`` It was n't suited to him , Tom .
It was a gentleman 's tie .
He was n't up to it -- not the rest of him , It was n't becoming '' ...
`` Orf to Brighton ! ''
said old Smallways , regarding his youngest son from the sitting-room window over the green-grocer 's shop with something between pride and reprobation .
`` When I was 'is age , I 'd never been to London , never bin south of Crawley -- never bin anywhere on my own where I could n't walk .
And nobody did n't go .
Not unless they was gentry .
Now every body 's orf everywhere ; the whole dratted country sims flying to pieces .
Wonder they all get back .
Orf to Brighton indeed !
Anybody want to buy 'orses ? ''
Bert sighed deeply , and turned to his motor-bicycle again .
The conversation seemed degenerating into an amiable wrangle of contradiction .
`` I tell you they got nearly a square mile fenced in -- a sort of valley .
Fences of barbed wire ten feet high , and inside that they do things .
Chaps about the camp -- now and then we get a peep .
It is n't only us neither .
There 's the Japanese ; you bet they got it too -- and the Germans ! ''
The soldier prepared to light his pipe .
Mr. Butteridge , it became evident , was a man singularly free from any false modesty -- indeed , from any modesty of any kind -- singularly willing to see interviewers , answer questions upon any topic except aeronautics , volunteer opinions , criticisms , and autobiography , supply portraits and photographs of himself , and generally spread his personality across the terrestrial sky .
The published portraits insisted primarily upon an immense black moustache , and secondarily upon a fierceness behind the moustache .
The general impression upon the public was that Butteridge , was a small man .
No one big , it was felt , could have so virulently aggressive an expression , though , as a matter of fact , Butteridge had a height of six feet two inches , and a weight altogether proportionate to that .
Moreover , he had a love affair of large and unusual dimensions and irregular circumstances and the still largely decorous British public learnt with reluctance and alarm that a sympathetic treatment of this affair was inseparable from the exclusive acquisition of the priceless secret of aerial stability by the British Empire .
The exact particulars of the similarity never came to light , but apparently the lady had , in a fit of high-minded inadvertence , had gone through the ceremony of marriage with , one quotes the unpublished discourse of Mr. Butteridge -- '' a white-livered skunk , '' and this zoological aberration did in some legal and vexatious manner mar her social happiness .
He wanted to talk about the business , to show the splendour of her nature in the light of its complications .
It was really most embarrassing to a press that has always possessed a considerable turn for reticence , that wanted things personal indeed in the modern fashion .
Yet not too personal .
It was embarrassing , I say , to be inexorably confronted with Mr. Butteridge 's great heart , to see it laid open in relentlesss self-vivisection , and its pulsating dissepiments adorned with emphatic flag labels .
`` The injustice , sorr , is public .
I do not care either I am up against institutions or individuals .
I do not care if I am up against the universal All .
I am pleading the cause of a woman , a woman I lurve , sorr -- a noble woman -- misunderstood .
I intend to vindicate her , sorr , to the four winds of heaven ! ''
And presently he too was going out into a world of change and wonder , bowed beneath a load of potatoes and patriotic insecurity , that merged at last into a very definite irritation at the weight and want of style of the potatoes and a very clear conception of the entire detestableness of Jessica .
`` This ai n't 'ad fair usage , '' he used to begin .
It was a position they had long considered .
It was a small , shed-like shop with a plate-glass window and one room behind , just at the sharp bend in the road at the bottom of Bun Hill ; and here they struggled along bravely , in spite of persistent annoyance from their former landlord , hoping for certain eventualities the peculiar situation of the shop seemed to promise .
Here , too , they were doomed to disappointment .
`` Here 's one of the places where a chap might get a living by keeping hens , '' said Grubb .
`` You 'd keep the hen and have it spatch-cocked , '' said Grubb .
`` The motor chaps would pay for it . ''
The weather was fine , and though they were on their way southward before nine o'clock , there was already a great multitude of holiday people abroad upon the roads .
There were quantities of young men and women on bicycles and motor-bicycles , and a majority of gyroscopic motor-cars running bicycle-fashion on two wheels , mingled with old-fashioned four-wheeled traffic .
Bank Holiday times always bring out old stored-away vehicles and odd people ; one saw tricars and electric broughams and dilapidated old racing motors with huge pneumatic tyres .
Once our holiday-makers saw a horse and cart , and once a youth riding a black horse amidst the badinage of the passersby .
And there were several navigable gas air-ships , not to mention balloons , in the air .
It was all immensely interesting and refreshing after the dark anxieties of the shop .
Edna wore a brown straw hat with poppies , that suited her admirably , and sat in the trailer like a queen , and the eight-year-old motor-bicycle ran like a thing of yesterday .
Little it seemed to matter to Mr. Bert Smallways that a newspaper placard proclaimed : -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- - GERMANY DENOUNCES THE MONROE DOCTRINE .
They had come up the hill in the twilight ; Bert was anxious to get as far as possible before he lit -- or attempted to light , for the issue was a doubtful one -- his lamps , and they had scorched past a number of cyclists , and by a four-wheeled motor-car of the old style lamed by a deflated tyre .
Some dust had penetrated Bert 's horn , and the result was a curious , amusing , wheezing sound had got into his `` honk , honk . ''
For the sake of merriment and glory he was making this sound as much as possible , and Edna was in fits of laughter in the trailer .
They made a sort of rushing cheerfulness along the road that affected their fellow travellers variously , according to their temperaments .
She did notice a good lot of bluish , evil-smelling smoke coming from about the bearings between his feet , but she thought this was one of the natural concomitants of motor-traction , and troubled no more about it , until abruptly it burst into a little yellow-tipped flame .
He stood for some fatal seconds watching the petrol drip and catch , and the flame , which was now beginning to smell of enamel as well as oil , spread and grew .
His chief idea was the sorrowful one that he had not sold the machine second-hand a year ago , and that he ought to have done so -- a good idea in its way , but not immediately helpful .
He turned upon Edna sharply .
`` Get a lot of wet sand , '' he said .
Then he wheeled the machine a little towards the side of the roadway , and laid it down and looked about for a supply of wet sand .
The flames received this as a helpful attention , and made the most of it .
They seemed to brighten and the twilight to deepen about them .
The road was a flinty road in the chalk country , and ill-provided with sand .
Bert had got very dusty and sweaty and strenuous .
It seemed to him his weapon had been wrested from him at the moment of victory .
The fire lay like a dying thing , close to the ground and wicked ; it gave a leap of anguish at every whack of the beaters .
But now Grubb had gone off to stamp out the burning blanket ; the others were lacking just at the moment of victory .
One had dropped the cushion and was running to the motor-car .
cried Bert ; `` keep on ! ''
A bystander was hit by a hot halfpenny flying out of the air .
Then Bert thought of the papers in his pockets , and staggered back , trying to extinguish his burning jacket -- checked , repulsed , dismayed .
`` I 'm awfully afraid I ca n't , '' said the Oxford man .
`` Awfully sorry , you know . ''
`` See you to-morrer , '' said Bert , though he was destined , as a matter of fact , to see much of the habitable globe before he saw her again .
THE KING 'S GARDEN PARTY TO THE MASKED TWAREGS .
MR. BUTTERIDGE 'S INVENTION FOR AMERICA.
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -
`` No need for us to sink after our capital , '' said Bert , ignoring the point .
Bert turned round and regarded him .
`` I thought it out as I was walking 'ome , and in bed .
I could n't sleep a wink . ''
You 're for stickin , here . ''
`` There 's people in the world , '' said Bert , `` who would n't recognise us , who 'd know them bicycles again like a shot , and we do n't want to go on with no old stories .
We want a fresh start . ''
He occupied himself with some unseen object while the people on the rope pulled him in .
Bert was nearest the balloon , and much excited and interested .
He kept stumbling over the tail of the Dervish costume in his zeal .
He had never imagined before what a big , light , wallowing thing a balloon was .
The car was of brown coarse wicker-work , and comparatively small .
The rope he tugged at was fastened to a stout-looking ring , four or five feet above the car .
At each tug he drew in a yard or so of rope , and the waggling wicker-work was drawn so much nearer .
Out of the car came wrathful bellowings : `` Fainted , she has ! ''
and then : `` It 's her heart -- broken with all she 's had to go through . ''
In the car , sprawling upon a sort of bed-bench , in an attitude of elaborate self-abandonment , was a large , blond lady , wearing a fur coat and a big floriferous hat .
Her head lolled back against the padded corner of the car , and her eyes were shut and her mouth open .
`` Me dear ! ''
said Mr. Butteridge , in a common , loud voice , `` we 're safe ! ''
He stood upon the bed-bench and lifted the lady carefully .
Then he sat down on the wicker edge opposite to Bert , and put one leg over to dangle outside .
A rope or so seemed to incommode him .
`` Will some one assist me ? ''
`` If they would take this lady ? ''
It was just at this moment , with Mr. Butteridge and the lady balanced finely on the basket brim , that she came-to .
She came-to suddenly and violently with a loud , heart-rending cry of `` Alfred !
And she waved her arms searchingly , and then clasped Mr. Butteridge about .
`` A 'ome from 'ome , '' said Bert , surveying this provision as he tied the ear-flaps under his chin .
He looked over the side of the car .
Far below were the shining clouds .
They had thickened so that the whole world was hidden .
Southward they were piled in great snowy masses , so that he was half disposed to think them mountains ; northward and eastward they were in wavelike levels , and blindingly sunlit .
`` Wonder what would happen if you pulled a cord ? ''
Then he routed about for matches to utilise Mr. Butteridge 's cigars ; but here again luck was on his side , and he could n't find any wherewith to set light to the gas above him .
Or else he would have dropped in a flare , a splendid but transitory pyrotechnic display .
`` 'Eng old Grubb ! ''
said Bert , slapping unproductive pockets .
`` 'E did n't ought to 'ave kep' my box .
'E 's always sneaking matches . ''
He did not know where he might be drifting , or what might happen next .
He accepted this state of affairs with a serenity creditable to the Smallways ' courage , which one might reasonably have expected to be of a more degenerate and contemptible quality altogether .
His impression was that he was bound to come down somewhere , and that then , if he wasn't smashed , some one , some `` society '' perhaps , would probably pack him and the balloon back to England .
If not , he would ask very firmly for the British Consul .
said Bert , and meditated .
`` They seem to want him to come , '' said Bert , `` but they do n't seem hurting themselves to get 'im .
Or else they 're shamming do n't care to get his prices down .
`` Voici , Mossoo !
-- Je suis un inventeur Anglais .
Mon nom est Butteridge .
J'avais ici pour vendre le secret de le flying-machine .
Vendre pour l'argent tout suite , l'argent en main .
C'est le machine a jouer dans l'air .
C'est le machine a faire l'oiseau .
Battir l'oiseau en fait , a son propre jeu .
Je desire de vendre ceci a votre government national .
Voulez vous me directer la ?
`` It 's the chance of my life ! ''
`` NOW what 's going to 'appen ? ''
First he seemed to see , and then not to see .
Then he saw clearly little edges of foam pursuing each other , and a wide waste of weltering waters below him .
Far away was a pilot boat with a big sail bearing dim black letters , and a little pinkish-yellow light , and it was rolling and pitching , rolling and pitching in a gale , while he could feel no wind at , all .
Soon the sound of waters was loud and near .
He was dropping , dropping -- into the sea !
The air was at its utmost clearness and except to the south and south-west there was not a cloud in the sky .
The country was hilly , with occasional fir plantations and bleak upland spaces , but also with numerous farms , and the hills were deeply intersected by the gorges of several winding rivers interrupted at intervals by the banked-up ponds and weirs of electric generating wheels .
It was dotted with bright-looking , steep-roofed , villages , and each showed a distinctive and interesting church beside its wireless telegraph steeple ; here and there were large chateaux and parks and white roads , and paths lined with red and white cable posts were extremely conspicuous in the landscape .
There were walled enclosures like gardens and rickyards and great roofs of barns and many electric dairy centres .
The uplands were mottled with cattle .
At places he would see the track of one of the old railroads ( converted now to mono-rails ) dodging through tunnels and crossing embankments , and a rushing hum would mark the passing of a train .
Everything was extraordinarily clear as well as minute .
Once or twice he saw guns and soldiers , and was reminded of the stir of military preparations he had witnessed on the Bank Holiday in England ; but there was nothing to tell him that these military preparations were abnormal or to explain an occasional faint irregular firing Of guns that drifted up to him ... .
`` Wish I knew how to get down , '' said Bert , ten thousand feet or so above it all , and gave himself to much futile tugging at the red and white cords .
Afterwards he made a sort of inventory of the provisions .
Life in the high air was giving him an appalling appetite , and it seemed to him discreet at this stage to portion out his supply into rations .
So far as he could see he might pass a week in the air .
From the first this attempt was unfortunate , perhaps because the place for descent was ill-chosen .
A balloon should come down in an empty open space , and he chose a crowd .
He made his decision suddenly , and without proper reflection .
As he trailed , Bert saw ahead of him one of the most attractive little towns in the world -- a cluster of steep gables surmounted by a high church tower and diversified with trees , walled , and with a fine , large gateway opening out upon a tree-lined high road .
All the wires and cables of the countryside converged upon it like guests to entertainment .
It had a most home-like and comfortable quality , and it was made gayer by abundant flags .
Along the road a quantity of peasant folk , in big pair-wheeled carts and afoot , were coming and going , besides an occasional mono-rail car ; and at the car-junction , under the trees outside the town , was a busy little fair of booths .
It seemed a warm , human , well-rooted , and altogether delightful place to Bert .
He came low over the tree-tops , with his grapnel ready to throw and so anchor him -- a curious , interested , and interesting guest , so his imagination figured it , in the very middle of it all .
He thought of himself performing feats with the sign language and chance linguistics amidst a circle of admiring rustics ... .
The balloon leapt at once , in the manner of balloons when part of their weight is released by touching down , with a sort of flippancy , and in another moment Bert was over a street crowded with peasants and soldiers , that opened into a busy market-square .
The wave of unfriendliness pursued him .
Everybody now was aware of the balloon .
Everybody was either trying to dodge the grapnel or catch the trail rope .
With a pendulum-like swoop through the crowd , that sent people flying right and left the grapnel came to earth again , tried for and missed a stout gentleman in a blue suit and a straw hat , smacked away a trestle from under a stall of haberdashery , made a cyclist soldier in knickerbockers leap like a chamois , and secured itself uncertainly among the hind-legs of a sheep -- which made convulsive , ungenerous efforts to free itself , and was dragged into a position of rest against a stone cross in the middle of the place .
The balloon pulled up with a jerk .
In another moment a score of willing hands were tugging it earthward .
At the same instant Bert became aware for the first time of a fresh breeze blowing about him .
Then they shot a little wide of the car .
Latterly he had been shot at six or seven times , and once the bullet had gone by with a sound so persuasively like the tearing of silk that he had resigned himself to the prospect of a headlong fall .
But either they were aiming near him or they had missed , and as yet nothing was torn but the air about him -- and his anxious soul .
The essential fact of the politics of the age in which Bert Smallways lived -- the age that blundered at last into the catastrophe of the War in the Air -- was a very simple one , if only people had had the intelligence to be simple about it .
The development of Science had altered the scale of human affairs .
By means of rapid mechanical traction , it had brought men nearer together , so much nearer socially , economically , physically , that the old separations into nations and kingdoms were no longer possible , a newer , wider synthesis was not only needed , but imperatively demanded .
Just as the once independent dukedoms of France had to fuse into a nation , so now the nations had to adapt themselves to a wider coalescence , they had to keep what was precious and possible , and concede what was obsolete and dangerous .
A saner world would have perceived this patent need for a reasonable synthesis , would have discussed it temperately , achieved and gone on to organise the great civilisation that was manifestly possible to mankind .
The world of Bert Smallways did nothing of the sort .
Its national governments , its national interests , would not hear of anything so obvious ; they were too suspicious of each other , too wanting in generous imaginations .
They began to behave like ill-bred people in a crowded public car , to squeeze against one another , elbow , thrust , dispute and quarrel .
Vain to point out to them that they had only to rearrange themselves to be comfortable .
Everywhere , all over the world , the historian of the early twentieth century finds the same thing , the flow and rearrangement of human affairs inextricably entangled by the old areas , the old prejudices and a sort of heated irascible stupidity , and everywhere congested nations in inconvenient areas , slopping population and produce into each other , annoying each other with tariffs , and every possible commercial vexation , and threatening each other with navies and armies that grew every year more portentous .
Altogether it was a well-imagined and most hopeful and spirited enterprise , having regard to the information in the possession of the German government .
The chances of it being a successful surprise were very great .
The airship and the flying-machine were very different things from ironclads , which take a couple of years to build .
Given hands , given plant , they could be made innumerably in a few weeks .
Once the needful parks and foundries were organised , air-ships and Drachenflieger could be poured into the sky .
Indeed , when the time came , they did pour into the sky like , as a bitter French writer put it , flies roused from filth .
Quite equally with the rest of the world , the general German population was taken by surprise by the swift vigour of the Imperial government .
A considerable literature of military forecasts , beginning as early as 1906 with Rudolf Martin , the author not merely of a brilliant book of anticipations , but of a proverb , `` The future of Germany lies in the air , '' had , however , partially prepared the German imagination for some such enterprise .
`` They 've spotted it . ''
`` Herr Booteraidge , we are chust to start ! ''
repeated the white moustache , and then helplessly , `` What is de goot ?
What can we do ? ''
Now and then a voice gave directions to workers indistinctly seen .
Shall I try to keep it up , or sha n't I ? ''
`` What water ? ''
cried the young man , `` you do n't understand ? ''
`` We 're going up ! ''
`` Mother was English -- went to school in England .
Afterwards , Rhodes scholar .
German none the less for that .
Detailed for the present , Mr. Butteridge , to look after you .
You 're shaken by your fall .
It 's all right , really .
They 're going to buy your machine and everything .
You sit down , and take it quite calmly .
You 'll soon get the hang of the position . ''
He was really a very tactful young man indeed , in a natural sort of way .
`` Daresay all this is new to you , '' he said ; `` not your sort of machine .
These cabins are n't half bad . ''
Bert parried that compliment a little awkwardly , and then the lieutenant was struck with the riddle why Herr Butteridge had not come in his own flying machine .
`` Worked it out , '' said Bert , after a pause .
`` Jest ground away at it . ''
`` Jes ' lem me think a bit , '' said Bert , finding the stare debilitating .
`` Look 'ere ! ''
he said at last , with an air of great explicitness , `` I GOT the secret . ''
His voice failed him a little , and the stare continued .
`` I want to do the thing Enonymously .
Bert drifted on like a swimmer caught by a current .
`` Fact is , I 'm going to edop ' the name of Smallways .
I do n't want no title of Baron ; I 've altered my mind .
And I want the money quiet-like .
I want the hundred thousand pounds paid into benks -- thirty thousand into the London and County Benk Branch at Bun Hill in Kent directly I 'and over the plans ; twenty thousand into the Benk of England ; 'arf the rest into a good French bank , the other 'arf the German National Bank , see ?
I want it put there , right away .
I do n't want it put in the name of Butteridge .
I want it put in the name of Albert Peter Smallways ; that 's the name I'm going to edop ' .
That 's condition one . ''
`` Go on ! ''
`` And der was also the prestige -- the worldt prestige of Pooterage with us ... .
Well , we must see what we can do . ''
He held out his hand .
`` Gif me the plans . ''
`` Nice 'old swindle for 'im if I tore 'em up !
I could 'ave . ''
And later in the day an extremely shattered and disorganised Bert Smallways stood in the presence of the Prince Karl Albert .
They talked German over that for a time .
`` It could 'ovver , your Royal Highness , like a wasp , '' said Bert .
`` Viel besser , nicht wahr ? ''
said the Prince to Von Winterfeld , and then went on in German for a time .
Bert opened his mouth to ask about the five hundred pounds , and then a saving gleam of wisdom silenced him .
He met Von Winterfeld 's eye , and it seemed to him the secretary nodded slightly .
From the magazine amidships a covered canvas gallery with aluminium treads on its floor and a hand-rope , ran back underneath the gas-chamber to the engine-room at the tail ; but along this Bert did not go , and from first to last he never saw the engines .
But he went up a ladder against a gale of ventilation -- a ladder that was encased in a kind of gas-tight fire escape -- and ran right athwart the great forward air-chamber to the little look-out gallery with a telephone , that gallery that bore the light pom-pom of German steel and its locker of shells .
This gallery was all of aluminium magnesium alloy , the tight front of the air-ship swelled cliff-like above and below , and the black eagle sprawled overwhelmingly gigantic , its extremities all hidden by the bulge of the gas-bag .
And far down , under the soaring eagles , was England , four thousand feet below perhaps , and looking very small and defenceless indeed in the morning sunlight .
Kurt was not very clear upon that himself , and was still explaining when Bert was called to the conference we have recorded with the Prince .
And after that was over , the last traces of Butteridge fell from Bert like a garment , and he became Smallways to all on board .
The soldiers ceased to salute him , and the officers ceased to seem aware of his existence , except Lieutenant Kurt .
He was turned out of his nice cabin , and packed in with his belongings to share that of Lieutenant Kurt , whose luck it was to be junior , and the bird-headed officer , still swearing slightly , and carrying strops and aluminium boot-trees and weightless hair-brushes and hand-mirrors and pomade in his hands , resumed possession .
Bert was put in with Kurt because there was nowhere else for him to lay his bandaged head in that close-packed vessel .
He was to mess , he was told , with the men .
`` I thought you were a bit of a fraud -- even when I thought you were Butteridge .
You 're jolly lucky the Prince took it calmly .
He 's a pretty tidy blazer when he 's roused .
He would n't stick a moment at pitching a chap of your sort overboard if he thought fit .
They 've shoved you on to me , but it 's my cabin , you know . ''
Bert stood by , saying very little , but watching Kurt 's finger on the map .
`` They 've been saying things like this in the papers for a long time , '' he remarked .
`` Fancy it coming real ! ''
Either there was no news of the naval battle that morning , or the Prince kept to himself whatever came until past midday .
Then the bulletins came with a rush , bulletins that made the lieutenant wild with excitement .
Bert 's heart began to beat rapidly .
He felt himself poised over the fighting vessels far below .
In a moment , were they to drop like a hawk striking a bird ?
he whispered at last , in awestricken tones .
That made a distinct pause in the fight .
It seemed a long pause to Bert .
He found himself looking for the drachenflieger .
The flattened ruin of one was floating abeam of the Monitor , the rest had passed , dropping bombs down the American column ; several were in the water and apparently uninjured , and three or four were still in the air and coming round now in a wide circle to return to their mother airships .
The American ironclads were no longer in column formation ; the Theodore Roosevelt , badly damaged , had turned to the southeast , and the Andrew Jackson , greatly battered but uninjured in any fighting part was passing between her and the still fresh and vigorous Furst Bismarck to intercept and meet the latter 's fire .
Away to the west the Hermann and the Germanicus had appeared and were coming into action .
The deep impression of helplessly drowning men that Bert had brought from the actual fight in the Atlantic mixed itself up inextricably with that of the lordly figure of Prince Karl Albert gesturing aside the dead body of the Vaterland sailor .
Hitherto he had rather liked the idea of war as being a jolly , smashing , exciting affair , something like a Bank Holiday rag on a large scale , and on the whole agreeable and exhilarating .
Now he knew it a little better .
The incident that gave him his third shock was the execution of one of the men on the Adler for carrying a box of matches .
The case was a flagrant one .
The man had forgotten he had it upon him when coming aboard .
Ample notice had been given to every one of the gravity of this offence , and notices appeared at numerous points all over the airships .
The man 's defence was that he had grown so used to the notices and had been so preoccupied with his work that he had n't applied them to himself ; he pleaded , in his defence , what is indeed in military affairs another serious crime , inadvertency .
He was tried by his captain , and the sentence confirmed by wireless telegraphy by the Prince , and it was decided to make his death an example to the whole fleet .
`` The Germans , '' the Prince declared , `` had n't crossed the Atlantic to go wool gathering . ''
And in order that this lesson in discipline and obedience might be visible to every one , it was determined not to electrocute or drown but hang the offender .
said Bert , clutching the rail before him , and a sympathetic grunt came from several of the men beside him .
For many generations New York had taken no heed of war , save as a thing that happened far away , that affected prices and supplied the newspapers with exciting headlines and pictures .
The New Yorkers felt perhaps even more certainly than the English had done that war in their own land was an impossible thing .
In that they shared the delusion of all North America .
They felt as secure as spectators at a bullfight ; they risked their money perhaps on the result , but that was all .
And such ideas of war as the common Americans possessed were derived from the limited , picturesque , adventurous war of the past .
They saw war as they saw history , through an iridescent mist , deodorised , scented indeed , with all its essential cruelties tactfully hidden away .
They were inclined to regret it as something ennobling , to sigh that it could no longer come into their own private experience .
They read with interest , if not with avidity , of their new guns , of their immense and still more immense ironclads , of their incredible and still more incredible explosives , but just what these tremendous engines of destruction might mean for their personal lives never entered their heads .
They did not , so far as one can judge from their contemporary literature , think that they meant anything to their personal lives at all .
They thought America was safe amidst all this piling up of explosives .
They cheered the flag by habit and tradition , they despised other nations , and whenever there was an international difficulty they were intensely patriotic , that is to say , they were ardently against any native politician who did not say , threaten , and do harsh and uncompromising things to the antagonist people .
They were spirited to Asia , spirited to Germany , so spirited to Great Britain that the international attitude of the mother country to her great daughter was constantly compared in contemporary caricature to that between a hen-pecked husband and a vicious young wife .
And for the rest , they all went about their business and pleasure as if war had died out with the megatherium ... .
The curious thing is that they did all do all they could ; there is no exception known .
Their only defect indeed was a defect of style .
One of the most striking facts historically about this war , and the one that makes the complete separation that had arisen between the methods of warfare and the necessity of democratic support , is the effectual secrecy of the Washington authorities about their airships .
They did not bother to confide a single fact of their preparations to the public .
They did not even condescend to talk to Congress .
They burked and suppressed every inquiry .
The war was fought by the President and the Secretaries of State in an entirely autocratic manner .
Such publicity as they sought was merely to anticipate and prevent inconvenient agitation to defend particular points .
They realised that the chief danger in aerial warfare from an excitable and intelligent public would be a clamour for local airships and aeroplanes to defend local interests .
This , with such resources as they possessed , might lead to a fatal division and distribution of the national forces .
Particularly they feared that they might be forced into a premature action to defend New York .
They realised with prophetic insight that this would be the particular advantage the Germans would seek .
So they took great pains to direct the popular mind towards defensive artillery , and to divert it from any thought of aerial battle .
Their real preparations they masked beneath ostensible ones .
There was at Washington a large reserve of naval guns , and these were distributed rapidly , conspicuously , and with much press attention , among the Eastern cities .
They were mounted for the most part upon hills and prominent crests around the threatened centres of population .
They were mounted upon rough adaptations of the Doan swivel , which at that time gave the maximum vertical range to a heavy gun .
Much of this artillery was still unmounted , and nearly all of it was unprotected when the German air-fleet reached New York .
And down in the crowded streets , when that occurred , the readers of the New York papers were regaling themselves with wonderful and wonderfully illustrated accounts of such matters as : --
`` It beat , '' they declared , `` the newspapers . ''
It was so great , and in its collective effect so pacifically magnificent , that to make war upon it seemed incongruous beyond measure , like laying siege to the National Gallery or attacking respectable people in an hotel dining-room with battle-axe and mail .
It was in its entirety so large , so complex , so delicately immense , that to bring it to the issue of warfare was like driving a crowbar into the mechanism of a clock .
And the fish-like shoal of great airships hovering light and sunlit above , filling the sky , seemed equally remote from the ugly forcefulness of war .
To Kurt , to Smallways , to I know not how many more of the people in the air-fleet came the distinctest apprehension of these incompatibilities .
But in the head of the Prince Karl Albert were the vapours of romance : he was a conqueror , and this was the enemy's city .
The greater the city , the greater the triumph .
No doubt he had a time of tremendous exultation and sensed beyond all precedent the sense of power that night .
`` What are they doing ? ''
The first loss of life occurred in the panic rush from Brooklyn Bridge as the airship approached it .
With the cessation of the traffic an unusual stillness came upon New York , and the disturbing concussions of the futile defending guns on the hills about grew more and more audible .
At last these ceased also .
A pause of further negotiation followed .
People sat in darkness , sought counsel from telephones that were dumb .
Then into the expectant hush came a great crash and uproar , the breaking down of the Brooklyn Bridge , the rifle fire from the Navy Yard , and the bursting of bombs in Wall Street and the City Hall .
New York as a whole could do nothing , could understand nothing .
New York in the darkness peered and listened to these distant sounds until presently they died away as suddenly as they had begun .
`` What could be happening ? ''
They asked it in vain .
The lamentable incidents that followed the surrender of New York seem now in the retrospect to be but the necessary and inevitable consequence of the clash of modern appliances and social conditions produced by the scientific century on the one hand , and the tradition of a crude , romantic patriotism on the other .
At first people received the fact with an irresponsible detachment , much as they would have received the slowing down of the train in which they were travelling or the erection of a public monument by the city to which they belonged .
He lifted weary eyes to the pink flush in the sky , yawned immensely , and crawled back whispering to himself across the cabin to the locker .
He did not so much lie down upon that as fall upon it and instantly become asleep .
It dawned upon Bert that hardly a third of the fleet was visible .
The others had gone upon errands he could not imagine , beyond the compass of that great circle of earth and sky .
He wondered , but there was no one to ask .
As the day wore on , about a dozen reappeared in the east with their stores replenished from the flotilla and towing a number of drachenflieger .
Towards afternoon the weather thickened , driving clouds appeared in the south-west and ran together and seemed to engender more clouds , and the wind came round into that quarter and blew stronger .
Towards the evening the wind became a gale into which the now tossing airships had to beat .
But hard upon that came the desperate attempt of a party of young clubmen from New York , who , inspired by patriotic and adventurous imaginations , slipped off in half a dozen motor-cars to Beacon Hill , and set to work with remarkable vigour to improvise a fort about the Doan swivel gun that had been placed there .
They found it still in the hands of the disgusted gunners , who had been ordered to cease fire at the capitulation , and it was easy to infect these men with their own spirit .
They declared their gun had n't had half a chance , and were burning to show what it could do .
Directed by the newcomers , they made a trench and bank about the mounting of the piece , and constructed flimsy shelter-pits of corrugated iron .
The disintegrating truce gave place to a definite general breach with the assassination of the Wetterhorn -- for that is the only possible word for the act -- above Union Square , and not a mile away from the exemplary ruins of City Hall .
This occurred late in the afternoon , between five and six .
By that time the weather had changed very much for the worse , and the operations of the airships were embarrassed by the necessity they were under of keeping head on to the gusts .
A series of squalls , with hail and thunder , followed one another from the south by south-east , and in order to avoid these as much as possible , the air-fleet came low over the houses , diminishing its range of observation and exposing itself to a rifle attack .
But before Kurt could produce an explanation , the shrill bells of the airship were ringing to quarters , and he had to go .
Bert hesitated and stepped thoughtfully into the passage , looking back at the window as he did so .
He was knocked off his feet at once by the Prince , who was rushing headlong from his cabin to the central magazine .
Bert had a momentary impression of the great figure of the Prince , white with rage , bristling with gigantic anger , his huge fist swinging .
`` Blut und Eisen ! ''
cried the Prince , as one who swears .
Blut und Eisen ! ''
He stood up , collected his wits for a minute , and then went slowly towards the gangway of the little gallery .
As he did so he heard noises suggestive of the return of the Prince .
The lot of them were coming back again .
He shot into his cabin like a rabbit into its burrow , just in time to escape that shouting terror .
He clung to the frame of the porthole as the airship tossed and swayed , and stared down through the light rain that now drove before the wind , into the twilight streets , watching people running out of the houses , watching buildings collapse and fires begin .
As the airships sailed along they smashed up the city as a child will shatter its cities of brick and card .
Below , they left ruins and blazing conflagrations and heaped and scattered dead ; men , women , and children mixed together as though they had been no more than Moors , or Zulus , or Chinese .
Lower New York was soon a furnace of crimson flames , from which there was no escape .
Cars , railways , ferries , all had ceased , and never a light lit the way of the distracted fugitives in that dusky confusion but the light of burning .
He had glimpses of what it must mean to be down there -- glimpses .
And it came to him suddenly as an incredible discovery , that such disasters were not only possible now in this strange , gigantic , foreign New York , but also in London -- in Bun Hill !
that the little island in the silver seas was at the end of its immunity , that nowhere in the world any more was there a place left where a Smallways might lift his head proudly and vote for war and a spirited foreign policy , and go secure from such horrible things .
He saw nothing of the stars , as presently the Vaterland cleared the rush and confusion of the lower weather , nor of the duel she fought with two circling aeroplanes , how they shot her rear-most chambers through , and how she fought them off with explosive bullets and turned to run as she did so .
`` Was there a battle ? ''
`` Can we get any grub ? ''
Bert 's sense of the queerness of this experience was so keen that it blotted out any fear he might have felt .
Indeed , he was far more interested now than afraid .
He seemed to have touched down to the bottom of fear and abandonment overnight .
He was growing accustomed to the idea that he would probably be killed presently , that this strange voyage in the air was in all probability his death journey .
No human being can keep permanently afraid : fear goes at last to the back of one 's mind , accepted , and shelved , and done with .
He squatted over his soup , sopping it up with his bread , and contemplated his comrades .
They were all rather yellow and dirty , with four-day beards , and they grouped themselves in the tired , unpremeditated manner of men on a wreck .
The situation perplexed them beyond any suggestion of ideas .
Three had been hurt in the pitching up of the ship during the fight , and one had a bandaged bullet wound .
It was incredible that this little band of men had committed murder and massacre on a scale beyond precedent .
None of them who squatted on the sloping gas-padded partition , soup mug in hand , seemed really guilty of anything of the sort , seemed really capable of hurting a dog wantonly .
They were all so manifestly built for homely chalets on the solid earth and carefully tilled fields and blond wives and cheery merrymaking .
The red-faced , sturdy man with light eyelashes who had brought the first news of the air battle to the men 's mess had finished his soup , and with an expression of maternal solicitude was readjusting the bandages of a youngster whose arm had been sprained .
The Prince surveyed them with the gesture of a man who site a steed .
The head of the Kapitan appeared beside him .
`` So , '' said the Prince , and Bert was disposed of .
The immediate task before the captain of the Vaterland was a very simple one .
He had to keep afloat .
The wind , though it had fallen from its earlier violence , was still blowing strongly enough to render the grounding of so clumsy a mass extremely dangerous , even if it had been desirable for the Prince to land in inhabited country , and so risk capture .
It was necessary to keep the airship up until the wind fell and then , if possible , to descend in some lonely district of the Territory where there would be a chance of repair or rescue by some searching consort .
In order to do this weight had to be dropped , and Kurt was detailed with a dozen men to climb down among the wreckage of the deflated air-chambers and cut the stuff clear , portion by portion , as the airship sank .
So Bert , armed with a sharp cutlass , found himself clambering about upon netting four thousand feet up in the air , trying to understand Kurt when he spoke in English and to divine him when he used German .
All together they cleared three considerable chunks of wreckage , and then Bert was glad to clamber up into the cabins again and give place to a second squad .
He and his companions were given hot coffee , and indeed , even gloved as they were , the job had been a cold one .
They sat drinking it and regarding each other with satisfaction .
One man spoke to Bert amiably in German , and Bert nodded and smiled .
Through Kurt , Bert , whose ankles were almost frozen , succeeded in getting a pair of top-boots from one of the disabled men .
`` I haf heard noding , '' said the linguist .
That was all Bert could get for a time .
But the excitement of all the men about him was contagious , and presently he saw Kurt standing alone , hands behind him , and looking at one of the distant waterfalls very steadfastly .
He went up and saluted , soldier-fashion .
`` Beg pardon , lieutenant , '' he said .
`` Heaven knows ... . ''
Kurt stopped and half turned .
`` I know '' said Bert , `` me and Edna -- we done things like that .
Seems years off now . ''
Their secrecy and swiftness and inventions had far surpassed those of the Germans , and where the Germans had had a hundred men at work the Asiatics had ten thousand .
There came to their great aeronautic parks at Chinsi-fu and Tsingyen by the mono-rails that now laced the whole surface of China a limitless supply of skilled and able workmen , workmen far above the average European in industrial efficiency .
The news of the German World Surprise simply quickened their efforts .
At the time of the bombardment of New York it is doubtful if the Germans had three hundred airships all together in the world ; the score of Asiatic fleets flying east and west and south must have numbered several thousand .
Moreover the Asiatics had a real fighting flying-machine , the Niais as they were called , a light but quite efficient weapon , infinitely superior to the German drachenflieger .
Like that , it was a one-man machine , but it was built very lightly of steel and cane and chemical silk , with a transverse engine , and a flapping sidewing .
The aeronaut carried a gun firing explosive bullets loaded with oxygen , and in addition , and true to the best tradition of Japan , a sword .
Mostly they were Japanese , and it is characteristic that from the first it was contemplated that the aeronaut should be a swordsman .
The wings of these flyers had bat-like hooks forward , by which they were to cling to their antagonist's gas-chambers while boarding him .
These light flying-machines were carried with the fleets , and also sent overland or by sea to the front with the men .
They were capable of flights of from two to five hundred miles according to the wind .
So , hard upon the uprush of the first German air-fleet , these Asiatic swarms took to the atmosphere .
Instantly every organised Government in the world was frantically and vehemently building airships and whatever approach to a flying machine its inventors ' had discovered .
There was no time for diplomacy .
Warnings and ultimatums were telegraphed to and fro , and in a few hours all the panic-fierce world was openly at war , and at war in the most complicated way .
For Britain and France and Italy had declared war upon Germany and outraged Swiss neutrality ; India , at the sight of Asiatic airships , had broken into a Hindoo insurrection in Bengal and a Mohametan revolt hostile to this in the North-west Provinces -- the latter spreading like wildfire from Gobi to the Gold Coast -- and the Confederation of Eastern Asia had seized the oil wells of Burmha and was impartially attacking America and Germany .
In a week they were building airships in Damascus and Cairo and Johannesburg ; Australia and New Zealand were frantically equipping themselves .
One unique and terrifying aspect of this development was the swiftness with which these monsters could be produced .
To build an ironclad took from two to four years ; an airship could be put together in as many weeks .
Moreover , compared with even a torpedo boat , the airship was remarkably simple to construct , given the air-chamber material , the engines , the gas plant , and the design , it was really not more complicated and far easier than an ordinary wooden boat had been a hundred years before .
And now from Cape Horn to Nova Zembla , and from Canton round to Canton again , there were factories and workshops and industrial resources .
One sees these things in glimpses , in illuminated moments , as if through a driving reek of clouds , going on all over the world .
It was the dissolution of an age ; it was the collapse of the civilisation that had trusted to machinery , and the instruments of its destruction were machines .
But while the collapse of the previous great civilisation , that of Rome , had been a matter of centuries , had been a thing of phase and phase , like the ageing and dying of a man , this , like his killing by railway or motor car , was one swift , conclusive smashing and an end .
The early battles of the aerial war were no doubt determined by attempts to realise the old naval maxim , to ascertain the position of the enemy's fleet and to destroy it .
There was first the battle of the Bernese Oberland , in which the Italian and French navigables in their flank raid upon the Franconian Park were assailed by the Swiss experimental squadron , supported as the day wore on by German airships , and then the encounter of the British Winterhouse-Dunn aeroplanes with three unfortunate Germans .
It was not in their airships , but , as I have said , in their flying-machines proper , that the strength of the Asiatics lay .
Next only to the Butteridge machine , these were certainly the most efficient heavier-than-air fliers that had ever appeared .
They were the invention of a Japanese artist , and they differed in type extremely from the box-kite quality of the German drachenflieger .
They had curiously curved , flexible side wings , more like BENT butterfly 's wings than anything else , and made of a substance like celluloid and of brightly painted silk , and they had a long humming-bird tail .
At the forward corner of the wings were hooks , rather like the claws of a bat , by which the machine could catch and hang and tear at the walls of an airship's gas-chamber .
The solitary rider sat between the wings above a transverse explosive engine , an explosive engine that differed in no essential particular from those in use in the light motor bicycles of the period .
Below was a single large wheel .
The rider sat astride of a saddle , as in the Butteridge machine , and he carried a large double-edged two-handed sword , in addition to his explosive-bullet firing rifle .
A flapping shadow passed for a moment between Bert and the sun and was followed by another .
A whirring of engines , click , clock , clitter clock , smote upon his ears .
Instantly he forgot the zenith .
When Bert 's sense of security was sufficiently restored for him to watch the battle again , he perceived that a brisk little fight was in progress between the Asiatic aeronauts and the German engineers for the possession of Niagara city .
It was the first time in the whole course of the war that he had seen anything resembling fighting as he had studied it in the illustrated papers of his youth .
It seemed to him almost as though things were coming right .
He saw men carrying rifles and taking cover and running briskly from point to point in a loose attacking formation .
The first batch of aeronauts had probably been under the impression that the city was deserted .
They had grounded in the open near Prospect Park and approached the houses towards the power-works before they were disillusioned by a sudden fire .
They had scattered back to the cover of a bank near the water -- it was too far for them to reach their machines again ; they were lying and firing at the men in the hotels and frame-houses about the power-works .
Other flapping bird-shapes came into this affair , but Bert had not seen their coming .
A staccato of shots came over to him , reminding him of army manoeuvres , of newspaper descriptions of fights , of all that was entirely correct in his conception of warfare .
He saw quite a number of Germans running from the outlying houses towards the power-house .
One lay still , but the other wriggled and made efforts for a time .
The hotel that was used as a hospital , and to which he had helped carry the wounded men from the Zeppelin earlier in the day , suddenly ran up the Geneva flag .
The town that had seemed so quiet had evidently been concealing a considerable number of Germans , and they were now concentrating to hold the central power-house .
He wondered what ammunition they might have .
More and more of the Asiatic flying-machines came into the conflict .
They had disposed of the unfortunate German drachenflieger and were now aiming at the incipient aeronautic park , -- the electric gas generators and repair stations which formed the German base .
Some landed , and their aeronauts took cover and became energetic infantry soldiers .
Others hovered above the fight , their men ever and again firing shots down at some chance exposure below .
The firing came in paroxysms ; now there would be a watchful lull and now a rapid tattoo of shots , rising to a roar .
Once or twice flying machines , as they circled warily , came right overhead , and for a time Bert gave himself body and soul to cowering .
Ever and again a larger thunder mingled with the rattle and reminded him of the grapple of airships far above , but the nearer fight held his attention .
The whack of a bullet on the rocks beside him reminded him that he was a visible object and wearing at least portions of a German uniform .
It drove him into the trees again , and for a time he dodged and dropped and sought cover like a chick hiding among reeds from imaginary hawks .
The swordsman slashed a fourth time and went on as his fellows came up after the better runner .
The hindmost swordsman stopped and turned back .
He had perceived some movement perhaps ; but at any rate he stood , and ever and again slashed at the fallen body .
groaned Bert at every slash , and shrank closer into the bushes and became very still .
Presently came a sound of shots from the town , and then everything was quiet , everything , even the hospital .
It was far more than any personal desolation extremity that flooded his soul .
It seemed to him indeed that this must be the sunset of his race .
He strolled round it once or twice , and then attacked the shutters with his pocket-knife , reinforced presently by a wooden stake he found conveniently near .
At last he got a shutter to give , and tore it back and stuck in his head .
`` Not an idee , '' he said .
He was chiefly conscious that a fortnight ago he had been in Bun Hill with no idea of travel in his mind , and that now he was between the Falls of Niagara amidst the devastation and ruins of the greatest air fight in the world , and that in the interval he had been across France , Belgium , Germany , England , Ireland , and a number of other countries .
It was an interesting thought and suitable for conversation , but of no great practical utility .
`` Wonder 'ow I can get orf this ? ''
`` Wonder if there is a way out ?
If not ... rummy ! ''
With the first he found the wreckage of an aeronaut too .
A feeling of infinite distress swept over Bert as the body swept out of sight towards the fall .
he cried , `` Kurt !
I did n't mean to !
don ' leave me 'ere !
Don ' leave me ! ''
`` This war , '' he cried , `` this blarsted foolery of a war .
Presently he was talking again in a low undertone .
`` Gaw , Pussy !
'ow you frightened me ! ''
said Bert , with drops of perspiration on his brow .
When he awoke , he was stiff but in better heart , and the kitten slept warmly and reassuringly inside his jacket .
And fear , he found , had gone from amidst the trees .
said Bert , and stopped with a second comment under his breath .
He stared and saluted awkwardly and became at once a masked defensive thing with whom co-operation was impossible .
`` If I do mend it , '' said Bert , struck by a new thought , `` none of us ain't to be trusted to fly it . ''
The kitten appeared from under the vendor 's seat with an ingratiating purr .
`` Of course ! ''
where 's your milk ? ''
The bird-faced officer intervened , saying something in German and pointing skyward .
The bird-faced officer shouted to him to be quiet , and then began a conversation with the Prince .
The two Germans regarded him as he crouched there .
Death for a moment seemed near .
There was no pretence after that moment that Bert was under the orders of the Prince or that he was going on with the repairing of the flying-machine .
The two Germans took possession of that and set to work upon it .
Bert , with his new weapon went off to the neighbourhood of Terrapin Rock , and there sat down to examine it .
It was a short rifle with a big cartridge , and a nearly full magazine .
He took out the cartridges carefully and then tried the trigger and fittings until he felt sure he had the use of it .
Then he remembered he was hungry and went off , gun under his arm , to hunt in and about the refreshment shed .
He had the sense to perceive that he must not show himself with the gun to the Prince and his companion .
So long as they thought him unarmed they would leave him alone , but there was no knowing what the Napoleonic person might do if he saw Bert 's weapon .
Also he did not go near them because he knew that within himself boiled a reservoir of rage and fear that he wanted to shoot these two men .
He wanted to shoot them , and he thought that to shoot them would be a quite horrible thing to do .
The two sides of his inconsistent civilisation warred within him .
At last the flying-machine was turned and stood poised on its wheel , with its hooks pointing up the Rapids .
The two officers wiped their faces , resumed jackets and swords , spoke and bore themselves like men who congratulated themselves on a good laborious morning .
Then they went off briskly towards the refreshment shed , the Prince leading .
Bert became active in pursuit ; but he found it impossible to stalk them quickly enough and silently enough to discover the hiding-place of the food .
He found them , when he came into sight of them again , seated with their backs against the shed , plates on knee , and a tin of corned beef and a plateful of biscuits between them .
They seemed in fairly good spirits , and once the Prince laughed .
At this vision of eating Bert's plans gave way .
Fierce hunger carried him .
He appeared before them suddenly at a distance of perhaps twenty yards , gun in hand .
So it was that war began upon Goat Island .
It lasted a day and a night , the longest day and the longest night in Bert 's life .
He had to lie close and listen and watch .
Also he had to scheme what he should do .
It was clear now that he had to kill these two men if he could , and that if they could , they would kill him .
The prize was first food and then the flying-machine and the doubtful privilege of trying ' to ride it .
If one failed , one would certainly be killed ; if one succeeded , one would get away somewhere over there .
For a time Bert tried to imagine what it was like over there .
His mind ran over possibilities , deserts , angry Americans , Japanese , Chinese -- perhaps Red Indians !
( Were there still Red Indians ? )
`` 'E 's got a sword , of course '' ... .
He discovered , later , traces of an attempt to cross the gap in the broken bridge .
A rope with a bolt attached had been flung across and had caught in a fenestration of a projecting fragment of railing .
The end of the rope trailed in the seething water towards the fall .
He was presently almost cool , and his eyes got more used to the rush of air , but he was getting very high , very high .
He tilted his head forwards and surveyed the country , blinking .
He could see all over Buffalo , a place with three great blackened scars of ruin , and hills and stretches beyond .
He wondered if he was half a mile high , or more .
There were some people among some houses near a railway station between Niagara and Buffalo , and then more people .
They went like ants busily in and out of the houses .
He saw two motor cars gliding along the road towards Niagara city .
Then far away in the south he saw a great Asiatic airship going eastward .
`` Oh , Gord ! ''
he said , and became earnest in his ineffectual attempts to alter his direction .
But that airship took no notice of him , and he continued to ascend convulsively .
The world got more and more extensive and maplike .
Click , clock , clitter-clock .
Above him and very near to him now was a hazy stratum of cloud .
He turned it to the left and had a sensation of being spun round backwards .
`` Too much ! ''
He discovered that he was rushing down at a headlong pace towards a railway line and some factory buildings .
They appeared to be tearing up to him to devour him .
He must have dropped all that height .
For a moment he had the ineffectual sensations of one whose bicycle bolts downhill .
The ground had almost taken him by surprise .
he cried ; and then with a violent effort of all his being he got the beating engine at work again and set the wings flapping .
He swooped down and up and resumed his quivering and pulsating ascent of the air .
Bert hesitated and went on .
`` She 'll do all right , '' he said ... .
`` She 'll catch things .
`` She 'll do all right , '' he said presently , without conviction .
But if it had not been for the black dog , he would have gone back .
The shop seemed to him by his Bun Hill standards extremely roomy , well lit , and unencumbered .
There was a long counter to the left of him , with drawers and miscellaneous commodities ranged behind it , a number of chairs , several tables , and two spittoons to the right , various barrels , cheeses , and bacon up the vista , and beyond , a large archway leading to more space .
A little group of men was assembled round one of the tables , and a woman of perhaps five-and-thirty leant with her elbows on the counter .
All the men were armed with rifles , and the barrel of a gun peeped above the counter .
They were all listening idly , inattentively , to a cheap , metallic-toned gramophone that occupied a table near at hand .
From its brazen throat came words that gave Bert a qualm of homesickness , that brought back in his memory a sunlit beach , a group of children , red-painted bicycles , Grubb , and an approaching balloon : --
`` I want a meal , '' said Bert , `` but I 'ave n't very much money .
I don ' want to give mor 'n a shillin ' . ''
`` Yes , '' said the proprietor , startled for a moment from his courtly bearing .
`` But what in hell is a shilling ? ''
`` I don ' know what it was called .
But any'ow I found a flying-machine and made a sort of fly with it and got here . ''
`` Look 'ere , '' said Bert , `` I 'll show you -- only I 'ave n't 'ad anything to eat since yestiday -- except mineral water . ''
`` But could n't he tell ? ''
asked the man in the straw hat .
`` Did he die so suddenly as that ? ''
`` I allow -- '' he began .
Then the whole company realised that something was happening to Bert ; either he was suffocating or going mad .
Laurier looked down on him .
`` He is reported in the neighbourhood of Albany -- out towards the Berkshire Hills .
He is moving from place to place and , as far as he can , organising the defence by telegraph and telephones The Asiatic air-fleet is trying to locate him .
When they think they have located the seat of government , they throw bombs .
This inconveniences him , but so far they have not come within ten miles of him .
The Asiatic air-fleet is at present scattered all over the Eastern States , seeking out and destroying gas-works and whatever seems conducive to the building of airships or the transport of troops .
Our retaliatory measures are slight in the extreme .
But with these machines -- Sir , this ride of ours will count among the historical rides of the world ! ''
For a week Bert led a life of mixed sensations .
Amidst these fatigue in the legs predominated .
Mostly he rode , rode with Laurier 's back inexorably ahead , through a land like a larger England , with bigger hills and wider valleys , larger fields , wider roads , fewer hedges , and wooden houses with commodious piazzas .
Laurier made inquiries , Laurier chose the turnings , Laurier doubted , Laurier decided .
Now it seemed they were in telephonic touch with the President ; now something had happened and he was lost again .
But always they had to go on , and always Bert rode .
A tyre was deflated .
He grew saddle sore .
Laurier declared that unimportant .
Asiatic flying ships passed overhead , the two cyclists made a dash for cover until the sky was clear .
Once a red Asiatic flying-machine came fluttering after them , so low they could distinguish the aeronaut 's head .
He followed them for a mile .
Now they came to regions of panic , now to regions of destruction ; here people were fighting for food , here they seemed hardly stirred from the countryside routine .
They spent a day in a deserted and damaged Albany .
The Asiatics had descended and cut every wire and made a cinder-heap of the Junction , and our travellers pushed on eastward .
They passed a hundred half-heeded incidents , and always Bert was toiling after Laurier 's indefatigable back ... .
`` Dose guys done wase cartridges .
Deyse hung him and dey pulled his legs .
Deyse doin ' all der Chinks dey can fine dat weh !
Dey ai n't takin ' no risks .
All der Chinks dey can fine . ''
`` We must go on !
We have something more than a woman to save .
We have to save America ! ''
And now the whole fabric of civilisation was bending and giving , and dropping to pieces and melting in the furnace of the war .
The accidental balance on the side of Progress was far slighter and infinitely more complex and delicate in its adjustments than the people of that time suspected ; but that did not alter the fact that it was an effective balance .
They did not realise that this age of relative good fortune was an age of immense but temporary opportunity for their kind .
They complacently assumed a necessary progress towards which they had no moral responsibility .
They did not realise that this security of progress was a thing still to be won -- or lost , and that the time to win it was a time that passed .
They went about their affairs energetically enough and yet with a curious idleness towards those threatening things .
No one troubled over the real dangers of mankind .
They , saw their armies and navies grow larger and more portentous ; some of their ironclads at the last cost as much as the whole annual expenditure upon advanced education ; they accumulated explosives and the machinery of destruction ; they allowed their national traditions and jealousies to accumulate ; they contemplated a steady enhancement of race hostility as the races drew closer without concern or understanding , and they permitted the growth in their midst of an evil-spirited press , mercenary and unscrupulous , incapable of good , and powerful for evil .
The State had practically no control over the press at all .
Quite heedlessly they allowed this torch-paper to lie at the door of their war magazine for any spark to fire .
The precedents of history were all one tale of the collapse of civilisations , the dangers of the time were manifest .
One is incredulous now to believe they could not see .
An idle question that , as idle as to ask could mankind have prevented the decay that turned Assyria and Babylon to empty deserts or the slow decline and fall , the gradual social disorganisation , phase by phase , that closed the chapter of the Empire of the West !
They could not , because they did not , they had not the will to arrest it .
What mankind could achieve with a different will is a speculation as idle as it is magnificent .
And this was no slow decadence that came to the Europeanised world ; those other civilisations rotted and crumbled down , the Europeanised civilisation was , as it were , blown up .
Within the space of five years it was altogether disintegrated and destroyed .
Up to the very eve of the War in the Air one sees a spacious spectacle of incessant advance , a world-wide security , enormous areas with highly organised industry and settled populations , gigantic cities spreading gigantically , the seas and oceans dotted with shipping , the land netted with rails , and open ways .
Then suddenly the German air-fleets sweep across the scene , and we are in the beginning of the end .
A fourth phase follows .
Through the struggle against Chaos , in the wake of the Famine , came now another old enemy of humanity -- the Pestilence , the Purple Death .
But the war does not pause .
The flags still fly .
Fresh air-fleets rise , new forms of airship , and beneath their swooping struggles the world darkens -- scarcely heeded by history .
The people were in a state of panic in Cardiff and many had fled to the hills , and directly the steamer came to the harbour she was boarded and her residue of food impounded by some unauthenticated Provisional Committee .
Bert tramped through a country disorganised by pestilence , foodless , and shaken to the very base of its immemorial order .
He came near death and starvation many times , and once he was drawn into scenes of violence that might have ended his career .
But the Bert Smallways who tramped from Cardiff to London vaguely `` going home , '' vaguely seeking something of his own that had no tangible form but Edna , was a very different person from the Desert Dervish who was swept out of England in Mr. Butteridge 's balloon a year before .
He was brown and lean and enduring , steady-eyed and pestilence-salted , and his mouth , which had once hung open , shut now like a steel trap .
Across his brow ran a white scar that he had got in a fight on the brig .
In Cardiff he had felt the need of new clothes and a weapon , and had , by means that would have shocked him a year ago , secured a flannel shirt , a corduroy suit , and a revolver and fifty cartridges from an abandoned pawnbroker 's .
He also got some soap and had his first real wash for thirteen months in a stream outside the town .
The Vigilance bands that had at first shot plunderers very freely were now either entirely dispersed by the plague , or busy between town and cemetery in a vain attempt to keep pace with it .
He prowled on the outskirts of the town for three or four days , starving , and then went back to join the Hospital Corps for a week , and so fortified himself with a few square meals before he started eastward .
Then presently he would meet a man or a woman , yellow-faced and probably negligently dressed and armed -- prowling for food .
These people would have the complexions and eyes and expressions of tramps or criminals , and often the clothing of prosperous middle-class or upper-class people .
Many of these would be eager for news , and willing to give help and even scraps of queer meat , or crusts of grey and doughy bread , in return for it .
They would listen to Bert 's story with avidity , and attempt to keep him with them for a day or so .
The virtual cessation of postal distribution and the collapse of all newspaper enterprise had left an immense and aching gap in the mental life of this time .
Men had suddenly lost sight of the ends of the earth and had still to recover the rumour-spreading habits of the Middle Ages .
In their eyes , in their bearing , in their talk , was the quality of lost and deoriented souls .
`` So you 've really got to Bun Hill at last , Teddy , '' said old Tom , beginning to talk and slackening his pace so soon as they were out of range of old Jessica .
`` You 're the last of Bert 's boys for me to see .
Wat I 've seen , young Bert I 've seen , Sissie and Matt , Tom what 's called after me , and Peter .
The traveller people brought you along all right , eh ? ''
`` I managed , '' said Teddy , who was a dry little boy .
`` It was a bicycle right enough . ''
They 'd keep on going by all day , -- 'undreds and 'undreds . ''
`` All round 'ere , Teddy , there was people living in those 'ouses , and up the road more 'ouses and more people .
You 'd 'ardly believe me , Teddy , but it 's Bible truth .
You can go on that way for ever and ever , and keep on coming on 'ouses , more 'ouses , and more .
There 's no end to 'em .
They get bigger and bigger . ''
His voice dropped as though he named strange names .
`` And all those 'ouses and streets and ways used to be full of people before the War in the Air and the Famine and the Purple Death .
They used to be full of people , Teddy , and then came a time when they was full of corpses , when you could n't go a mile that way before the stink of 'em drove you back .
It was the Purple Death 'ad killed 'em every one .
The cats and dogs and 'ens and vermin caught it .
Everything and every one 'ad it .
Jest a few of us 'appened to live .
I pulled through , and your aunt , though it made 'er lose 'er 'air .
Why , you find the skeletons in the 'ouses now .
This way we been into all the 'ouses and took what we wanted and buried moce of the people , but up that way , Norwood way , there 's 'ouses with the glass in the windows still , and the furniture not touched -- all dusty and falling to pieces -- and the bones of the people lying , some in bed , some about the 'ouse , jest as the Purple Death left 'em five-and-twenty years ago .
I went into one -- me and old Higgins las ' year -- and there was a room with books , Teddy -- you know what I mean by books , Teddy ? ''
The boy watched his uncle sharply .
`` WOT stories ? ''
The little boy looked round and ceased his questions for a space .
`` Bort 'em in shops like I used to 'ave .
I 'll show you the place , Teddy , if we go back .
People nowadays 'ave n't no idee of a shop -- no idee .
Plate-glass winders -- it 's all Greek to them .
Why , I 've 'ad as much as a ton and a 'arf of petaties to 'andle all at one time .
You 'd open your eyes till they dropped out to see jes ' what I used to 'ave in my shop .
Baskets of pears 'eaped up , marrers , apples and pears , d'licious great nuts . ''
His voice became luscious -- '' Benanas , oranges . ''
`` But 'OW did the people get killed ? ''
`` 'No , ' I says , 'not to sell .
I wish I 'ad .
But if I 'ad , I 'm afraid I could n't let you have it .
This gent , 'e 's been offerin ' me -- '
`` 'What 's 'e been offerin ' you ? '
says a great big chap with a 'atchet ; 'what 's 'e been offerin you ? '
I 'ad to tell .
`` It was the famine began to kill people .
Even before the Purple Death came along they was dying like flies at the end of the summer .
'Ow I remember it all !
I was one of the first to 'ave it .
I was out , seein ' if I might n't get 'old of a cat or somethin ' , and then I went round to my bit of ground to see whether I could n't get up some young turnips I 'd forgot , and I was took something awful .
You 've no idee the pain , Teddy -- it doubled me up pretty near .
I jes ' lay down by 'at there corner , and your aunt come along to look for me and dragged me 'ome like a sack .
`` But why did they 'ave a Penic ? ''
`` But why did they start the War ? ''
`` And 'ow did the War end ? ''
`` It ought to 'ave ended , '' said the little boy .
`` It did n't ought to 'ave begun , '' said old Tom , `` But people was proud .
People was la-dy-da-ish and uppish and proud .
Too much meat and drink they 'ad .
Give in -- not them !
And after a bit nobody arst 'em to give in .
Nobody arst 'em ... . ''
`` You can say what you like , '' he said .
`` It did n't ought ever to 'ave begun . ''
The gentleman reflected upon these difficulties .
`` She 's been a mother -- and several aunts -- to us ever since my wife died .
She was the first servant we ever had . ''
`` She put it there .
She even in a sense put the flower there .
It is renewed of course .
I am -- a sort of author .
Perhaps you know my books .
Not very important books -- but people sometimes read them . ''
He paused and she filled the pause with feeling .
He became suddenly very brave and brisk and businesslike .
He led the way back into the hall and made explanations .
`` It is not so much a hall as a hall living-room .
We use that end , except when we go out upon the verandah beyond , as our dining-room .
The door to the right is the kitchen . ''
`` This strip of wood is ours right up to the crest , '' he said , `` and from the crest one has a view .
One has two views .
If you would care -- -- ? ''
`` Man does not live by bread alone . ''
`` I implore you to forget that outbreak -- mere petulance -- because , I suppose , of a peculiar liking for that particular view .
There are -- associations -- -- ''
She was wonderfully expressive in her inexpressiveness , he thought , but found as yet no saving phrase .
Her thought continued to drop from her .
`` One sees them so much that at last one does n't see them . ''
Lady Harman reflected upon this statement and then responded with an air of remembered moments : `` Is n't it . ''
`` One loses the most precious things , '' said Mr. Brumley , `` and one loses them and it seems as though one could n't go on .
And one goes on . ''
`` I wish , '' said Lady Harman , with a sudden frankness and a little quickening of her colour , `` that I had some work .
Something -- that was my own . ''
`` I thought -- -- I thought you might have step-children . ''
But his thought ran along its own path .
`` You see , '' he said , `` there is something about you -- so freshly beginning life .
So like -- Spring . ''
Mr. Clarence appeared walking across the lawn towards them , surveying the charms of as obviously a charming garden as one could have , with the disdain and hostility natural to a chauffeur .
He did not so much touch his cap as indicate that it was within reach , and that he could if he pleased touch it .
`` It 's time you were going , my lady , '' he said .
`` Sir Isaac will be coming back by the five-twelve , and there 'll be a nice to-do if you ai n't at home and me at the station and everything in order again . ''
`` I 'll tell Mrs. Rabbit at once , '' said Mr. Brumley , and started to run and trod in some complicated way on one of his loose laces and was precipitated down the rockery steps .
and clasped her hands .
_I'll_ take a cup all right , '' said Clarence in the kindly voice of one who addresses an amusing inferior ... .
Mrs. Rabbit had already got the tea-things out upon the cane table in the pretty verandah , and took it ill that she should be supposed not to have thought of these preparations .
And all this was somehow animated by the stirring warmth in the June weather , for spring raised the sap in Mr. Brumley as well as in his trees , had been a restless time for him all his life .
This spring particularly had sensitized him , and now a light had shone .
In the small hours when he ought to have been fast asleep he decided she would certainly take the house , and that he would see her again quite a number of times .
A long tangle of unavoidable detail for discussion might be improvised by an ingenious man .
And the rest of that waking interval passed in such inventions , which became more and more vague and magnificent and familiar as Mr. Brumley lapsed into slumber again ... .
Next day the garden essay was still neglected , and he wrote a pretty vague little song about an earthly mourner and a fresh presence that set him thinking of the story of Persephone and how she passed in the springtime up from the shadows again , blessing as she passed ... .
He pulled himself together about midday , cycled over to Gorshott for lunch at the clubhouse and a round with Horace Toomer in the afternoon , re-read the poem after tea , decided it was poor , tore it up and got himself down to his little fantasy about Shakespear 's Garden for a good two hours before supper .
It was a sketch of that fortunate poet ( whose definitive immortality is now being assured by an influential committee ) walking round his Stratford garden with his daughter , quoting himself copiously with an accuracy and inappropriateness that reflected more credit upon his heart than upon his head , and saying in addition many distinctively Brumley things .
When Mrs. Rabbit , with a solicitude acquired from the late Mrs. Brumley , asked him how he had got on with his work -- the sight of verse on his paper had made her anxious -- he could answer quite truthfully , `` Like a house afire . ''
It is to be remarked that two facts , usually esteemed as supremely important in the life of a woman , do not seem to have affected Mr. Brumley 's state of mind nearly so much as quite trivial personal details about Lady Harman .
The first of these facts was the existence of the lady 's four children , and the second , Sir Isaac .
`` She came , '' said Brumley , neglecting to add the trifling fact that she had come alone .
`` Personally I 've little against the man .
A wife too young for him and jealously guarded , but that 's all to his credit .
If it wasn't for his blatancy in his business ... .
And the knighthood ... .
I suppose he ca n't resist taking anything he can get .
Bread made by wholesale and distributed like a newspaper ca n't , I feel , be the same thing as the loaf of your honest old-fashioned baker -- each loaf made with individual attention -- out of wholesome English flour -- hand-ground -- with a personal touch for each customer .
Still , everything drifts on to these hugger-mugger large enterprises ; Chicago spreads over the world .
One thing goes after another , tobacco , tea , bacon , drugs , bookselling .
Decent homes destroyed right and left .
Not Harman 's affair , I suppose .
The girls in his London tea-shops have of course to supplement their wages by prostitution -- probably do n't object to that nowadays considering the novels we have .
And his effect on the landscape -- -- Until they stopped him he was trying very hard to get Shakespear 's Cliff at Dover .
He did for a time have the Toad Rock at Tunbridge .
Still '' -- something like a sigh escaped from Toomer , -- '' his private life appears to be almost as blameless as anybody 's can be ... .
Thanks no doubt to his defective health .
I made the most careful enquiries when his knighthood was first discussed .
Before his marriage he seems to have lived at home with his mother .
Very quietly and inexpensively . ''
But the house had to be let , and it had to be let to Sir Isaac Harman .
In another moment an amiable though distinguished man of letters was in the hall interviewing the great _entrepreneur_ .
`` Been there myself , '' said Sir Isaac .
`` They sell those brass fittings in Ho'bun . ''
`` I suppose , '' he said , indicating the hill of pines behind , `` one could buy or lease some of that .
If one wanted to throw it into the place and open out more .
That 's not bad .
Nothing nearer than Aldershot ... .
That 's eleven miles , is it ?
I suppose there are n't any _literary_ people about here , musicians or that kind of thing , no advanced people of that sort ? ''
`` Not a business man , but my agent tells me -- -- '' panted Mr. Brumley .
said Mr. Brumley , and waved an arm widely .
Sir Isaac regarded the prospect with a dissatisfied face .
His pallor had given place to a shiny , flushed appearance , his nose , his ears , and his cheeks were pink .
He blew his face out , and seemed to be studying the landscape for defects .
`` This might be built over at any time , '' he complained .
_ '' said Mr. Brumley , too surprised for coherent speech .
Sir Isaac considered it .
`` Just the letters showing , '' he said .
`` No , -- that would be going too far in the other direction . ''
He made a faint sucking noise with his lips and teeth as he surveyed the landscape and weighed this important matter ... .
she cried , `` and so I 've caught you at home , Mr. Brumley !
And , poor dear , you 're at my mercy . ''
And she shook both his hands with both of hers .
Sir Isaac was borne along upon the lady 's stream of words in a state of mulish reluctance , nodding , saying `` Of course '' and similar phrases , and wishing he was out of it all with an extreme manifestness .
He drank his tea with unmistakable discomfort , and twice inserted into the conversation an entirely irrelevant remark that he had to be going .
But Lady Beach-Mandarin had her purposes with him and crushed these quivering tentatives .
`` Ca n't keep the car waiting , '' was what Brumley could distinguish in his reply .
`` We must see it , '' she said , and turned his retreat into a procession .
She admired the car , she admired the colour of the car , she admired the lamps of the car and the door of the car and the little fittings of the car .
She admired the horn .
She admired the twist of the horn .
She admired Clarence and the uniform of Clarence and she admired and coveted the great fur coat that he held ready for his employer .
( But if she had it , she said , she would wear the splendid fur outside to show every little bit of it . )
And when the car at last moved forward and tooted -- she admired the note -- and vanished softly and swiftly through the gates , she was left in the porch with Mr. Brumley still by sheer inertia admiring and envying .
She admired Sir Isaac 's car number Z 900 .
( Such an easy one to remember ! )
Then she stopped abruptly , as one might discover that the water in the bathroom was running to waste and turn it off .
She had a cynicism as exuberant as the rest of her .
Lady Beach-Mandarin turned her full blue eye upon him .
Lady Beach-Mandarin 's reply was silent and singular .
She compressed her lips very tightly , fixed her eye firmly on Mr. Brumley 's , lifted her finger to the level of her left eyelash , and then shook it at him very deliberately five times .
Then with a little sigh and a sudden and complete restoration of manner she remarked that never in any year before had she seen peonies quite so splendid .
`` I 've a peculiar sympathy with peonies , '' she said .
`` They 're so exactly my style . ''
`` I 'm selling it , '' said Mr. Brumley , `` by almost imperceptible degrees . ''
`` But does n't it distress you highly , Mr. Brumley , '' one of the Perth ladies asked , `` to be leaving Euphemia 's Home to strangers ?
The man may go altering it . ''
`` It 's one of those cases , '' began Mr. Brumley with a note of scientific detachment , `` where one is really tempted to be ultra-feminist .
It's clear , he uses every advantage .
He 's her owner , her keeper , her obstinate insensitive little tyrant ... .
And yet there 's a sort of effect , as though nothing was decided ... .
As if she was only just growing up . ''
`` Queen Mary ! ''
said Mr. Brumley , `` No !
-- Lady Harman . ''
`` I 've never seen this lady , '' said Miss Sharsper .
`` Is she beautiful ? ''
Miss Sharsper declared she would _love_ to come .
Was n't it her business to study out-of-the-way types ?
Mr. Roper produced a knowing sort of engagement -- '' I 'm provided for already , Lady Beach-Mandarin , '' he said , and the cousins from Perth had to do some shopping .
`` Suppose she is n't at all the sort of person you seem to think she is , '' said Miss Sharsper .
`` And suppose she came ! ''
`` Not ask him too ! ''
`` My vividest anticipations outdone , '' said Lady Beach-Mandarin , squeezing Lady Harman 's fingers with enthusiasm .
`` And what a charming garden you have , and what a delightful situation !
And on the very verge of London , high , on this delightful _literary_ hill , and ready at any moment to swoop in that enviable great car of yours .
I suppose you come a great deal into London , Lady Harman ? ''
`` Without yours , it 's only half a name ! ''
`` If it were a _business_ thing -- -- !
But on my list , I'm like dear old Queen Victoria you know , the wives must come too . ''
`` But , dear Lady Harman , it 's entirely unnecessary you should consult him , -- entirely , '' Lady Beach-Mandarin was saying .
`` He 's very uncertain , '' said Lady Harman , with a quiet readiness that pleased Mr. Brumley .
`` Yes , Snagsby , please , under the big cypress .
And tell my mother and sister . ''
Lady Harman said there was nothing beyond but sycamores and the fence , but Lady Beach-Mandarin would press on through a narrow path that pierced the laurel hedge , in order , she said , that she might turn back and get the whole effect of the grounds .
And so it was they discovered the mushroom shed .
Mr. Brumley 's interest in Lady Harman was to be almost too crowded by detail before that impulsive call was over .
Superposed upon the mystery of the mushroom shed was the vivid illumination of Lady Harman by her mother and sister .
They had an effect of having reluctantly become her social inferiors for her own good ; the mother -- her name he learnt was Mrs. Sawbridge -- had all Lady Harman 's tall slenderness , but otherwise resembled her only in the poise of her neck and an occasional gesture ; she was fair and with a kind of ignoble and premeditated refinement in her speech and manner .
She was dressed with the restraint of a prolonged and attenuated widowhood , in a rich and complicatedly quiet dress of mauve and grey .
She was obviously a transitory visitor and not so much taking the opulence about her and particularly the great butler for granted as pointedly and persistently ignoring it in an effort to seem to take it for granted .
The sister , on the other hand , had Lady Harman's pale darkness but none of her fineness of line .
She missed altogether that quality of fineness .
Her darkness was done with a quite perceptible heaviness , her dignity passed into solidity and her profile was , with an entire want of hesitation , handsome .
She was evidently the elder by a space of some years and she was dressed with severity in grey .
`` Of course they are mostly quite dreadfully Sweated , '' said Lady Beach-Mandarin .
`` Especially in the confectionery -- -- '' She thought of her position in time .
`` In the inferior class of confectioners' establishments , '' she said and then hurried on to : `` Of course when you come to lunch , -- Agatha Alimony .
I 'm most anxious for you and her to meet . ''
`` So _true_ , '' Mrs. Sawbridge confided to Mr. Brumley with a look that almost languished ... .
The raid had accomplished its every object and was drifting doorward .
For a moment Lady Beach-Mandarin desisted from Lady Harman and threw her whole being into an eddying effort to submerge the already subjugated Mrs. Sawbridge .
Miss Sawbridge was behind up the oak staircase explaining Sir Isaac 's interest in furniture-buying to Miss Sharsper .
Mr. Brumley had his one moment with Lady Harman .
`` He was dodging about in the garden all the time . ''
`` I 'm sure I saw Him , '' said Lady Beach-Mandarin .
He hid away in the mushroom shed .
The one you found locked . ''
Lady Beach-Mandarin 's car passed through the open gates and was swallowed up in the dusty stream of traffic down Putney Hill ; the great butler withdrew , the little manservant vanished , Mrs. Sawbridge and her elder daughter had hovered and now receded from the back of the hall ; Lady Harman remained standing thoughtfully in the large Bulwer-Lyttonesque doorway of her house .
Her face expressed a vague expectation .
She waited to be addressed from behind .
Lady Harman regarded the lord of her being and hesitated before she answered .
She knew what she had to say would enrage him , but she had come to a point in their relationship when a husband 's good temper is no longer a supreme consideration .
`` You 've had plenty of time to wash them , '' she said .
`` Yes , '' he shouted .
`` And instead I kept 'em to show you .
I stayed out here to see the last of that crew for fear I might run against 'em in the house .
Of all the infernal old women -- -- ''
`` Isaac , '' said Lady Harman , leaning forward and then in a low penetrating whisper , `` _Snagsby !
And meet _her_ ! ''
He walked past her into the hall , and the little manservant suddenly materialised in the middle of the space and came forward to brush him obsequiously .
Lady Harman regarded that proceeding for some moments in a preoccupied manner and then passed slowly into the classical conservatory .
She felt that in view of her engagements the discussion of Lady Beach-Mandarin was only just beginning .
Sir Isaac appeared surprised .
He had assumed the incident was closed .
_ '' he asked compactly .
`` No , '' said Lady Harman , gripping her tassel more firmly .
`` I shall have to return that call . ''
`` I tell you , you wo n't . ''
`` I might have known when we asked her here , '' said Sir Isaac with an habitual disregard of her judgments that was beginning to irritate her more and more .
`` You ca n't take on all these people .
They 're not the sort of people we want to know . ''
`` I do n't . ''
Her reply was the material of much subsequent reflection on the part of Sir Isaac .
There was something in her manner ... .
Yet great possibilities of faith and devotion stirred already in the girl 's heart .
She thought little of God by day , but had a strange sense of Him in the starlight ; never under the moonlight -- that was in no sense divine -- but in the stirring darkness of the stars .
And it is remarkable that after a course of astronomical enlightenment by a visiting master and descriptions of masses and distances , incredible aching distances , then even more than ever she seemed to feel God among the stars ... .
She began to speculate about that future life upon which religion insists so much and communicates so little .
Was it perhaps in other planets , under those wonderful , many-mooned , silver-banded skies ?
She perceived more and more a kind of absurdity in the existence all about her .
Was all this world a mere make-believe , and would Miss Beeton Clavier and every one about her presently cast aside a veil ?
Manifestly there was a veil .
She had a very natural disposition to doubt whether the actual circumstances of her life were real .
Her mother for instance was so lacking in blood and fire , so very like the stiff paper wrapping of something else .
But if these things were not real , what was real ?
What might she not presently do ?
What might she not presently be ?
Perhaps death had something to do with that .
Was death perhaps no more than the flinging off of grotesque outer garments by the newly arrived guests at the feast of living ?
She had that feeling that there might be a feast of living .
`` She 's _such_ a child , '' said Mrs. Sawbridge repeatedly in reply .
`` Sooner or later , '' said Mrs. Harman , `` I suppose Isaac will marry .
He's been such a good son to me that I shall feel it dreadfully , and yet , you know , I wish I could see him settled .
Then _I_ shall settle -- in a little house of my own somewhere .
Just a little place .
I do n't believe in coming too much between son and daughter-in-law ... . ''
And while she was still feeling quite surprised by everything and extremely doubtful whether she wanted to go any further with this business , which was manifestly far more serious , out of all proportion more serious , than anything that had ever happened to her before -- and _unpleasant_ , abounding indeed in crumpling indignities and horrible nervous stresses , it dawned upon her that she was presently to be that strange , grown-up and preoccupied thing , a mother , and that girlhood and youth and vigorous games , mountains and swimming and running and leaping were over for her as far as she could see for ever ... .
`` I 've seen to that . ''
`` You 'll see , '' he said .
`` There 's a butler -- and everything . ''
And so the woman who had been a girl three weeks ago , this tall , dark-eyed , slightly perplexed and very young-looking lady , was introduced to the home that had been made for her .
She went about it with an alarmed sense of strange responsibilities , not in the least feeling that anything was being given to her .
And Sir Isaac led her from point to point full of the pride and joy of new possession -- for it was his first own house as well as hers -- rejoicing over it and exacting gratitude .
She understood now why he had said downstairs , when she had glanced at a big photographic enlargement of a portrait of Doctor Barnardo , `` your favourite hero in real life . ''
Perhaps Mr. Charterson might claim to be Sir Isaac 's chief friend at the time of that gentleman 's marriage .
Transactions in sugar had brought them together originally .
He was Sir Isaac 's best man , and the new knight entertained a feeling of something very like admiration for him .
Moreover , Mr. Charterson had very large ears , more particularly was the left one large , extraordinarily large and projecting upper teeth , which he sought vainly to hide beneath an extravagant moustache , and a harsh voice , characteristics that did much to allay the anxieties natural to a newly married man .
Mr. Charterson was moreover adequately married to a large , attentive , enterprising , swarthy wife , and possessed a splendid house in Belgravia .
Not quite so self-made as Sir Isaac , he was still sufficiently self-made to take a very keen interest in his own social advancement and in social advancement generally , and it was through him that Sir Isaac 's attention had been first directed to those developing relations with politics that arise as a business grows to greatness .
`` I 'm for Parliament , '' said Charterson .
`` Sugar 's in politics , and I'm after it .
You 'd better come too , Harman .
Those chaps up there , they'll play jiggery-pokery with sugar if we are n't careful .
And it wo n't be only sugar , Harman ! ''
A few weeks later they went to dinner at the Chartersons ' , and then she gave a dinner , which was arranged very skilfully by Sir Isaac and Snagsby and the cook-housekeeper , with a little outside help , and then came a big party reception at Lady Barleypound 's , a multitudinous miscellaneous assembly in which the obviously wealthy rubbed shoulders with the obviously virtuous and the not quite so obviously clever .
It was a great orgy of standing about and seeing the various Blenkers and the Cramptons and the Weston Massinghays and the Daytons and Mrs. Millingham with her quivering lorgnette and her last tame genius and Lewis , and indeed all the Tapirs and Tadpoles of Liberalism , being tremendously active and influential and important throughout the evening .
The house struck Ellen as being very splendid , the great staircase particularly so , and never before had she seen a great multitude of people in evening dress .
Lady Barleypound in the golden parlour at the head of the stairs shook hands automatically , lest it would seem in some amiable dream , Mrs. Blapton and a daughter rustled across the gathering in a hasty vindictive manner and vanished , and a number of handsome , glittering , dark-eyed , splendidly dressed women kept together in groups and were tremendously but occultly amused .
The various Blenkers seemed everywhere , Horatio in particular with his large fluent person and his luminous tenor was like a shop-walker taking customers to the departments : one felt he was weaving all these immiscibles together into one great wise Liberal purpose , and that he deserved quite wonderful things from the party ; he even introduced five or six people to Lady Harman , looking sternly over her head and restraining his charm as he did so on account of Sir Isaac 's feelings .
The people he brought up to her were not very interesting people , she thought , but then that was perhaps due to her own dreadful ignorance of politics .
`` Good Lord ! ''
`` What 's this ?
It ought n't to be allowed . ''
And he pitched the papers at the wastepaper basket under the sideboard .
`` I 'll thank you , '' said Georgina , `` not to throw away our _Votes for Women_ .
We subscribe to that . ''
`` Put 'em down there , '' said Sir Isaac , waving to the sideboard and then in an ensuing silence handed two letters of no importance to his mother-in-law .
His face was pale and he was breathless .
Snagsby with an obvious tactfulness retired .
`` Well , rot then , if you like , '' said Sir Isaac , unamiably and panting .
`` It 's queer , '' said Susan ; `` but it never seemed to me the sort of thing a girl ought to go telling .
It 's a kind of private thing .
And besides , it is n't exactly easy to tell ... .
I suppose the Firm did n't want to be worried by complaints and disputes about that sort of thing .
And it is n't always easy to say just which of the two is to blame . ''
`` Thirteen there was .
Father always used to laugh and say he 'd had a fair baker 's dozen .
There was Luke to begin with -- -- ''
She gave some glimpses of her father and then there was a collapse of which she fought shy .
Lady Harman was too delicate to press her to talk of that .
`` Father 's inquest ? ''
`` I suppose it is , '' said Lady Harman .
`` Alice goes into one of their Ho'burn branches as a waitress , do what I could to prevent her .
It makes one mad to think of it .
Time after time I 've said to her , 'Alice , ' I 've said , 'sooner than touch their dirty money I 'd starve in the street . '
She says it 's all nonsense of me to bear a spite .
'Alice , ' I told her , 'it's a wonder the spirit of poor father do n't rise up against you . '
Calls that bearing a spite ... .
Of course she was little when it happened .
She ca n't remember , not as I remember ... . ''
Lady Harman reflected for a time .
`` I suppose you do n't know , '' she began , addressing Susan 's industrious back ; `` you do n't know who -- who owns these International Stores ? ''
We have done much in the last few years to destroy the severe limitations of Victorian delicacy , and all of us , from princesses and prime-ministers ' wives downward , talk of topics that would have been considered quite gravely improper in the nineteenth century .
Nevertheless , some topics have , if anything , become more indelicate than they were , and this is especially true of the discussion of income , of any discussion that tends , however remotely , to inquire , Who is it at the base of everything who really pays in blood and muscle and involuntary submissions for _your_ freedom and magnificence ?
This , indeed , is almost the ultimate surviving indecency .
So that it was with considerable private shame and discomfort that Lady Harman pursued even in her privacy the train of thought that Susan Burnet had set going .
It had been conveyed into her mind long ago , and it had settled down there and grown into a sort of security , that the International Bread and Cake Stores were a very important contribution to Progress , and that Sir Isaac , outside the gates of his home , was a very useful and beneficial personage , and richly meriting a baronetcy .
She had n't particularly analyzed this persuasion , but she supposed him engaged in a kind of daily repetition , but upon modern scientific lines , of the miracle of the loaves and fishes , feeding a great multitude that would otherwise have gone hungry .
She knew , too , from the advertisements that flowered about her path through life , that this bread in question was exceptionally clean and hygienic ; whole front pages of the _Daily Messenger_ , headed the `` Fauna of Small Bakehouses , '' and adorned with a bordering of _Blatta orientalis_ , the common cockroach , had taught her that , and she knew that Sir Isaac 's passion for purity had also led to the _Old Country Gazette's_ spirited and successful campaign for a non-party measure securing additional bakehouse regulation and inspection .
And her impression had been that the growing and developing refreshment side of the concern was almost a public charity ; Sir Isaac gave , he said , a larger , heavier scone , a bigger pat of butter , a more elegant teapot , ham more finely cut and less questionable pork-pies than any other system of syndicated tea-shops .
She supposed that whenever he sat late at night going over schemes and papers , or when he went off for days together to Cardiff or Glasgow or Dublin , or such-like centres , or when he became preoccupied at dinner and whistled thoughtfully through his teeth , he was planning to increase the amount or diminish the cost of tea and cocoa-drenched farinaceous food in the stomachs of that section of our national adolescence which goes out daily into the streets of our great cities to be fed .
And she knew his vans and catering were indispensable to the British Army upon its manoeuvres ... .
Now the smashing up of the Burnet family by the International Stores was disagreeably not in the picture of these suppositions .
And the remarkable thing is that this one little tragedy would n't for a moment allow itself to be regarded as an exceptional accident in an otherwise fair vast development .
It remained obstinately a specimen -- of the other side of the great syndication .
After all she did not bring it to Sir Isaac 's attention .
But one morning , while this phase of new doubts was still lively in her mind , Sir Isaac told her he was going down to Brighton , and then along the coast road in a car to Portsmouth , to pay a few surprise visits , and see how the machine was working .
He would be away a night , an unusual breach in his habits .
Sir Isaac shook his head .
`` I want younger men , '' he said .
`` You ca n't get a move on the older hands . ''
When at last Sir Isaac had gone off in the car to Victoria , Lady Harman rang for Snagsby .
`` Is n't there a paper , '' she asked , `` called the _London Lion_ ? ''
When she put down the paper she was suddenly afflicted by a vivid vision of Susan Burnet 's father , losing heart and not knowing what to do .
She had an unreasonable feeling that Susan Burnet 's father must have been a small , kindly , furry , bunnyish , little man .
Of course there had to be progress and the survival of the fittest .
She found herself weighing what she imagined Susan Burnet 's father to be like , against the ferrety face , stooping shoulders and scheming whistle of Sir Isaac .
It is n't a natural thing to keep on worrying about the morality of one 's material prosperity .
These are proclivities superinduced by modern conditions of the conscience .
There is a natural resistance in every healthy human being to such distressful heart-searchings .
Strong instincts battled in Lady Harman against this intermittent sense of responsibility that was beginning to worry her .
An immense lot of her was for simply running away from these troublesome considerations , for covering herself up from them , for distraction .
And it was this particular conception of evasion that had set her careering about the countryside in her car , looking for conceivable houses of refuge from this dark novelty of social and personal care , and that had driven her into the low long room of Black Strand and the presence of Mr. Brumley .
Of what ensued and the appearance and influence of Lady Beach-Mandarin and how it led among other things to a lunch invitation from that lady the reader has already been informed .
( `` Now where are we going out to lunch ? ''
said Snagsby presently to Peters .
`` One ca n't help observing things , '' said the maid , after a pause .
`` Mute though we be . ''
Lady Harman felt taken in at once to all that capacious bosom involved and contained ... .
Lady Beach-Mandarin delegated Sir Markham to preside over the men's cigars and bounced and slapped her four ladies upstairs to the drawing-room .
Her mother disappeared and so did Phyllis and the governess .
Lady Harman heard a large aside to Lady Viping : `` Is n't she perfectly lovely ? ''
glanced to discover the lorgnette in appreciative action , and then found herself drifting into a secluded window-seat and a duologue with Miss Agatha Alimony .
Miss Alimony was one of that large and increasing number of dusky , grey-eyed ladies who go through life with an air of darkly incomprehensible significance .
She led off Lady Harman as though she took her away to reveal unheard-of mysteries and her voice was a contralto undertone that she emphasized in some inexplicable way by the magnetic use of her eyes .
Her hat of cock's feathers which rustled like familiar spirits greatly augmented the profundity of her effect .
As she spoke she glanced guardedly at the other ladies at the end of the room and from first to last she seemed undecided in her own mind whether she was a conspirator or a prophetess .
She had heard of Lady Harman before , she had been longing impatiently to talk to her all through the lunch .
`` You are just what we want , '' said Agatha .
`` What who want ? ''
asked Lady Harman , struggling against the hypnotic influence of her interlocutor .
`` _We_ , '' said Miss Agatha , `` the Cause .
They were now through the gates approaching the Albert Memorial .
Mr. Brumley was filled with an idea so desirable that it made him fear to suggest it .
`` Of course we can talk very comfortably here , '' he said , `` under these great trees .
But I do so wish -- -- Have you seen those great borders at Hampton Court ?
The whole place is glowing , and in such sunshine as this -- -- A taxi -- will take us there under the hour .
If you are free until half-past five . ''
`` I must n't be later than half-past five . ''
( _Why should n't she ?
_ It would no doubt make Sir Isaac furiously angry -- if he heard of it .
But it was the sort of thing other women of her class did ; did n't all the novels testify ?
She had a perfect right -- --
And Mr. Brumley reflected too briefly and committed a fatal error .
`` No , '' he said with his mind upon that loose silver .
`` We shall go back by train . ''
The crisis came at tea .
They had tea at the inn upon the green that struck Mr. Brumley as being most likely to be cheap and which he pretended to choose for some trivial charm about the windows .
And it was n't cheap , and when at last Mr. Brumley was faced by the little slip of the bill and could draw his money from his pocket and look at it , he knew the worst and the worst was worse than he had expected .
The bill was five shillings ( Should he dispute it ?
Too ugly altogether , a dispute with a probably ironical waiter ! )
and the money in his hand amounted to four shillings and sixpence .
He acted surprise with the waiter 's eye upon him .
( Should he ask for credit ?
They might be frightfully disagreeable in such a cockney resort as this . )
`` Tut , tut , '' said Mr. Brumley , and then -- a little late for it -- resorted to and discovered the emptiness of his sovereign purse .
He realized that this was out of the picture at this stage , felt his ears and nose and cheeks grow hot and pink .
The waiter 's colleague across the room became interested in the proceedings .
`` Then you _ought_ to have , '' said Isaac .
`` She ought to be at home . ''
Mrs. Sawbridge stood up in order to be more dignified than a seated position permitted .
`` No , Sir Isaac . ''
`` He ca n't _know_ anything , '' said Peters .
She had been calculating her answers since the moment she had realized that she was to return home at a disadvantage .
( It is not my business to blame her for a certain disingenuousness ; it is my business simply to record it . )
`` I went out to lunch at Lady Beach-Mandarin 's , '' she said .
`` I told you I meant to . ''
`` I went on -- to see the borders at Hampton Court . ''
`` Of _course_ it 's your duty .
You know it 's your duty .
You know perfectly well .
It 's only these rotten , silly , degenerate , decadent fools who've got ideas into you -- -- '' The sentence staggered under its load of adjectives like a camel under the last straw and collapsed .
_ '' he said .
He emphasized his speech by gestures .
He thrust out one rather large ill-shaped hand at her with two vibrating fingers extended .
His ears became red , his nose red , his eyes seemed red and all about these points his face was wrathful white .
His hair rose up into stiff scared listening ends .
He had his rights , he had some _little_ claim to consideration surely , he might be just nobody but he was n't going to stand this much anyhow .
He gave her fair warning .
What was she , what did she know of the world into which she wanted to rush ?
He lapsed into views of Lady Beach-Mandarin -- unfavourable views .
I wish Lady Beach-Mandarin could have heard him ... .
( Limburger in his curious `` _Sexuelle Unterschiede der Seele_ , '' points out as a probably universal distinction between the sexes that when a man scolds a woman , if only he scolds loudly enough and long enough , conviction of sin is aroused , while in the reverse case the result is merely a murderous impulse .
This he further says is not understood by women , who hope by scolding to produce the similar effect upon men that they themselves would experience .
The passage is illustrated by figures of ducking stools and followed by some carefully analyzed statistics of connubial crime in Berlin in the years 1901-2 .
But in this matter let the student compare the achievement of Paulina in _The Winter 's Tale_ and reflect upon his own life .
And moreover it is difficult to estimate how far the twinges of conscience that Lady Harman was feeling were not due to an entirely different cause , the falsification of her position by the lie she had just told Sir Isaac . )
Mrs. Sawbridge , perhaps erring on the side of discretion , had consumed a little soup and a wing of chicken in her own room .
Sir Isaac was down first and his wife found him grimly astride before the great dining-room fire awaiting her .
She had had her dark hair dressed with extreme simplicity and had slipped on a blue velvet tea-gown , but she had been delayed by a visit to the nursery , where the children were now flushed and uneasily asleep .
`` What exactly has Georgina done ? ''
`` It 's in the paper , dear .
On the table there . ''
`` Georgina got them the tickets , '' Mrs. Sawbridge explained .
`` I wish she had n't .
It was so -- so unnecessary of her . ''
`` I -- I suppose it 's all Right , dear , now ? ''
`` It 's quite all right now , mummy . ''
`` Go on , '' he encouraged grimly .
`` I 'm not a slave and I wo n't be a slave . ''
`` Elly , '' he whispered .
She caught her dressing-gown about her and stood up .
She looked at him and it dawned upon her that she had always imagined herself to be afraid of him and that indeed she was n't .
She shook her head obstinately .
`` I come in here to make it up , '' he said , with a voice charged with griefs , `` after all you 've done , and you go and you talk of autonomy ! ''
`` There are places , me lady , '' said Peters .
She was a little surprised to find how readily she did this and how easily the once entirely authoritative Mrs. Harblow submitted .
It was much the same surprise that growing young people feel when they reach some shelf that has hitherto been inaccessible .
The crisis soon passed .
At his first visit the doctor was a little doubtful whether the Harman nursery was n't under the sway of measles , which were then raging in a particularly virulent form in London ; the next day he inclined to the view that the trouble was merely a feverish cold , and before night this second view was justified by the disappearance of the `` temperatures '' and a complete return to normal conditions .
But as for that hushed reconciliation in the fevered presence of the almost sacrificial offspring , it did n't happen .
Sir Isaac merely thrust aside the stiff silences behind which he masked his rage to remark : `` This is what happens when wimmen go gadding about ! ''
So Susan , bright-eyed , flushed and voluble , pleading the cause of that vague greatness in humanity that would love , that would loiter , that would think , that would if it could give us art , delight and beauty , that turns blindly and stumblingly towards joy , towards intervals , towards the mysterious things of the spirit , against all this sordid strenuousness , this driving destructive association of hardfisted peasant soul and Ghetto greed , this fool 's `` efficiency , '' that rules our world to-day .
Then Susan lunged for a time at the waitress life her sister led .
`` She has 'er 'ome with us , but some -- they have n't homes . ''
And after some hearsay about the pressure in the bake-houses and the accidents to the van-men , who worked on a speeding-up system that Sir Isaac had adopted from an American business specialist , Susan 's mental discharge poured out into the particulars of the waitresses ' strike and her sister 's share in that .
`` She _would_ go into it , '' said Susan , `` she let herself be drawn in .
I asked her never to take the place .
Better Service , I said , a thousand times .
I begged her , I could have begged her on my bended knees ... . ''
`` You ca n't be too careful , '' said Susan , manifestly resolved not to give our highly civilized state half a chance with her .
He expanded generally on strikes .
`` It 's a question practically whether we are to manage our own businesses or whether we 're to have them managed for us .
`` I thought , '' she said to some confused explanations by Blenker and Charterson , `` that gratuities were forbidden . ''
Charterson could n't imagine whether she was going on in this way out of sheer ignorance or not .
`` Sometimes their fines make big unexpected holes in their week 's pay , '' she said .
If Lady Harman had failed to remark at the time the deep impression her words had made upon her hearers , she would have learnt it later from the extraordinary wrath in which Sir Isaac , as soon as his guests had departed , visited her .
He was so angry he broke the seal of silence he had set upon his lips .
He came raging into the pink bedroom through the paper-covered door as if they were back upon their old intimate footing .
He brought a flavour of cigars and manly refreshment with him , his shirt front was a little splashed and crumpled and his white face was variegated with flushed patches .
Sir Isaac suddenly gave way to woe .
`` What have I _done_ ? ''
he cried , `` what have I done ?
Here 's everything going so well !
We might be the happiest of couples !
We 're rich , we got everything we want ... .
And then you go harbouring these ideas , fooling about with rotten people , taking up with Socialism -- -- Yes , I tell you -- Socialism ! ''
He paused at the papered door .
He had a popular craving for a vivid curtain and this he felt was just a little too mild .
Twice had Sir Isaac come near to betraying the rapid and extensive preparations for the subjugation of his wife , that he hid behind his silences .
He hoped that their estrangement might be healed by a certain display of strength and decision .
He still refused to let himself believe that all this trouble that had arisen between them , this sullen insistence upon unbecoming freedoms of intercourse and movement , this questioning spirit and a gaucherie of manner that might almost be mistaken for an aversion from his person , were due to any essential evil in her nature ; he clung almost passionately to the alternative that she was the victim of those gathering forces of discontent , of that interpretation which can only be described as decadent and that veracity which can only be called immodest , that darken the intellectual skies of our time , a sweet thing he held her still though touched by corruption , a prey to `` idees , '' `` idees '' imparted from the poisoned mind of her sister , imbibed from the carelessly edited columns of newspapers , from all too laxly censored plays , from `` blear-eyed '' bookshow he thanked the Archbishop of York for that clever expressive epithet !
-- from the careless talk of rashly admitted guests , from the very atmosphere of London .
And it had grown clearer and clearer to him that his duty to himself and the world and her was to remove her to a purer , simpler air , beyond the range of these infections , to isolate her and tranquillize her and so win her back again to that acquiescence , that entirely hopeless submissiveness that had made her so sweet and dear a companion for him in the earlier years of their married life .
Long before Lady Beach-Mandarin 's crucial luncheon , his deliberate foreseeing mind had been planning such a retreat .
Black Strand even at his first visit had appeared to him in the light of a great opportunity , and the crisis of their quarrel did but release that same torrential energy which had carried him to a position of Napoleonic predominance in the world of baking , light catering and confectionery , into the channels of a scheme already very definitely formed in his mind .
This done , and it was done in less than fifteen minutes , Sir Isaac produced a rather crumpled young architect from the motor-car as a conjurer might produce a rabbit from a hat , a builder from Aleham appeared astonishingly in a dog-cart -- he had been summoned by telegram -- and Sir Isaac began there and then to discuss alterations , enlargements and , more particularly , with a view to his nursery requirements , the conversion of the empty barn into a nursery wing and its connexion with the house by a corridor across the shrubbery .
`` That 's enough , Snagsby , '' said Sir Isaac , at her entrance .
`` Bring it all . ''
Latterly Snagsby 's eye had lost the assurance of his former days .
She had noted it before , she noted it now more than ever ; as though he was losing confidence , as though he was beginning to doubt , as though the world he had once seemed to rule grew insecure beneath his feet .
For a moment she met his eye ; it might have been a warning he conveyed , it might have been an appeal for sympathy , and then he had gone .
She looked at the table .
Sir Isaac had breakfasted acutely .
`` Snagsby , '' he said , `` just tell Peters to pack up Lady Harman's things ... . ''
Lady Harman realized with a deepening humiliation that she dared not dispute before the servants , and that he could .
`` But the children -- -- '' she said at last .
`` I 've told Mrs. Harblow , '' he said , over his shoulder .
`` Told her it was a bit of a surprise . ''
He turned , with a momentary lapse into something like humour .
`` You see , '' he said , `` it _is_ a bit of a surprise . ''
`` Do n't speak to me ! ''
he answered , waving her off .
`` Do n't speak to me !
You should have spoken before , Elly .
_Now_ , -- things are happening . ''
A violent outcry from baby , who , with more than her customary violence was making her customary morning protest against being clad , recalled Lady Harman from the contemplation of these exterior activities ... .
`` And now , '' said Sir Isaac with evident premeditation and a certain deliberate amiability , `` now we got down here , now we got away a bit from all those London things with nobody to cut in between us , me and you can have a bit of a talk , Elly , and see what it 's all about . ''
Sir Isaac , reverting to his tone of almost elaborate reasonableness , expanded his view that it was impossible for husband and wife to have two different sets of friends ; -- let alone every other consideration , he explained , it was n't convenient for them not to be about together , and as for reading or thinking what she chose he had never made any objection to anything unless it was `` decadent rot '' that any decent man would object to his womanfolk seeing , rot she could n't understand the drift of -- fortunately .
He checked himself on the verge of an almost archiepiscopal outbreak in order to be patiently reasonable again .
He was prepared to concede that it would be very nice if Lady Harman could be a good wife and also an entirely independent person , very nice , but the point was -- his tone verged on the ironical -- that she could n't be two entirely different people at the same time .
Sir Isaac took that musingly .
But he hesitated for a time .
He paused with the effect of having delivered himself of long premeditated things .
Lady Harman essayed to speak .
But she found that directly she set herself to speak she sobbed and began weeping .
She choked for a moment .
Then she determined she would go on , and if she must cry , she must cry .
She could n't let a disposition to tears seal her in silence for ever .
`` _What's_ beautiful ? ''
cried Sir Isaac in protesting scorn .
Doing your duty if you like and being sensible , that 's noble and beautiful , but not fretting about and running yourself into danger .
You 've got to have a sense of humour , Elly , in this life -- -- '' He created a quotation .
`` As you make your bed -- so shall you lie . ''
`` It is n't much like a prison .
I 'm asking you to stay here -- and be what a wife _should_ be . ''
For some moments his mind hunted among possibilities .
Lady Viping 's dinner-party had been kept waiting exactly thirty-five minutes for Lady Harman .
Sir Isaac , with a certain excess of zeal , had intercepted the hasty note his wife had written to account for her probable absence .
The party was to have centred entirely upon Lady Harman , it consisted either of people who knew her already , or of people who were to have been specially privileged to know her , and Lady Viping telephoned twice to Putney before she abandoned hope .
`` It's disconnected , '' she said , returning in despair from her second struggle with the great public service .
`` They ca n't get a reply . ''
Naturally the talk tended to centre upon the Harmans .
And naturally Lady Beach-Mandarin was very bold and outspoken and called Sir Isaac quite a number of vivid things .
She also aired her views of the marriage of the future , which involved a very stringent treatment of husbands indeed .
`` Half his property and half his income , '' said Lady Beach-Mandarin , `` paid into her separate banking account . ''
`` But -- when will she be at home ? ''
`` Sir Isaac , my lady , is not a Tome .
Nobody is a Tome , my lady . ''
`` But we 've come from London ! ''
Snagsby 's confusion increased .
He seemed to be wanting to keep his face to the visitors and at the same time glance over his shoulder .
`` I will , '' he considered , `` I will enquire , my lady . ''
He backed a little , and seemed inclined to close the door upon them .
Lady Beach-Mandarin was too quick for him .
She got herself well into the open doorway .
`` And of whom are you going to enquire ? ''
`` Snagsby , '' said Sir Isaac , `` open that door . ''
The ladies were defeated .
When at last that stiff interval ended their dresses rustled doorward , and Sir Isaac broke out into the civilities of a victor ... .
Luck was with him at first and he forced the defence with ridiculous ease .
`` My situation here , '' she said , her dark frankness of gaze meeting his troubled eyes .
`` It 's so strange and difficult .
I do n't know what to do .
I do n't know -- what I _want_ to do ... . ''
`` I _have_ , '' admitted Lady Harman with a note of recalled astonishment in her voice .
`` If I can help you to escape -- -- ! ''
`` We 're getting on all right , '' said Sir Isaac with no manifest glow of gratitude .
Mr. Brumley remained seated .
`` It was the first thing that struck me , Lady Harman .
This evidence of Sir Isaac 's energy . ''
`` Come and look over it , '' Sir Isaac persisted .
But Mr. Brumley did n't remember clearly enough to make any use of that .
`` But you _know_ she called ! ''
said Mr. Brumley and looked in affected reproach at Sir Isaac .
`` But _when_ , Mr .
`` It 's my opinion , '' he said , `` that that old lady -- Lady Beach-Mandarin I mean -- does n't know what she 's saying half the time .
She says -- oh !
Saying _that_ for example ! ''
`` And now , '' said Sir Isaac to himself with extreme bitterness , `` now to see about getting a dog . ''
He knew of course the lie of the land about Black Strand very well indeed and his harmless literary social standing gave him a certain freedom of trespass .
He dropped from his gate on the inner side and taking a bridle path through a pine-wood was presently out upon the moorland behind his former home .
He struck the high-road that led past the Staminal Bread Board and was just about to clamber over the barbed wire on his left and make his way through the trees to the crest that commanded the Black Strand garden when he perceived a man in a velveteen coat and gaiters strolling towards him .
He decided not to leave the road until he was free from observation .
The man was a stranger , an almost conventional gamekeeper , and he endorsed Mr. Brumley 's remark upon the charmingness of the day with guarded want of enthusiasm .
Mr. Brumley went on for some few minutes , then halted , assured himself that the stranger was well out of sight and returned at once towards the point where high-roads were to be left and adventure begun .
But he was still some yards away when he became aware of that velveteen-coated figure approaching again .
said Mr. Brumley and slacked his eager paces .
This time he expressed a view that the weather was extremely mild .
`` Very , '' said the man in velveteen with a certain lack of respect in his manner .
`` I sold a ring and got some money and here I am ! ''
`` I think , perhaps , I have n't explained , clearly , how things are , '' said Lady Harman , and commenced a rather more explicit statement of her case .
She felt she had not conveyed and she wanted to convey to Miss Alimony that her rebellion was not simply a desire for personal freedom and autonomy , that she desired these things because she was becoming more and more aware of large affairs outside her home life in which she ought to be not simply interested but concerned , that she had been not merely watching the workings of the business that made her wealthy , but reading books about socialism , about social welfare that had stirred her profoundly ... .
`` But he wo n't even allow me to know of such things , '' she said ... .
`` Is there -- -- Is there someone else ? ''
`` Then I ca n't understand why you should find it so important to come away . ''
`` Of course if you do n't see it as I do -- -- ''
`` I ca n't , '' said Miss Alimony .
`` I ca n't . ''
Miss Alimony rose with a sigh and a slow unfolding rustle .
`` I forgot , '' she said .
`` My little maid is out . ''
Then she became aware of the evening newspaper Miss Alimony had been reading .
The headline , `` Suffrage Raid on Regent Street , '' caught her eye .
A queer little idea came into her head .
It grew with tremendous rapidity .
She put out a hand and took up the paper and read .
One may doubt whether this extensive change from a humorous conservatism to a primitive and dangerous romanticism is to be ascribed entirely to the personal charm , great as it no doubt was , of Lady Harman ; rather did her tall soft dark presence come to release a long accumulating store of discontent and unrest beneath the polished surfaces of Mr. Brumley's mind .
Things had been stirring in him for some time ; the latter Euphemia books had lacked much of the freshness of their precursors and he had found it increasingly hard , he knew not why , to keep up the lightness , the geniality , the friendly badinage of successful and accepted things , the sunny disregard of the grim and unamiable aspects of existence , that were the essential merits of that Optimistic Period of our literature in which Mr. Brumley had begun his career .
With every justification in the world Mr. Brumley had set out to be an optimist , even in the _Granta_ his work had been distinguished by its gay yet steadfast superficiality , and his early success , his rapid popularity , had done much to turn this early disposition into a professional attitude .
He had determined that for all his life he would write for comfortable untroubled people in the character of a light-spirited , comfortable , untroubled person , and that each year should have its book of connubial humour , its travel in picturesque places , its fun and its sunshine , like roses budding in succession on a stem .
He did his utmost to conceal from himself the melancholy realization that the third and the fourth roses were far less wonderful than the first and the second , and that by continuing the descending series a rose might be attained at last that was almost unattractive , but he was already beginning to suspect that he was getting less animated and a little irritable when Euphemia very gently and gracefully but very firmly and rather enigmatically died , and after an interval of tender and tenderly expressed regrets he found himself , in spite of the most strenuous efforts to keep bright and kindly and optimistic in the best style , dull and getting duller -- he could disguise the thing no longer .
And he weighed more .
Six -- eight -- eleven pounds more .
He took a flat in London , dined and lunched out lightly but frequently , sought the sympathetic friendship of several charming ladies , and involved himself deeply in the affairs of the Academic Committee .
Indeed he made a quite valiant struggle to feel that optimism was just where it always had been and everything all right and very bright with him and with the world about him .
He did not go under without a struggle .
But as Max Beerbohm's caricature -- the 1908 one I mean -- brought out all too plainly , there was in his very animation , something of the alert liveliness of the hunted man .
Do what he would he had a terrible irrational feeling that things , as yet scarce imagined things , were after him and would have him .
Even as he makes his point , even as he gesticulates airily , with his rather distinctively North European nose Beerbohmically enlarged and his sensitive nostril in the air , he seems to be looking at something he does not want to look at , something conceivably pursuing , out of the corner of his eye .
As a basis and substance for the tissue of whimsically expressed happiness and confident appreciation of the good things of life , which Mr. Brumley had set before himself as his agreeable -- and it was to be hoped popular and profitable -- life-task , certain assumptions had been necessary .
They were assumptions he had been very willing to make and which were being made in the most exemplary way by the writers who were succeeding all about him at the commencement of his career .
And these assumptions had had such an air then of being quite trustworthy , as being certain to wash and wear !
Already nowadays it is difficult to get them stated ; they have become incredible while still too near to justify the incredibility that attaches to history .
It was assumed , for example , that in the institutions , customs and culture of the middle Victorian period , humanity had , so far as the broad lines of things are concerned , achieved its goal .
There were of course still bad men and women -- individually -- and classes one had to recognize as `` lower , '' but all the main things were right , general ideas were right ; the law was right , institutions were right , Consols and British Railway Debentures were right and were going to keep right for ever .
The Abolition of Slavery in America had been the last great act which had inaugurated this millennium .
Except for individual instances the tragic intensities of life were over now and done with ; there was no more need for heroes and martyrs ; for the generality of humanity the phase of genial comedy had begun .
There might be improvements and refinements ahead , but social , political and economic arrangement were now in their main outlines settled for good and all ; nothing better was possible and it was the agreeable task of the artist and the man of letters to assist and celebrate this establishment .
There was to be much editing of Shakespear and Charles Lamb , much delightful humour and costume romance , and an Academy of refined Fine Writers would presently establish belles-lettres on the reputable official basis , write _finis_ to creative force and undertake the task of stereotyping the language .
Literature was to have its once terrible ferments reduced to the quality of a helpful pepsin .
Ideas were dead -- or domesticated .
The last wild idea , in an impoverished and pitiful condition , had been hunted down and killed in the mobbing of , `` The Woman Who Did . ''
For a little time the world did actually watch a phase of English writing that dared nothing , penetrated nothing , suppressed everything and aspired at most to Charm , creep like a transitory patch of sunlight across a storm-rent universe .
And behind and beneath these immediately disconcerting things still more sinister hintings and questioning were beginning to pluck at contentment .
In 1899 nobody would have dreamt of asking and in 1909 even Mr. Brumley was asking , `` Are things going on much longer ? ''
A hundred little incidents conspired to suggest that a Christianity that had , to put it mildly , shirked the Darwinian challenge , had no longer the palliating influence demanded of a national religion , and that down there in the deep levels of labour where they built railways to carry Mr. Brumley 's food and earn him dividends , where they made engines and instruments and textiles and drains for his little needs , there was a new , less bounded discontent , a grimmer spirit , something that one tried in vain to believe was only the work of `` agitators , '' something that was to be pacified no longer by the thin pretences of liberalism , something that might lead ultimately -- optimism scarcely dared to ask whither ... .
Mr. Brumley did his best to resist the influence of these darkening ideas .
He tried to keep it up that everything was going well and that most of these shadows and complaints were the mischief of a few incurably restless personalities .
He tried to keep it up that to belong to the working class was a thoroughly jolly thing -- for those who were used to it .
He declared that all who wanted to alter our laws or our ideas about property or our methods of production were envious and base and all who wanted any change between the sexes , foolish or vicious .
He tried to go on disposing of socialists , agitators , feminists , women's suffragists , educationists and every sort of reformer with a good-humoured contempt .
And he found an increasing difficulty in keeping his contempt sufficiently good-humoured .
Instead of laughing down at folly and failure , he had moments when he felt that he was rather laughing up -- a little wryly -- at monstrous things impending .
And since ideas are things of atmosphere and the spirit , insidious wolves of the soul , they crept up to him and gnawed the insides out of him even as he posed as their manful antagonist .
Occasionally he would write an important signed review for the _Twentieth Century_ or the _Hebdomadal Review_ , and on one such occasion he took in hand several studies of contemporary conditions by various 'New Witnesses , ' 'Young Liberals , ' _New Age_ rebels and associated insurgent authors .
He intended to be rather kindly with them , rather disillusioned , quite sympathetic but essentially conventional and conservative and sane .
He sat at a little desk near the drooping Venus , under the benediction of Euphemia 's posthumous rose , and turned over the pages of one of the least familiar of the group .
The stuff was written with a crude force that at times became almost distinguished , but with a bitterness that he felt he must reprove .
And suddenly he came upon a passionate tirade against the present period .
It made him nibble softly with his lips at the top of his fountain pen as he read .
`` He slings it out .
And what 's this ? ''
`` This young man must be spanked , '' said Mr. Brumley and , throwing aside an open illustrated paper in which a full-length portrait of Sir Edward Carson faced a picture of the King and Queen in their robes sitting side by side under a canopy at the Coronation Durbar , he prepared himself to write in an extremely salutary manner about the follies of the younger generation , and incidentally to justify his period and his professional contentment .
Even at the first impact he realized that the line she had taken wasn't quite in the picture with the line he had proposed for her .
He felt -- left out .
He felt as though a door had slammed between himself and affairs to which he had supposed himself essential .
He could not understand why she had done this thing instead of coming straight to his flat and making use of all that chivalrous service she surely knew was at her disposal .
This self-reliance , this direct dealing with the world , seemed to him , even in the height of his concern , unwomanly , a deeper injury to his own abandoned assumptions than any he had contemplated .
He felt it needed explanation , and he hurried to secure an elbowed unsavoury corner in the back of the court in order to hear her defence .
He had to wait through long stuffy spaces of time before she appeared .
There were half a dozen other window smashers , -- plain or at least untidy-looking young women .
The magistrate told them they were silly and the soul of Mr. Brumley acquiesced .
One tried to make a speech , and it was such a poor speech -- squeaky ... .
`` But how ? ''
gasped Mr. Brumley , with his soul in infinite distress .
`` But how ? ''
`` Naturally , '' said Lady Beach-Mandarin with what he felt to be deliberate brutality .
Surely she must have understood -- --
His eyes rested as he thought of these things upon the familiar purple hill crests , patched that afternoon with the lingering traces of a recent snowstorm , the heather slopes , the dark mysterious woods , the patches of vivid green where a damp and marshy meadow or so broke the moorland surface .
To-day in spite of the sun there was a bright blue-white line of frost to the northward of every hedge and bank , the trees were dripping down the white edgings of the morning into the pine-needle mud at their feet ; he had seen it so like this before ; years hence he might see it all like this again ; all this great breezy countryside had taken upon itself a quality of endurance , as though it would still be real and essential in his mind when Lady Harman had altogether passed again .
It would be real when he himself had passed away , and in other costumes and other vehicles fresh Euphemias and new crude George Brumleys would come along , feeling in the ultimate bright new wisdom of youth that it was all for them -- a subservient scenery , when really it was entirely indifferent in its careless permanence to all their hopes and fancies ... .
`` After asking your advice , '' she said .
`` Tell me , '' he said , `` whatever you think fit . ''
`` And there were the children -- such helpless little things .
In the prison I worried about them .
I thought of things for them .
I 've come to feel -- they are left too much to nurses and strangers ... .
And then you see he has agreed to nearly everything I had wanted .
It was n't only the personal things -- I was anxious about those silly girls -- the strikers .
I did n't want them to be badly treated .
It distressed me to think of them .
I do n't think you know how it distressed me .
And he -- he gave way upon all that .
He says I may talk to him about the business , about the way we do our business -- the kindness of it I mean .
And this is why I am back here .
Where else _could_ I be ? ''
`` Mr. Brumley , '' she said weakly , `` I do n't understand .
What do you mean ?
I have to do what I am doing .
He -- he is my husband . ''
He made a gesture of impatience .
`` Do you understand nothing of _love_ ? ''
She hesitated through a little pause .
`` Mr. Brumley , '' she said , `` I want friendship so badly , I want some one to be my friend .
I do n't want to think of things -- disturbing things -- things I have lost -- things that are spoilt .
_That_ -- that which you spoke of ; what has it to do with me ? ''
he sighed , and then , `` You know if I can help you -- -- Rather than distress you -- -- ''
He addressed that friendly memorable room in tones that mingled amazement and wrong .
`` He is her husband ! ''
he said , and then : `` The power of words ! ''
`` Ow , '' snarled Sir Isaac , with a glance at his mother that was almost vicious and a lapse into Cockney intonations and phrases that witnessed how her presence recalled his youth , `` It 'll _go_ all right , mother .
_You_ need n't fret . ''
He folded his arms , crossed his legs , frowned and reasoned with himself , -- resolved to dismiss post-mortem speculations -- absolutely .
His mind recoiled to Sir Isaac 's pillowed-up possession .
What flimsy stuff all this talk of altered marriage was !
These things did not even touch the essentials of the matter .
He thought of Sir Isaac 's thin lips and wary knowing eyes .
What possible divorce law could the wit of man devise that would release a desired woman from that -- grip ?
Marriage was covetousness made law .
As well ask such a man to sell all his goods and give to the poor as expect the Sir Isaacs of this world to relax the matrimonial subjugation of the wife .
Our social order is built on jealousy , sustained by jealousy , and those brave schemes we evolve in our studies for the release of women from ownership , -- and for that matter for the release of men too , -- they will not stand the dusty heat of the market-place for a moment , they wilt under the first fierce breath of reality .
Marriage and property are the twin children of man's individualistic nature ; only on these terms can he be drawn into societies ... .
Sometimes he made what George Edmund regarded as quite footling comments .
Still George Edmund had to tell someone and there was no one else to tell .
So George Edmund went on talking and Mr. Brumley went on thinking .
`` No , '' cried Mr. Brumley suddenly in the silence of the night , `` I will rise again .
I will rise again by love out of these morasses ... .
She shall be my goddess and by virtue of her I will end this incessant irrational craving for women ... .
I will be her friend and her faithful friend . ''
He lay still for a time and then he said in a whisper very humbly : `` _God help me_ . ''
He set himself in those still hours which are so endless and so profitable to men in their middle years , to think how he might make himself the perfect lover instead of a mere plotter for desire , and how he might purge himself from covetousness and possessiveness and learn to serve .
Before anything else it was manifestly conceded by Lady Harman that she would not run away again , and still more manifest that she undertook to break no more windows or do anything that might lead to a second police court scandal .
And she was to be a true and faithful wife and comfort , as a wife should be , to Sir Isaac .
In return for that consideration and to ensure its continuance Sir Isaac came great distances from his former assumption of a matrimonial absolutism .
She was to be granted all sorts of small autonomies , -- the word autonomy was carefully avoided throughout but its spirit was omnipresent .
He was her chief disturbance .
Her children were healthy children and fell in with the routines of governess and tutor that their wealth provided .
She saw them often , she noted their increasing resemblance to their father , she did her best to soften the natural secretiveness and aggressiveness of their manners , she watched their teachers and intervened whenever the influences about them seemed to her to need intervention , she dressed them and gave them presents and tried to believe she loved them , and as Sir Isaac 's illness increased she took a larger and larger share in the direction of the household ... .
`` I say , -- I 've eaten that mutton .
I did n't notice .
One eats too much at these affairs .
One does n't notice at the time and then afterwards one finds out . ''
She was a little surprised at his gambit and could think of nothing but a kindly murmur .
`` You go to meetings , and try to get to the bottom of Movements , and you want to meet and know the people who write the wonderful things ?
Get at the wonderful core of it ? ''
`` But I do n't like to think -- -- Are n't Great Men after all -- great ? ''
`` You see , Lady Harman , '' he said , leaning back from his empty plate , inclining himself confidentially to her ear and speaking in a privy tone ; `` it 's in the very nature of things that we -- if I may put myself into the list -- we ideologists , should be rather exceptionally loose and untrustworthy and disappointing men .
Rotters -- to speak plain contemporary English .
If you come to think of it , it has to be so . ''
`` I try to understand , '' she said .
`` I want to understand .
I want -- I want not to miss life . ''
`` It would have been jolly to have talked some more , '' he said .
said Wilkins , with a sudden hardness in his eyes and she was swept away from him .
It did not come .
For a time that expectation gave dinners and luncheon parties a quite appreciable attraction .
Then she told Agatha Alimony .
`` I 've never met him but that once , '' she said .
`` One does n't meet him now , '' said Agatha , deeply .
Upon reflection Lady Harman perceived that this explained all sorts of things in their conversation and particularly the flash of hardness at the end .
Five of them were being built , not four but five .
There was to be one , the largest , in a conspicuous position in Bloomsbury near the British Museum , one in a conspicuous position looking out upon Parliament Hill , one conspicuously placed upon the Waterloo Road near St. George's Circus , one at Sydenham , and one in the Kensington Road which was designed to catch the eye of people going to and fro to the various exhibitions at Olympia .
He took out a silver pencil case and got to work .
`` And of course there 'll be all sorts of Rules . ''
`` You got to back up rules somehow -- once you got 'em , '' said Susan .
`` And when you get a crowd , and no father and mother , and no proper family feeling , I suppose there 's got to be Rules . ''
`` Lots of 'em have n't anything in the world but their bits of furniture and their lease and there they are stuck and tied .
There 's Aunt Hannah , Father 's sister , she 's like that .
Sleeps in the basement and works and slaves , and often I 've had to lend her ten shillings to pay the rent with , through her not being full .
This sort of place is n't going to do much good to her . ''
`` And then if you manage this sort of place easy and attractive , it's going to draw girls away from their homes .
There 's girls like Alice who 'd do anything to get a bit of extra money to put on their backs and seem to think of nothing but chattering and laughing and going about .
Such a place like this would be fine fun for Alice ; in when she liked and out when she liked , and none of us to ask her questions .
She 'd be just the sort to go , and mother , who 's had the upbringing of her , how's she to make up for Alice 's ten shillings what she pays in every week ?
There 's lots like Alice .
She 's not bad is n't Alice , she 's a good girl and a good-hearted girl ; I will say that for her , but she 's shallow , say what you like she 's shallow , she 's got no thought and she 's wild for pleasure , and sometimes it seems to me that that 's as bad as being bad for all the good it does to anyone else in the world , and so I tell her .
But of course she has n't seen things as I 've seen them and does n't feel as I do about all these things ... . ''
Mr. Brumley said `` Um '' a great number of times and realized that he was a humbug .
He fenced with her and affected sagacity for a time and suddenly he threw down his defences and confessed he knew as little of the business as she did .
`` But I see it is a complex question and -- it 's an interesting one too .
May I enquire into it for you ?
I think I might be able to hunt up a few particulars ... . ''
`` I think , '' said Lady Harman slowly , arresting him by a gesture , `` if you could make that about autonomy a little clearer ... . ''
`` Now London -- and England generally -- had its period of expansion and got on to the beginnings at least of this period of synthesis that is following it , sooner than any other country in the world ; and because it was the first to reach the new stage it developed the characteristics of the new stage with a stronger flavour of the old than did such later growths of civilization as New York or Bombay or Berlin .
That is why London and our British big cities generally are congestions of little houses , little homes , while the newer great cities run to apartments and flats .
We had n't grasped the logical consequences of what we were in for so completely as the people abroad did who caught it later , and that is why , as we began to develop our new floating population of mainly celibate employees and childless people , they had mostly to go into lodgings , they went into the homes that were intended for families as accessories to the family , and they were able to go in because the families were no longer so numerous as they used to be .
London is still largely a city of landladies and lodgings , and in no other part of the world is there so big a population of lodgers .
And this business of your Hostels is nothing more nor less than the beginning of the end of that .
Just as the great refreshment caterers have mopped up the ancient multitude of coffee-houses and squalid little special feeding arrangements of the days of Tittlebat Titmouse and Dick Swiveller , so now your Hostels are going to mop up the lodging-house system of London .
Of course there are other and kindred movements .
, the London Girls Club Union and so forth are all doing kindred work . ''
`` Do you know the other day I went into Chelsea , where there are whole streets of lodgings , and -- I suppose it was wrong of me , but I went and pretended to be looking for rooms for a girl clerk I knew , and I saw -- Oh !
no end of rooms .
And such poor old women , such dingy , worked-out , broken old women , with a kind of fearful sharpness , so eager , so dreadfully eager to get that girl clerk who did n't exist ... . ''
She looked at him with an expression of pained enquiry .
`` You see , '' he said , `` I regard this process of synthesis , this substitution of wholesale and collective methods for homely and individual ones as , under existing conditions , inevitable -- inevitable .
It 's the phase we live in , it 's to this we have to adapt ourselves .
It is as little under your control or mine as the movement of the sun through the zodiac .
Practically , that is .
And what we have to do is not , I think , to sigh for lost homes and the age of gold and spade husbandry , and pigs and hens in the home , and so on , but to make this new synthetic life tolerable for the mass of men and women , hopeful for the mass of men and women , a thing developing and ascending .
That 's where your Hostels come in , Lady Harman ; that 's where they 're so important .
They're a pioneer movement .
If they succeed -- and things in Sir Isaac 's hands have a way of succeeding at any rate to the paying point -- then there'll be a headlong rush of imitations , imitating your good features , imitating your bad features , deepening a groove ... .
You see my point ? ''
`` There is a world-wide fall in the birth-rate .
People do n't have the families they did . ''
`` Yes , '' said Lady Harman .
`` I understand now . ''
`` That 's just what they wo n't let you do , '' said Mr. Brumley .
`` Nobody visits but relations -- and prospective relations , and the only other social intercourse is over the garden wall .
Perhaps I can find books -- -- ''
A vague aversion from Mrs. Pembrose was in some mysterious way strengthened in Lady Harman by this extraordinary convergence of testimony .
When Sir Isaac mentioned the lady with a kind of forced casualness at breakfast as the only conceivable person for the work of initiation and organization that lay before them , Lady Harman determined to see more of her .
With a quickened subtlety she asked her to tea .
`` I have heard so much of your knowledge of social questions and I want you to advise me about my work , '' she wrote , and then scribbled a note to Mr. Brumley to call and help her judgments .
`` In Sir Isaac 's hands it is _very_ likely to answer , '' said Mrs. Pembrose with her eye steadily on Lady Harman .
`` You must permit me to differ , '' said Mrs. Pembrose , and for weeks afterwards Mr. Brumley was still seeking a proper polite retort to that difficult counterstroke .
It was such a featureless reply .
It was like having your nose punched suddenly by a man without a face .
They descended to a more particular treatment of the problems ahead .
Mrs. Pembrose quoted certain precedents from the Girls ' Club Union .
Lady Harman ceased to listen to Mr. Pope 's strained but not unhappy tenor .
She had heard him before , and she had heard his like endlessly .
He was the larger moiety of every public meeting she had ever attended .
She had ceased even to marvel at the dull self-satisfaction that possessed him .
To-day her capacity for marvelling was entirely taken up by the details of this extraordinary reality which had sprung from her dream of simple , kindly , beautiful homes for distressed and overworked young women ; nothing in the whole of life had been so amazing since that lurid occasion when she had been the agonized vehicle for the entry of Miss Millicent Harman upon this terrestrial scene .
It was all so entirely what she could never have thought possible .
A few words from other speakers followed , Mrs. Blapton , with the young secretary at hand to prompt , said something , and Sir Isaac was poked forwards to say , `` Thank you very much .
It 's all my wife 's doing , really ... .
Thank you very much . ''
It had the effect of being the last vestige of some more elaborate piece of eloquence that had suddenly disintegrated in his mind .
`` Then they _are_ my hostels ? ''
`` Did n't I say they were ? ''
The satisfaction of his face was qualified by that fatigued irritability that nowadays always followed any exertion or excitement .
`` Of course you may , of course you may .
What 's the matter with you , Elly ?
What 's been putting ideers into your head ?
You got to have a directress to the thing ; you must have a woman of education who knows a bit about things to look after the matrons and so on .
Very likely she is n't everything you want .
She 's the only one we could get , and I don't see -- -- .
Here I go and work hard for a year and more getting these things together to please you , and then suddenly you do n't like 'em .
There 's a lot of the spoilt child in you , Elly -- first and last .
There they are ... . ''
They were silent for the rest of the journey to Putney , both being filled with incommunicable things .
`` These hostels , '' said Mr. Brumley in his most prophetic mood , `` can be made free , fine things -- or no -- just as all the world of men we are living in , could be made a free , fine world .
And it 's our place to see they are that .
It 's just by being generous and giving ourselves , helping without enslaving , and giving without exacting gratitude , planning and protecting with infinite care , that we bring that world nearer ... .
Since I 've known you I 've come to know such things are possible ... . ''
`` How do you know ? ''
`` They 'd say anything . ''
`` In the background , '' she decided .
`` But you see these Rules -- were made conspicuous .
They were printed in two colours on wall cards just exactly like that list of rules and scale of fines you had to withdraw -- -- ''
As Lady Harman had made up her mind that she was not going to deliver a speech she felt no diffidence in speaking .
She was far too intent on her message to be embarrassed by any thought of the effect she was producing .
She talked as she might have talked in one of her easier moods to Mr. Brumley .
And as she talked it happened that Miss Babs Wheeler and quite a number of the other girls present watched her face and fell in love with her .
`` I wish , '' said Lady Harman when that storm had abated , `` you 'd come and look at the Hostel .
Could n't you come next Saturday afternoon ?
We could have a stand-up tea and you could see the place and then afterwards your committee and I -- and my husband -- could make out a real set of rules ... . ''
`` You come and talk to us again , Lady Harman . ''
And when the floor matrons were instructed to make little surprise visits up and down the corridors the girls who occupied rooms took to locking their doors -- and Lady Harman seemed inclined to sustain their right to do that .
The floor matrons did what they could to exercise authority , one or two were former department manageresses , two were ex-elementary teachers , crowded out by younger and more certificated rivals , one , and the most trustworthy one , Mrs. Pembrose found , was an ex-wardress from Holloway .
The natural result of these secret talkings and conferrings in the rooms became apparent presently in some mild ragging and in the concoction of petty campaigns of annoyance designed to soften the manners of the more authoritative floor matrons .
Here again were perplexing difficulties .
If a particular floor matron has a clear commanding note in her voice , is it or is it not `` violent and improper '' to say `` Haw ! ''
in clear commanding tones whenever you suppose her to be within earshot ?
As for the door-locking Mrs. Pembrose settled that by carrying off all the keys .
One day in Lent -- it was nearly three years after the opening of the first hostel -- she went to Saint Paul 's .
With only too much plausibility the threatened young women interpreted this as an expulsion , and declined to remove their boxes and personal belongings .
Miss Babs Wheeler thereupon entered the Bloomsbury Hostel , and in the teeth of three express prohibitions from Mrs. Pembrose , went a little up the staircase and addressed a confused meeting in the central hall .
There was loud and continuous cheering for Lady Harman at intervals during this incident .
Thereupon Mrs. Pembrose demanded sweeping dismissals , not only from the Hostels but the shops as an alternative to her resignation , and Lady Harman found herself more perplexed than ever ... .
Georgina Sawbridge had contrived to mingle herself in an entirely characteristic way in these troubles by listening for a brief period to an abstract of her sister 's perplexities , then demanding to be made Director-General of the whole affair , refusing to believe this simple step impossible and retiring in great dudgeon to begin a series of letters of even more than sisterly bitterness .
And Mr. Brumley when consulted had become dangerously sentimental .
Under these circumstances Lady Harman 's visit to Saint Paul 's had much of the quality of a flight .
How beautiful was this place !
She looked up presently at the great shadowy arcs far above her , so easy , so gracious that it seemed they had not so much been built by men as shaped by circling flights of angels .
The service , a little clustering advance of voices unsustained by any organ , mingled in her mind with the many-pointed glow of candles .
And then into this great dome of worship and beauty , like a bed of voices breaking into flower , like a springtime breeze of sound , came Allegri's Miserere ... .
At this point Lady Harman put down this letter for subsequent perusal and took its companion , which was addressed in an unfamiliar hand .
It was from Alice Burnet and it was written in that sprawling hand and diffused style natural to a not very well educated person with a complicated story to tell in a state of unusual emotion .
But the gist was in the first few sentences which announced that Alice had been evicted from the hostel .
`` I found my things on the pavement , '' wrote Alice .
`` Sir Isaac saw her , my lady .
They 'ad tea in the study . ''
`` You would , '' said Sir Isaac after an interval .
His tone was hostile , so hostile that it startled her .
He shook his head .
`` My idees and your idees -- or anyhow the idees you've got hold of -- somewhere -- somehow -- -- I do n't know where you _get_ your idees .
We have n't got the same idees , anyhow .
You got to keep order in these places -- anyhow ... . ''
He seemed to feel the need of a justification .
`` They should n't make trouble . ''
Neither spoke for some seconds .
She had the feeling of hopeless vexation that might come to a child that has wandered into a trap .
`` I thought , '' she began .
`` These hostels -- -- ''
He stared out of the window .
He answered in tones of excessive reasonableness : `` I did n't start these hostels to be run by you and your -- friend . ''
He gave the sentence the quality of an ultimatum , an irreducible minimum .
She perceived that suddenly she was faced by a test or a bargain .
In the background of her mind the figure of Mr. Brumley , as she had seen him last , in brown and with a tie rather to one side , protested vainly .
She did what she could for him on the spur of the moment .
`` But , '' she said , `` he 's so helpful .
He 's so -- harmless . ''
`` He 's been so good .
It is n't reasonable , Isaac .
When anyone has -- _slaved_ . ''
`` I mean you got to choose . ''
He waited as if he expected her to speak and then went on .
It seemed to her that she had always expected this to happen .
But however much she had expected it to happen she was still quite unprepared with any course of action .
She wanted with an equal want of limitation to keep both Mr. Brumley and her hostels .
`` Do n't you be too innocent , Elly .
You know and I know perfectly well what there is between men and women .
I do n't make out I know -- anything I do n't know .
I do n't pretend you are anything but straight .
`` We 'll look for daffodils away there towards the river under the trees , '' said Mr. Brumley , and it seemed preposterous not to enjoy those daffodils at least before she broached the great issue between an irresistible force and an immoveable post , that occupied her mental background .
Mr. Brumley was quite at his best that afternoon .
He was happy , gay and deferential ; he made her realize by his every tone and movement that if he had his choice of the whole world that afternoon and all its inhabitants and everything , there was no other place in which he would be , no other companion , no other occupation than this he had .
He talked of spring and flowers , quoted poets and added the treasures of a well-stored mind to the amenities of the day .
`` It 's good to take a holiday at times , '' he said , and after that it was more difficult than ever to talk about the trouble of the hostels .
The effect of this futile interview upon Lady Harman was remarkable .
She took to herself an absurd conviction that this inconclusiveness had been an achievement .
Confronted by a dilemma , she had chosen neither horn and assumed an attitude of inoffensive defiance .
Springs in England vary greatly in their character ; some are easterly and quarrelsome , some are north-westerly and wetly disastrous , a bleak invasion from the ocean ; some are but the broken beginnings of what are not so much years as stretches of meteorological indecision .
This particular spring was essentially a south-westerly spring , good and friendly , showery but in the lightest way and so softly reassuring as to be gently hilarious .
It was a spring to get into the blood of anyone ; it gave Lady Harman the feeling that Mrs. Pembrose would certainly be dealt with properly and without unreasonable delay by Heaven , and that meanwhile it was well to take the good things of existence as cheerfully as possible .
The good things she took were very innocent things .
Feeling unusually well and enjoying great draughts of spring air and sunshine were the chief .
And she took them only for three brief days .
She carried the children down to Black Strand to see her daffodils , and her daffodils surpassed expectation .
There was a delirium of blackthorn in the new wild garden she had annexed from the woods and a close carpet of encouraged wild primroses .
Even the Putney garden was full of happy surprises .
The afternoon following her visit to Black Strand was so warm that she had tea with her family in great gaiety on the lawn under the cedar .
Her offspring were unusually sweet that day , they had new blue cotton sunbonnets , and Baby and Annette at least succeeded in being pretty .
And Millicent , under the new Swiss governess , had acquired , it seemed quite suddenly , a glib colloquial French that somehow reconciled one to the extreme thinness and shapelessness of her legs .
She was amazed , and after her first belief incredulous again .
Could Isaac be going mad ?
At the corner she satisfied herself of the grey man 's proximity and hailed a taxi-cab .
The man in grey came nosing across to listen to her directions and hear where she was going .
She was astonished and indignant but not nearly so entirely indignant as a noble heroine should have been .
She was certainly not nearly so queenly as Mrs. Sawbridge would have shown herself under such circumstances .
It may have been due to some plebeian strain in her father 's blood that over and above her proper indignation she was extremely interested .
She wanted to know what manner of man it was whose nose was just appearing above the window edge of the taxi-cab behind .
In her inexperienced inattention she had never yet thought it was possible that men could be hired to follow women .
How far would he follow her and was it possible to shake him off ?
Or are such followers so expert that once upon a scent , they are like the Indian hunting dog , inevitable .
`` Let her stay , '' said Sir Isaac .
`` It -- pleases her ... . ''
For some time the business of the International Stores had been preparing itself for this withdrawal .
Sir Isaac had been entrusting his managers with increased responsibility and making things ready for the flotation of a company that would take the whole network of enterprises off his hands .
Charterson was associated with him in this , and everything was sufficiently definite to be managed from any continental resort to which his doctors chose to send him .
They chose to send him to Santa Margherita on the Ligurian coast near Rapallo and Porto Fino .
`` I daresay she 's -- stiff .
-- she 's difficult .
But -- being expelled is bitter . ''
`` Chust as it was now , '' the young doctor said , his imagination touched for a moment by mere unscientific things ... .
Look what your -- friend says ! ''
He hesitated and then hurled a strange word at her .
She glanced at the letter on the table but made no movement to touch it .
Then she saw that her husband 's face was reddening and that his arm waved helplessly .
His eyes , deprived abruptly of all the fury of conflict , implored assistance .
He shouted some direction in German as he ran past her .
By an inspiration she guessed he wanted the nurse .
Miss Summersley Satchell appeared in the doorway and became helpful .
Then Sir Isaac intimated his sense that calm was imperative .
`` You send for Crappen , '' he said with a quiet earnestness .
She had to be patient .
She had to be patient .
This sort of thing had to go on from crisis to crisis .
It might go on for years .
She could see no remedy and no escape .
But it was hard to give up the hostels .
She had been foolish of course , but she had not let them make her feel _real_ .
And she was n't real .
She was a wife -- just _this_ ... .
She sighed and bestirred herself and began to write .
Her imagination could give her no figure of Mr. Brumley as intimate , as habitual .
She could as easily imagine his skeleton .
He remained in all this queer speculation something friendly , something incidental , more than a trifle disembodied , entirely devoted of course in that hovering way -- but hovering ... .
what words are there for `` taken worse '' ?
She looked from the doctor to the nurse .
It seemed to her that both these people must be mad .
Never had she seen anything less like death .
`` But he 's not dead ! ''
she protested , still standing in the middle of the room .
The noise in his throat ceased .
But he still stared at her .
And then the nurse made a kind of assault upon Lady Harman , caught her -- even if she did n't fall .
It was no doubt the proper formula to collapse .
Or to fling oneself upon the deceased .
Lady Harman resisted this assistance , disentangled herself and remained amazed ; the nurse a little disconcerted but still ready behind her .
The doctor 's gesture to the nurse betrayed his sense of the fine quick scene this want of confidence had ruined .
Under no circumstances in life did English people really seem to know how to behave or what was expected of them .
He answered with something bordering upon irony .
`` Madam , '' he said , with a slight bow , `` he is _really_ det . ''
Then for a time she roused herself to some control of their proceedings .
The doctor came to Lady Harman to ask her about the meals for the day , the hotel manager was in entanglements of tactful consideration , and then the nurse came for instructions upon some trivial matter .
They had done what usage prescribes and now , in the absence of other direction , they appealed to her wishes .
She remarked that everyone was going on tiptoe and speaking in undertones ... .
What does one have to do when one 's husband is dead ?
People would have to be told .
She would begin by sending off telegrams to various people , to his mother , to her own , to his lawyer .
She remembered she had already written a telegram -- that very morning to Crappen .
Should she still let the lawyer come out ?
He was her lawyer now .
Perhaps he had better come , but instead of that telegram , which still lay upon the desk , she would wire the news of the death to him ... .
There was Mr. Brumley .
Mr. Brumley made a very little figure at first in the great prospect before her ... .
Then he grew larger in her thoughts .
She recalled his devotions , his services , his self-control .
It was good to have one understanding friend in this great limitless world ... .
She was impelled to go and see him , to see for herself that he was peaceful and no longer a figure of astonishment .
She went slowly along the corridor and very softly into his room -- it remained , she felt , his room .
They had put candles about him , and the outline of his face , showing dimly through the linen that veiled it , was like the face of one who sleeps very peacefully .
Very gently she uncovered it .
There was this beauty she had been discovering in the last few years , this mystery of love , -- all that had been hidden from him .
He had been such a hard little man , such a pursuing little man , so unreasonable and difficult a master , and now -- he was such a poor shrunken little man for all his obstinacy !
She had never realized before that he was pitiful ... .
Had she perhaps feared him too much , disliked him too much to deal fairly with him ?
Could she have helped him ?
Was there anything she could have done that she had not done ?
Might she not at least have saved him his suspicion ?
Behind his rages , perhaps he had been wretched .
How could one take him ?
Would he have to be embalmed ?
-- what a strange complement of death .
She averted herself a little more from the quiet figure on the bed , and could not turn to it again .
They might come here and do all sorts of things to it , mysterious , evil-seeming things with knives and drugs ... .
Meanwhile he had a curious little private conflict of his own .
He was trying not to think , day and night he was trying not to think , that Lady Harman was now a very rich woman .
Yet some portions of his brain , and he had never suspected himself of such lawless regions , persisted in the most vulgar and outrageous suggestions , suggestions that made his soul blush ; schemes , for example , of splendid foreign travel , of hotel staffs bowing , of a yacht in the Mediterranean , of motor cars , of a palatial flat in London , of a box at the opera , of artists patronized , of -- most horrible !
-- a baronetcy ... .
The more authentic parts of Mr. Brumley cowered from and sought to escape these squalid dreams of magnificences .
It shocked and terrified him to find such things could come out in him .
He was like some pest-stricken patient , amazedly contemplating his first symptom .
His better part denied , repudiated .
Of course he would never touch , never even propose -- or hint ... .
It was an aspect he had never once contemplated before Sir Isaac died .
He could on his honour , and after searching his heart , say that .
Yet in Pall Mall one afternoon , suddenly , he caught himself with a thought in his head so gross , so smug , that he uttered a faint cry and quickened his steps ... .
`` _In ourselves and the things about us._ ''
`` _My Dear , I want you to marry me._ ''
`` _My dear Friend_ , '' she wrote .
`` _You have been so good to me , so helpful .
But I do not think that is possible .
I want so badly to think and here I can not think .
I have never been able to think here .
I am going down to Black Strand , and in a day or so I will write and we will talk .
Be patient with me._ ''
`` Yes , '' cried Mr. Brumley , `` but I want to know ! ''
When one came to think it over , the Hostels did complicate the problem .
It was ingenious of Sir Isaac ... .
`` Nothing , '' said Mr. Brumley .
`` Well , why should they start a perfectly rotten action like that , '' continued Maxwell Hartington , now addressing himself very earnestly to his client , `` when they 've only got to keep quiet and do their job and be comfortable .
In these matters , Brumley , as in most matters affecting the relations of men and women , people can do absolutely what they like nowadays , absolutely , unless there 's someone about ready to make a row .
Then they ca n't do anything .
It hardly matters if they do n't do anything .
A row 's a row and damned disgraceful .
If there is n't a row , nothing 's disgraceful .
Of course all these laws and regulations and institutions and arrangements are just ways of putting people at the mercy of blackmailers and jealous and violent persons .
One 's only got to be a lawyer for a bit to realize that .
Still that 's not _our_ business .
If there are n't any jealous and violent persons about , well , then no ordinary decent person is going to worry what you do .
No decent person ever does .
So far as I can gather the only barbarian in this case is the testator -- now in Kensal Green .
With additional precautions I suppose in the way of an artistic but thoroughly massive monument presently to be added -- -- ''
`` Well anyhow , '' said Mr. Brumley , after a little pause , `` such a breach , such a proceeding is out of the question -- absolutely out of the question .
It 's unthinkable . ''
`` It has been like falling out of a prison from which one never hoped to escape .
I feel like a moth that has just come out of its case , -- you know how they come out , wet and weak but -- released .
For a time I feel I can do nothing but sit in the sun . ''
`` As free now -- as a man . ''
`` No , '' she said .
`` No sort of marriage . ''
The grip of her hand tightened on the back of their seat .
She seemed to be examining her thumb intently .
Her voice sank to a whisper .
`` I won't marry you , '' she said .
`` And he conquers !
This little monster of meanness , he conquers to the end -- his dead hand , his dead desires , out of the grave they hold you !
Always , always , it is Clutch that conquers ; the master of life !
I was a fool to dream , a fool to hope .
I thought only of you and I -- that perhaps you and I -- -- ''
`` When I think of the world filled by his children , the children you have borne him -- and I -- forbidden almost to touch your hand ! ''
`` I wo n't do it , '' he assured her .
`` I wo n't do it .
If I can not be your lover -- I will go away .
I will never see you again .
I will do anything -- anything , rather than suffer this degradation .
I will go abroad .
I will go to strange places .
I will kill myself -- or anything , but I wo n't endure this .
You see , you ask too much , you demand more than flesh and blood can stand .
I 've done my best to bring myself to it and I ca n't .
I wo n't have that -- that -- -- ''
she had cried at last .
`` But Mr. Brumley , '' she panted unheard .
`` Mister Brumley ! ''
`` Mr. Brumley , '' she repeated , and suddenly there were tears of honest vexation in her voice and eyes .
`` You _know_ I can not do without you . ''
He sat back and she remained kneeling .
PUBLISHED BY THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 64-66 Fifth Avenue New York
The title of Mrs. Norris 's new novel at once indicates its theme .
It is the story of a girl who has her own way to make in the world .
The various experiences through which she passes , the various viewpoints which she holds until she comes finally to realize that service for others is the only thing that counts , are told with that same intimate knowledge of character , that healthy optimism and the belief in the ultimate goodness of mankind that have distinguished all of this author 's writing .
The book is intensely alive with human emotions .
The reader is bound to sympathize with Mrs. Norris 's people because they seem like _real_ people and because they are actuated by motives which one is able to understand .
_Saturday 's Child_ is Mrs. Norris 's longest work .
Into it has gone the very best of her creative talent .
It is a volume which the many admirers of _Mother_ will gladly accept .
Probably no author to-day has written more powerfully or frankly on the conventions of modern society than John Helston , who , however , has hitherto confined himself to the medium of verse .
In this novel , the theme of which occasionally touches upon the same problems -- problems involving love , freedom of expression , the right to live one 's life in one 's own way -- he is revealed to be no less a master of the prose form than of the poetical .
While the book is one for mature minds , the skill with which delicate situations are handled and the reserve everywhere exhibited remove it from possible criticism even by the most exacting .
The title , it should be explained , refers to a spirited race horse with the fortunes of which the lives of two of the leading characters are bound up .
LUCAS , Author of `` Over Bemerton 's , '' `` London Lavender , '' etc .
Mr. Lucas 's new story combines a number of the most significant episodes in the life of the central figure ; in other words , those events of his career from early childhood to the close of the book which have been most instrumental in building up his character and experience .
The episodes are of every kind , serious , humorous , tender , awakening , disillusioning , and they are narrated without any padding whatever , each one beginning as abruptly as in life ; although in none of his previous work has the author been so minute in his social observation and narration .
A descriptive title precedes each episode , as in the moving-picture ; and it was in fact while watching a moving-picture that Mr. Lucas had the idea of adapting its swift selective methods to fiction .
Naturally they concluded that she must be a neighbour from one of the adjacent houses .
They were a little surprised not to have noticed her going down into the water , but beyond that her apparition had no shadow of wonder for them .
They made the furtive penetrating observations usual in such cases .
They could see that she was swimming very gracefully and that she had a lovely face and very beautiful arms , but they could not see her wonderful golden hair because all that was hidden in a fashionable Phrygian bathing cap , picked up -- as she afterwards admitted to my second cousin -- some nights before upon a Norman _plage_ .
Nor could they see her lovely shoulders because of the red costume she wore .
For a space no one did anything .
One , two , three seconds passed and then for an instant a bare arm flashed in the air and vanished again .
`` I had cramp , '' said the Sea Lady , with her lips against Fred 's cheek and one eye on Mrs. Bunting .
`` I am sure it was cramp ... .
I 've got it still . ''
`` Mother , '' said Nettie , giving words to the general horror .
_ She has a _tail_ ! ''
That , you know , is the tableau so far as I have been able to piece it together again .
You must imagine this little knot of people upon the beach , and Mr. Bunting , I figure , a little apart , just wading out of the water and very wet and incredulous and half drowned .
And the neighbour's ladder was drifting quietly out to sea .
First of all their heads came , and then their remarks .
Then they began to clamber the breakwater with joyful shouts .
`` My _dear_ ! ''
said Mrs. Bunting to Mabel , `` what _are_ we to do ? ''
And in her description of the affair to my cousin Melville she used always to make that the _clou_ of the story .
What ARE we to do ? ''
It was evident there was only one thing to be done .
Mrs. Bunting said as much .
`` The only thing , '' said she , `` is to carry her indoors . ''
One can figure the little procession .
In front Fred , wet and astonished but still clinging and clung to , and altogether too out of breath for words .
And in his arms the Sea Lady .
She had a beautiful figure , I understand , until that horrible tail began ( and the fin of it , Mrs. Bunting told my cousin in a whispered confidence , went up and down and with pointed corners for all the world like a mackerel 's ) .
It flopped and dripped along the path -- I imagine .
She was wearing a very nice and very long-skirted dress of red material trimmed with coarse white lace , and she had , Mabel told me , a _gilet_ , though that would scarcely show as they went up the garden .
And that Phrygian cap hid all her golden hair and showed the white , low , level forehead over her sea-blue eyes .
From all that followed , I imagine her at the moment scanning the veranda and windows of the house with a certain eagerness of scrutiny .
In other ways the beaches yield .
Young couples who `` begin to sit heapy , '' the Sea Lady told my cousin , as often as not will leave excellent modern fiction behind them , when at last they return to their proper place .
There is a particularly fine collection of English work , it seems , in the deep water of the English Channel ; practically the whole of the Tauchnitz Library is there , thrown overboard at the last moment by conscientious or timid travellers returning from the continent , and there was for a time a similar source of supply of American reprints in the Mersey , but that has fallen off in recent years .
And the Deep Sea Mission for Fishermen has now for some years been raining down tracts and giving a particularly elevated tone of thought to the extensive shallows of the North Sea .
The Sea Lady was very precise on these points .
`` And then you know , '' said the Sea Lady very gravely , `` one 's hair ! ''
`` That 's precisely it , '' said she .
`` Of course , '' said my cousin Melville , `` there are classes of people in whom one excuses -- One must weigh -- -- ''
`` It 's a most extraordinary situation , '' he said .
`` But several mornings ago ? ''
`` He 's not my son .
He 's -- he 's a friend .
He 's engaged to Adeline , to the elder Miss Glendower .
He was stopping here for a night or so .
I daresay he 'll come again on his way back from Paris .
Fancy _my_ having a son like that ! ''
The Sea Lady was not quite prompt in replying .
`` It 's preposterous . ''
`` Yes , '' said Mrs. Bunting , `` that 's the one .
They 've been engaged three months . ''
`` Dear me ! ''
said the Sea Lady .
`` She seemed -- And is he very much in love with her ? ''
`` Oh -- of _course_ .
If he was n't , he would n't -- -- ''
But Mrs. Bunting did not know whether the Sea Lady sighed at all or not .
She was so busy telling her all about everything that I do n't think she troubled very much to see how her information was received .
`` The sunlight seems so golden here , '' said the Sea Lady .
`` Is it always golden ? ''
`` One lives deeper than that , '' said the Sea Lady .
`` Everything is phosphorescent , you know , a mile or so down , and it 's like -- I hardly know .
As towns look at night -- only brighter .
Like piers and things like that . ''
`` It 's so different , '' said the Sea Lady .
`` What do you wear ? ''
`` Very charming things , I suppose . ''
`` I could n't , '' said Mr. Bunting .
`` You do n't know our journalists , '' said Fred .
He managed the thing admirably .
The younger emergency journalist had an inspiration .
He produced a note book from his breast pocket .
`` Perhaps , sir , you would n't mind suggesting to us something we might say -- -- ''
`` The mermaid -- there really _is_ a mermaid .
`` We do n't deal in mermaids here . ''
`` Very well , '' said the young man , heated , `` the _Gunfire_ it is . ''
Micklethwaite stared over his fork .
`` Ra-ther , '' he said .
`` He had _me_ for an hour very nearly the other day . ''
I was afraid it was all over , but luckily he gave me an opening again after gulping down his wine .
`` It 's tremendous .
I 've got most of it here , '' he was saying as we went by .
`` I do n't know if you 'd care -- -- ''
[ Illustration : She positively and quietly settled down with the Buntings . ]
That was the sort of glamour she threw about it .
`` You understand , '' said Mrs. Bunting , taking a plunge at it , `` that -- that she is an invalid . ''
`` You understand ? ''
and Mrs. Bunting looked up again and regarded Parker calmly .
I must confess , with a slight tinge of humiliation , that I pursued this young woman to her present situation at Highton Towers -- maid she is to that eminent religious and social propagandist , the Lady Jane Glanville .
There were certain details of which I stood in need , certain scenes and conversations of which my passion for verisimilitude had scarcely a crumb to go upon .
And from first to last , what she must have seen and learnt and inferred would amount practically to everything .
THE ABSENCE AND RETURN OF MR. HARRY CHATTERIS
This little rift was perceptible the very first time Mrs. Bunting had an opportunity of talking over her new arrangements with Miss Glendower .
`` She 's out of harmony , '' said Adeline .
`` Oh , help ! ''
`` I think you misjudge her there , dear .
She has been asking -- -- ''
`` My dear ! ''
`` Is that charity ? ''
`` I think , my dear , that you might trust my judgment a little , '' said Mrs. Bunting and paused .
The door opened and closed smartly and Mrs. Bunting was alone .
Within an hour they all met at the luncheon table and Adeline's behaviour to the Sea Lady and to Mrs. Bunting was as pleasant and alert as any highly earnest and intellectual young lady 's could be .
And all that Mrs. Bunting said and did tended with what people call infinite tact -- which really , you know , means a great deal more tact than is comfortable -- to develop and expose the more serious aspect of the Sea Lady 's mind .
Mr. Bunting was unusually talkative and told them all about a glorious project he had just heard of , to cut out the rather shrubby and weedy front of the Leas and stick in something between a wine vault and the Crystal Palace as a Winter Garden -- which seemed to him a very excellent idea indeed .
It is time now to give some impression of the imminent Chatteris , who for all his late appearance is really the chief human being in my cousin Melville 's story .
It happens that I met him with some frequency in my university days and afterwards ever and again I came upon him .
He was rather a brilliant man at the university , smart without being vulgar and clever for all that .
He was remarkably good-looking from the very onset of his manhood and without being in any way a showy spendthrift , was quite magnificently extravagant .
There was trouble in his last year , something hushed up about a girl or woman in London , but his family had it all over with him , and his uncle , the Earl of Beechcroft , settled some of his bills .
Not all -- for the family is commendably free from sentimental excesses -- but enough to make him comfortable again .
The family is not a rich one and it further abounds in an extraordinary quantity of rather frowsy , loose-tongued aunts -- I never knew a family quite so rich in old aunts .
But Chatteris was so good-looking , easy-mannered , and clever , that they seemed to agree almost without discussion to pull him through .
They hunted about for something that would be really remunerative without being laborious or too commercial ; and meanwhile -- after the extraordinary craving of his aunt , Lady Poynting Mallow , to see him acting had been overcome by the united efforts of the more religious section of his aunts -- Chatteris set himself seriously to the higher journalism -- that is to say , the journalism that dines anywhere , gets political tips after dinner , and is always acceptable -- if only to avoid thirteen articles -- in a half-crown review .
In addition , he wrote some very passable verse and edited Jane Austen for the only publisher who had not already reprinted the works of that classic lady .
_Marcella_ we know -- at least after her heart was changed -- would have clung to him .
There would have been a moment of high emotion in which thoughts -- of the highest class -- mingled with the natural ambition of two people in the prime of life and power .
Then she would have receded with a quick movement and listened with her beautiful hand pensive against her cheek , while Chatteris began to sum up the forces against him -- to speculate on the action of this group and that .
Something infinitely tender and maternal would have spoken in her , pledging her to the utmost help that love and a woman can give .
She would have produced in Chatteris that exquisite mingled impression of grace , passion , self-yielding , which in all its infinite variations and repetitions made up for him the constant poem of her beauty .
The Sea Lady appears to have been the first to see them .
`` Here he is , '' she said abruptly .
But the Sea Lady made no reply , and leaned back , scrutinising their advance .
Certainly they made a handsome pair .
Coming out of the veranda into the blaze of the sun and across the trim lawn towards the shadow of the ilex trees , they were lit , as it were , with a more glorious limelight , and displayed like actors on a stage more spacious than the stage of any theatre .
The figure of Chatteris must have come out tall and fair and broad , a little sunburnt , and I gather even then a little preoccupied , as indeed he always seemed to be in those latter days .
And beside him Adeline , glancing now up at him and now towards the audience under the trees , dark and a little flushed , rather tall -- though not so tall as _Marcella_ seems to have been -- and , you know , without any instructions from any novel-writer in the world , glad .
Quite involuntarily her eyes must have met the Sea Lady 's .
No one seemed to take the slightest notice of Adeline 's dramatic announcement .
The Buntings were not good at thinking of things to say .
She stood in the midst of the group like a leading lady when the other actors have forgotten their parts .
Then every one woke up to this , as it were , and they went off in a volley .
`` So it 's really all settled , '' said Mrs. Bunting ; and Betty Bunting said , `` There _is_ to be an election then ! ''
and Nettie said , `` What fun ! ''
Mr. Bunting remarked with a knowing air , `` So you saw him then ? ''
and Fred flung `` Hooray ! ''
into the tangle of sounds .
`` Well , I hope we shall do that , '' said Chatteris .
`` They threaten a dissolution for September . ''
`` It will come in a month , '' said Chatteris , with the inimitable tone of one who knows .
`` Miss Waters , '' explained Chatteris , `` has been telling me she means to help us . ''
He met Melville 's eye frankly .
`` It would be a picnic , '' said Chatteris .
My cousin was reminded of an anecdote .
My cousin had to gather himself together for a second or so .
`` What can it be ? ''
`` I ca n't tell at all , '' said Melville in a speculative tone .
It struck him he was getting to prevaricate better .
`` Oh , I know . ''
`` By Jove ! ''
said Chatteris , and quickened his steps .
`` She wo n't think it improper , '' he amplified , `` if nobody else thinks it improper . ''
`` It was worth coming for , '' said the Sea Lady , smiling into his eyes .
`` Oh , _you_ know . ''
`` No , '' she answered , `` I do n't . ''
`` You know as well as I do . ''
Melville flicked his extinct cigarette suddenly into an elbow shape and then threw it away .
The phrase may have awakened some reminiscence .
`` It 's an extra , '' he said .
`` It 's a sort of flourish ... .
And sometimes it 's like leaving cards by footmen -- a substitute for the real presence . ''
`` Yes , '' said she .
She nodded -- still grave .
`` I thought you would . ''
`` Is there ? ''
`` That 's different . ''
`` Your life , I tell you , is a dream -- a dream , and you ca n't wake out of it -- -- ''
She made no answer for a space .
`` Why do you tell me ? ''
He heard the rustle of her movement as she bent towards him .
`` If I fancy Chatteris . ''
`` What you too are beginning to suspect ... .
That other things may be conceivable even if they are not possible .
That this life of yours is not everything .
That it is not to be taken too seriously .
Because ... there are better dreams ! ''
`` But there is an escape , '' said the Sea Lady .
He was quite sure they had been `` more serious than -- -- ''
He had a sudden thought .
`` Where 's your cigarette ? ''
`` All sorts of things , I dare say , '' said Mrs. Bunting , in what might almost be called an arch manner .
And she honoured Melville with a special smile -- one of those smiles that are morally almost winks .
`` You 've a monopoly now , '' she cried .
`` But when we go back to London with her there will be ever so many people running after her . ''
`` It is doubtful whether I shall contest Hythe , '' he remarked .
`` Would you ? ''
`` You do n't want a career ? ''
`` All this , you know , is a mood .
My life is made for me -- and it 's a very good life .
It 's better than I deserve . ''
`` Ever so much , '' endorsed Melville .
`` She 'll do a lot for you , '' said Melville , and left a fine wide pause .
`` Who is this Miss Waters ? ''
`` Why should n't I know ? ''
`` There 's a sort of promise to keep it dark . ''
`` If you do n't want to , '' he said to the respectful waiter at the door .
`` Chatteris is a dreamer , with an impossible , extravagant discontent .
What does he dream of ?
... Three parts he is a dreamer and the fourth part -- spoiled child . ''
`` Where 's Miss Waters ? ''
`` What broke out ? ''
`` In a first-class cab , maid and boxes in another , all complete .
Could n't have believed if I had n't seen it -- the tail , I mean . ''
`` And Miss Glendower ? ''
Fred held his pipe elaborately out of the way and protruded his face to a confidential nearness .
`` Slump , '' said Fred with intensity .
`` Does n't stir . ''
`` We do n't know .
We ca n't watch him .
But if he does he 's clever -- -- ''
Just as likely they wo n't . ''
`` I 've been bathing , '' said Fred .
`` Nobody asked me to take a hand and I did n't .
It wo n't be a good pudding without me , but there you are !
There 's only one thing I can see to do -- -- ''
`` Oh , it would n't help matters , '' said Fred , adding with an air of conclusiveness , `` There it is ! ''
Then adjusting the folds of his blanket to a greater dignity , and replacing his long extinct large pipe between his teeth , he went on his way .
The tail of his blanket followed him reluctantly through the door .
His bare feet padded across the hall and became inaudible on the carpet of the stairs .
Instead , Mrs. Bunting appeared .
`` Go to him , '' said Mrs. Bunting , `` and put it all right . ''
`` Relatively -- yes . ''
Her voice went on , clear and a little high , resigned , impenetrably assured .
`` It seems as if I have never loved him .
And then -- and then I think of all the things that still might be . ''
`` What is there , '' she said , with that deliberate attempt at clearness which was one of her antipathetic qualities for Melville -- '' what is there that she has , that she offers , that _I_ -- -- ? ''
Melville winced at this deliberate proposal of appalling comparisons .
All the catlike quality in his soul came to his aid .
He began to edge away , and walk obliquely and generally to shirk the issue .
`` My dear Miss Glendower , '' he said , and tried to make that seem an adequate reply .
`` But you , '' she urged , `` you take an attitude , you must have an impression .
Why do n't you -- Do n't you see , Mr. Melville , this is very '' -- her voice caught for a moment -- '' very vital for me .
It is n't kind of you , if you have impressions -- I 'm sorry , Mr. Melville , if I seem to be trying to get too much from you .
I -- I want to know . ''
She hung over him as it were , as a tense silence .
`` There _is_ a difference , '' he admitted , and still went unhelped .
`` Go on , '' she insisted .
`` Let us get the meaning . ''
`` Yes , '' she said , `` he is different . ''
`` It 's a case of attraction , '' said Melville , `` and not of plans . ''
`` Out of some other world .
She comes , whispering that this life is a phantom life , unreal , flimsy , limited , casting upon everything a spell of disillusionment -- -- ''
`` Yes , and then she whispers , 'There are better dreams ! '
`` At any rate '' -- he said hastily , seeking some palliative phrase -- '' at any rate , if she gets him , this little world of yours -- There will be no coming back for him , you know . ''
`` That desire is desire , and the deep the deep -- yes . ''
`` I feel as if I had never wanted him before . ''
`` He might come back -- '' he said , and looked at her and stopped .
He tells me he had some vague intention of startling her , rousing her , wounding her to some display of romantic force , some insurgence of passion , that might yet win Chatteris back , and then in that moment , and like a blow , it came to him how foolish such a fancy had been .
There she stood impenetrably herself , limitedly intelligent , well-meaning , imitative , and powerless .
Her pose , her face , suggested nothing but a clear and reasonable objection to all that had come to her , a critical antagonism , a steady opposition .
And then , amazingly , she changed .
She looked up , and suddenly held out both her hands , and there was something in her eyes that he had never seen before .
He looked at her .
`` You are very good to help me , '' she said , and then : `` Tell him whatever you like if only he will come back to me !
Tell him what I have said . ''
He saw she had something more to say , and stopped .
`` You know , Mr. Melville , all this is like a book newly opened to me .
Are you sure -- -- ? ''
`` That Glendower girl is a fool too , '' she added after a pause .
`` Yes , the mermaid .
`` Simply makes her more interesting . ''
`` She 's a mermaid . ''
`` She does n't even mean to marry him ; it does n't enter into her code . ''
`` I do n't see why it should n't be managed for all that , '' she considered after a pause .
`` She cares for him ? ''
`` Dear Harry 's a pagan himself -- so that does n't matter , and as for being mythological -- all good families are .
He could even wear a diving dress if one could be found to suit him . ''
`` You do n't mean you 've called on her ? ''
`` Dear , no !
It 's Harry 's place to settle that .
But I 've seen her in her bath chair on the Leas , and I 'm certain I 've never seen any one who looked so worthy of dear Harry .
`` Well , well , '' said Melville .
`` Apart from any other considerations , you know , there 's Miss Glendower . ''
`` What a good aunt always does . ''
`` Let him do what he likes . ''
`` We 've known each other some years . ''
And with that they parted .
`` The fact is , '' said Melville , `` I -- I have been asked to talk to you . ''
`` It 's a gorgeous night , '' he said .
He made a little speech .
`` I 'm sorry to give everybody all this trouble , '' he said with an air of having prepared his sentences ; `` I suppose there is no question that I have behaved like an ass .
I am profoundly sorry .
Largely it is my own fault .
But you know -- so far as the overt kick-up goes -- there is a certain amount of blame attaches to our outspoken friend Mrs .
They found themselves drawing near the band and already on the outskirts of its territory of votaries .
Its cheerful rhythms became insistent .
The canopy of the stand was a focus of bright light , music-stands and instruments sent out beams of reflected brilliance , and a luminous red conductor in the midst of the lantern guided the ratatoo-tat , ratatoo-tat of a popular air .
Voices , detached fragments of conversation , came to our talkers and mingled impertinently with their thoughts .
`` I will admit by every standard , '' he said aloud , `` that I have been flappy and feeble and wrong .
In these things there is a prescribed and definite course .
To hesitate , to have two points of view , is condemned by all right-thinking people ... .
Still -- one has the two points of view ... .
You have come up from Sandgate ? ''
`` Did you see Miss Glendower ? ''
`` She is , '' said Chatteris , `` she is . ''
He left the sentence unfinished , as if unfinished it completely expressed his thought .
He became meditative , and his cigar glow waned and presently vanished altogether .
Melville stirred slightly and then they both sat rigidly quiet for a space .
Then abruptly Chatteris flung away his extinct cigar .
He seemed to fling many other things away with that dim gesture .
`` Of course , '' he said , `` I shall go back .
Melville 's silence bade him go on .
`` Bunting keeps calm . ''
`` We see -- finer . ''
`` These things are beyond measurement , '' said Melville .
`` Not if you measure them by their effect , '' said Chatteris .
`` And anyhow , why do they take us ?
That is the question I ca n't get away from just now . ''
My cousin meditated , no doubt with his hands deep in his trousers' pockets .
`` It is illusion , '' he said .
`` It is a sort of glamour .
After all , look at it squarely .
What can she give you ?
She promises you vague somethings ... .
She is a snare , she is deception .
She is the beautiful mask of death . ''
`` I mean , '' he explained , `` we are human beings .
We are matter with minds growing out of ourselves .
We reach downward into the beautiful wonderland of matter , and upward to something -- '' He stopped , from sheer dissatisfaction with the image .
`` In another direction , anyhow , '' he tried feebly .
He jumped at something that was not quite his meaning .
`` Man is a sort of half-way house -- he must compromise . ''
`` A few old engravings -- good , I suppose -- a little luxury in furniture and flowers , a few things that come within your means .
Art -- in moderation , and a few kindly acts of the pleasanter sort , a certain respect for truth ; duty -- also in moderation .
It 's just that even balance that I can not contrive .
I can not sit down to the oatmeal of this daily life and wash it down with a temperate draught of beauty and water .
I suppose I 'm voracious , I 'm one of the unfit -- for the civilised stage .
I 've sat down once , I 've sat down twice , to perfectly sane , secure , and reasonable things ... .
It 's not my way . ''
He recalled further portions of what I believe was some prepared and ready-phrased decision -- some decision from which the conversation had drifted .
`` The need of my life is discipline , the habit of persistence , of ignoring side issues and wandering thoughts .
`` It is n't that your work is contemptible . ''
`` The world wants leaders .
It gives a man of your class a great deal .
Training and high traditions -- -- ''
`` No , '' said Chatteris , `` I 've no doubt about the choice .
I 'm going to fall in -- with the species ; I 'm going to take my place in the ranks in that great battle for the future which is the meaning of life .
I want a moral cold bath and I mean to take one .
This lax dalliance with dreams and desires must end .
I will make a time table for my hours and a rule for my life , I will entangle my honour in controversies , I will give myself to service , as a man should do .
Clean-handed work , struggle , and performance . ''
`` Why not come down to-night ? ''
`` Nothing , '' said Chatteris , `` absolutely nothing . ''
And the valet , finding this answer quite satisfactory , wished him goodnight and departed .
Probably Chatteris remained in this attitude for a considerable time -- half an hour , perhaps , or more .
Slowly , it would seem , his mood underwent a change .
At some definite moment it must have been that his lethargic meditation gave way to a strange activity , to a sort of hysterical reaction against all his resolves and renunciations .
His first action seems to me grotesque -- and grotesquely pathetic .
He went into his dressing-room , and in the morning `` his clo'es , '' said the valet , `` was shied about as though 'e 'd lost a ticket . ''
This poor worshipper of beauty and the dream shaved !
He shaved and washed and he brushed his hair , and , his valet testifies , one of the brushes got `` shied '' behind the bed .
Even this throwing about of brushes seems to me to have done little or nothing to palliate his poor human preoccupation with the toilette .
He changed his gray flannels -- which suited him very well -- for his white ones , which suited him extremely .
He must deliberately and conscientiously have made himself quite `` lovely , '' as a schoolgirl would have put it .
The hall-porter went to Parker , and came half-way back .
He wished to goodness he was not a hall-porter .
The manager had gone out -- it was a stagnant hour .
He decided to try Parker again ; he raised his voice .
`` I could n't find the manager to tell 'im , '' said the hall-porter .
`` And what was _I_ authorised to do ?
He carried her down in his arms . ''
And this is the result of effort ; things get better because men mean them to get better and try to bring betterment about ; this progress goes on because man , in spite of evil temper , blundering and vanity , in spite of indolence and base desire , does also respond to Good Will and display Good Will .
You may declare that all the good things in life are the result of causes over which man has no control , that in pursuit of an `` enlightened self-interest '' he makes things better inadvertently .
But think of any good thing you know !
Was it thus it came ?
I walked in silence , and my companion talked by my side .
So we talked and were tormented .
`` We want all the beauty that is here , '' said my friend , `` and more also .
And none of these distresses .
We are here -- we know not whence nor why -- to want that and to struggle to get it , you and I and ten thousand others , thinly hidden from us by these luminous darknesses .
We work , we pass -- whither I know not , but out of our knowing .
But we work -- we are spurred to work .
That yonder -- those people are the spur -- for us who can not answer to any finer appeal .
Each in our measure must do .
Our reward is our faith .
Here is my creed to-night .
I believe -- out of me and the Good Will in me and my kind there comes a regenerate world -- cleansed of suffering and sorrow .
That is our purpose here -- to forward that .
It gives us work for all our lives .
Why should we ask to know more ?
Our errors -- our sins -- to-night they seem to matter very little .
If we stumble and roll in the mud , if we blunder against each other and hurt one another -- -- ''
One 's own personal problems came and went like a ripple on the water .
Even that whisky dealer 's advertisement upon the southern bank became through some fantastic transformation a promise , an enigmatical promise flashed up the river reach in letters of fire .
London was indeed very beautiful that night .
Without hope she would have seemed not only as beautiful but as terrible as a black panther crouching on her prey .
Our hope redeemed her .
Beyond her dark and meretricious splendours , beyond her throned presence jewelled with links and points and cressets of fire , crowned with stars , robed in the night , hiding cruelties , I caught a moment 's vision of the coming City of Mankind , of a city more wonderful than all my dreaming , full of life , full of youth , full of the spirit of creation ... .
Now the Socialist , inspired by this conception of a possible frank and comprehensive social order to which mean and narrow ends must be sacrificed , attacks and criticizes the existing order of things at a great number of points and in a great variety of phraseology .
At all points , however , you will find upon analysis that his criticism amounts to a declaration that there is wanting a sufficiency of CONSTRUCTIVE DESIGN .
That in the last resort is what he always comes to .
To make all this distincter I will show the planlessness of certain contemporary things , of two main sets of human interests in fact , and explain what inferences a Socialist draws in these matters .
You will then see exactly what is meant when we deny that this present state of affairs has any constructive plan , and you will appreciate in the most generalized form the nature of the constructive plan which Socialists are making and offering the world .
`` It will be seen that the proportion of children classed as 'very good ' in Section 3 is about ten times as large as in the poorest section , and that _more than half of the children in the poorest section are classed as 'bad .
A miserable family and in very wretched circumstances .
Father deserts home at intervals , but last time seemed 'sent back by providence , ' as the works in the town he was in were burnt down .
Children starving in his absence ; one had pneumonia , and died since of the effects .
The eldest child has adenoids ; the second , urticaria ; lice , bad ; clothes full of pediculi .
Housing : six in two rooms .
Mother hard-working , does her best , but has chronic bronchitis ; does not keep house over tidy .
The two elder boys are very idle , tiresome fellows , and worry the father a great deal .
They improved and found work during the year following the visit , in which time the father got into decent work in the City .
The S. P. C. C. branch had to interfere on behalf of small children .
Three dead since marriage , when parents were at ages 23 and 20 .
Food good when there is any .
School gave free dinners and clothes to two .
Evidence from Police , S. P. C. C. branch , School Charity , Parish Sister , Employer , Headmistress , School Officer and Doctors .
Father works in a shop in daytime , and in a public-house at night .
Rather soft ; but wife industrious and energetic and does her best .
Children well fed and regular at school .
Two children have enlarged tonsils .
They get no help , and belong to two thrift societies .
One of six children dead in ten years of married life .
Housing : seven in two rooms .
Evidence from Police , Doctors , Society , Church , Mission , Club , Headmistress , Charity School and Pawnbrokers .
So much the Socialist regards as all to the good , as all in the direction of that great constructive plan of organized human welfare at which he aims .
And they all amount to a destruction , so much with this and so much with that , of the independence of the family , an invasion of the old moral isolation of parent and child .
Consider , for instance , the circumstances of parentage among the large section of the working classes whose girls and women engage in factory labour .
In many cases the earnings of the woman are vitally necessary to the solvency of the family budget , the father 's wages do not nearly cover the common expenditure .
In some cases the women are unmarried , or the man is an invalid or out of work .
Consider such a woman on the verge of motherhood .
Either she must work in a factory right up to the birth of her child -- and so damage its health through her strain and fatigue , [ 2 ] or she must give up her work , lose money and go short of food and necessities and _so_ damage the coming citizen .
Moreover , after the child is born , either she must feed it artificially and return to work ( and prosperity ) soon , with a very great risk indeed that the child will die , or she must stay at home to nourish and tend it -- until her landlord sells her furniture and turns her out !
If the children of the decent skilled artisan and middle-class suffer less obviously than the poorer sort of children , assuredly the parents in wearing anxiety , in toil and limitation and disappointment , suffer more .
And in less intense and dramatic , but perhaps even more melancholy ways , the children of this class do suffer .
They do not die so abundantly in infancy , but they grow up , too many of them , to shabby and limited lives ; in Britain they are still , as a class , extraordinarily ill educated -- many of them still go to incompetent , understaffed and ill-equipped private adventure schools -- they are sent into business prematurely , often at fourteen or fifteen , they become mechanical `` respectable '' drudges in processes they do not understand .
They may escape want and squalor for a while , perhaps , but they can not escape narrowness and limitation and a cramped and anxious life .
If they get to anything better than that , it is chiefly through almost heroic parental effort and sacrifice .
_Parentage rightly undertaken is a service as well as a duty to the world , carrying with it not only obligations but a claim , the strongest of claims , upon the whole community .
It must be provided for like any other public service ; in any completely civilized State it must be sustained , rewarded and controlled .
And this is to be done not to supersede the love , pride and conscience of the parent , but to supplement , encourage and maintain it._
What would our visitor find in such a country as England , for example ?
He would find a few thousand people housed with conspicuous comfort and sumptuousness , in large , airy and often extremely beautiful homes equipped with every convenience -- except such as economize labour -- and waited on by many thousands of attendants .
He would find next , several hundreds of thousands in houses reasonably well built , but for the most part ill designed and unpleasant to the eye , houses passably sanitary and convenient , fitted with bathrooms , with properly equipped kitchens , usually with a certain space of air and garden about them .
And the rest of our millions he would find crowded into houses evidently too small for a decent life , and often dreadfully dirty and insanitary , without proper space or appliances to cook properly , wash properly or indeed perform any of the fundamental operations of a civilized life tolerably well -- without , indeed , even the privacy needed for common decency .
In the towns he would find most of the houses occupied by people for whose needs they were obviously not designed , and in many cases extraordinarily crowded , ramshackle and unclean ; in the country he would be amazed to find still denser congestion , sometimes a dozen people in one miserable , tumble-down , outwardly picturesque and inwardly abominable two-roomed cottage , people living up against pigsties and drawing water from wells they could not help but contaminate .
Think of how the intimate glimpses from the railway train one gets into people 's homes upon the outskirts of any of our large towns would impress him .
And being , as we assume , clear minded and able to trace cause and effect , he would see all this disorder working out in mortality , disease , misery and intellectual and moral failure .
This would puzzle our visitor considerably .
`` But why do you let the land be owned ? ''
he would go on .
`` You do n't let people own the air .
And these bricks and timber you must n't touch , the mortar you need and the gold you need -- they all came out of the ground -- they all belonged to everybody or nobody a little while ago ! ''
You would say something indistinct about Property .
`` Somebody must own the things . ''
`` I begin to perceive , '' our visitor would say as this became clear ; `` your world is under the spell of an exaggerated idea , this preposterous idea there must be an individual Owner for everything in the world .
Obviously you ca n't get on while you are under the spell of that !
So long as you have this private ownership in everything , there 's no help for you .
You cut up your land and material in parcels of all sorts and sizes among this multitude of irresponsible little monarchs ; you let all the material you need get distributed among another small swarm of Owners , and clearly you can only get them to work for public ends in the most roundabout , tedious and wasteful way .
They 're very well satisfied as they are !
But if the community as a whole insisted that this idea of private Ownership you have in regard to land and natural things was all nonsense -- and it is all nonsense !
-- just think what you might not do with it now that you have all the new powers and lights that Science has given you .
You might turn all your towns into garden cities , put an end to overcrowding , abolish smoky skies -- -- ''
`` Suppose , now , you said to him : 'But how did you come by this land and these herds so that you can stand between them and the people who have need of them , exacting this profit ? '
He would probably either embark upon a long rigmarole , or , what is much more probable , lose his temper and decline to argue .
Pursuing your doubt as to the rightfulness of his property in these things , you might admit he deserved a certain reasonable fee for the rough care he had taken of the land and herds .
But cattle breeders are a rude violent race , and it is doubtful if you would get far beyond your proposition of a reasonable fee .
You would , in fact , have to buy off this owner of the leather at a good thumping price -- he exacting just as much as he could get from you -- if you wanted to go on with your project .
Our imaginary visitor would probably quite fail to grasp the reasons why we do not forthwith shake off this obstructive and harmful idea of Private Ownership , dispossess our Landowners and so forth as gently as possible , and set to work upon collective housing and the rest of it .
And so he would `` exit wondering . ''
He might urge that our present way of doing things , though it was sometimes almost as wasteful as Nature when fresh spawn or pollen germs are scattered , was in many ways singularly congenial to the infirmities of humanity .
The idea of property is a spontaneous product of the mortal mind ; children develop it in the nursery , and are passionately alive to the difference of _meum_ and _tuum_ , and its extension to land , subterranean products and wild free things , even if it is under analysis a little unreasonable , was at least singularly acceptable to humanity .
`` He tempts them to drink , '' I have heard a clergyman say of his village publican .
But what else did he think the publican was there for ?
-- to preach total abstinence ?
Naturally , inevitably , the whole of the Trade is a propaganda -- not of drunkenness , but of habitual heavy drinking .
The more successful propagandists , the great brewers and distillers grow rich just in the proportion that people consume beer and spirits ; they gain honour and peerages in the measure of their success .
Not perhaps to the lowest .
There can be no disputing that our present civilization does discourage much of the innate bestiality of man ; that it helps people to a measure of continence , cleanliness and mutual toleration ; that it does much to suppress brute violence , the spirit of lawlessness , cruelty and wanton destruction .
But on the other hand it does also check and cripple generosity and frank truthfulness , any disinterested creative passion , the love of beauty , the passion for truth and research , and it stimulates avarice , parsimony , overreaching , usury , falsehood and secrecy , by making money-getting its criterion of intercourse .
Now this is not a thing that comes naturally out of the quality of man ; it is the result of a blind and complex social growth , of this set of ideas working against that , and of these influences modifying those .
The idea of property has run wild and become a choking universal weed .
It is not the natural master-passion of a wholesome man to want constantly to own .
People talk of Socialism as being a proposal `` against human nature , '' and they would have us believe that this life of anxiety , of parsimony and speculation , of mercenary considerations and forced toil we all lead , is the complete and final expression of the social possibilities of the human soul .
But , indeed , it is only quite abnormal people , people of a narrow , limited , specialized intelligence , Rockefellers , Morgans and the like , people neither great nor beautiful , mere financial monomaniacs , who can keep themselves devoted to and concentrated upon gain .
To the majority of capable good human stuff , buying and selling , saving and investing , insuring oneself and managing property , is a mass of uncongenial , irrational and tiresome procedure , conflicting with the general trend of instinct and the finer interests of life .
The great mass of men and women , indeed , find the whole process so against nature , that in spite of all the miseries of poverty , all the slavery of the economic disadvantage , they can not urge themselves to this irksome cunning game of besting the world , they remain poor .
Most , in a sort of despair , make no effort ; many resort to that floundering endeavour to get by accident , gambling ; many achieve a precarious and unsatisfactory gathering of possessions , a few houses , a claim on a field , a few hundred pounds in some investment as incalculable as a kite in a gale ; just a small minority have and get -- for the most part either inheritors of riches or energetic people who , through a real dulness toward the better and nobler aspects of life , can give themselves almost entirely to grabbing and accumulation .
To such as these , all common men who are not Socialists do in effect conspire to give the world .
The Anti-Socialist argues that out of this evil of encouraged and stimulated avarice comes good , and that this peculiar meanly greedy type that predominates in the individualist world to-day , the Rockefeller-Harriman type , `` creates '' great businesses , exploits the possibilities of nature , gives mankind railways , power , commodities .
As a matter of fact , a modern intelligent community is quite capable of doing all these things infinitely better for itself , and the beneficent influence of commerce may easily become , and does easily become , the basis of a cant .
Exploitation by private persons is no doubt a necessary condition to economic development in an illiterate community of low intelligence , just as flint implements marked a necessary phase in the social development of mankind ; but to-day the avaricious getter , like some obsolescent organ in the body , consumes strength and threatens health .
And to-day he is far more mischievous than ever he was before , because of the weakened hold of the old religious organization upon his imagination .
For the most part the great fortunes of the modern world have been built up by proceedings either not socially beneficial , or in some cases positively harmful .
Consider some of the commoner methods of growing rich .
There is first the selling of rubbish for money , exemplified by the great patent medicine fortunes and the fortunes achieved by the debasement of journalism , the sale of prize-competition magazines and the like ; next there is forestalling , the making of `` corners '' in such commodities as corn , nitrates , borax and the like ; then there is the capture of what Americans call `` franchises , '' securing at low terms by expedients that usually will not bear examination , the right to run some profitable public service for private profit which would be better done in public hands -- the various private enterprises for urban traffic , for example ; then there are the various more or less complex financial operations , watering stock , `` reconstructing , '' `` shaking out '' the ordinary shareholder , which transfer the savings of the common struggling person to the financial magnate .
All the activities in this list are more or less anti-social , yet it is by practising them that the great successes of recent years have been achieved .
Fortunes of a second rank have no doubt been made by building up manufactures and industries of various types by persons who have known how to buy labour cheap , organize it well and sell its produce dear , but even in these cases the social advantage of the new product is often largely discounted by the labour conditions .
It is impossible , indeed , directly one faces current facts , to keep up the argument of the public good achieved by men under the incentive of gain and the necessity of that incentive to progress and economic development .
I will confess I find it hard to write with any patience and civility of this argument that humanity will not work except for greed or need of money and only in proportion to the getting .
It is so patently absurd .
I suppose the reasonable Anti-Socialist will hardly maintain it seriously with that crudity .
He will say that although it may be true that good work is always done for the interest of the doing or in the spirit of service , yet in order to get and keep people at work , and to keep the standard high through periods of indolence and distraction , there must be the dread of dismissal and the stimulating eye of the owner .
That certainly puts the case a good deal less basely and much more plausibly .
Our social system , based on Private Ownership , encourages and glorifies this spirit of gain , and cripples and thwarts the spirit of service .
You need but have your eyes once opened to its influence , and thereafter you will never cease to see how the needs and imperatives of property taint the honour and dignity of human life .
Just where life should flower most freely into splendour , this chill , malign obsession most nips and cripples .
The law that makes getting and keeping an imperative necessity poisons and destroys the freedom of men and women in love , in art and in every concern in which spiritual or physical beauty should be the inspiring and determining factor .
Behind all the handsome professions of romantic natures the gaunt facts of monetary necessity remain the rulers of life .
Every youth who must sell his art and capacity for gain , every girl who must sell herself for money , is one more sacrifice to the Minotaur of Private Ownership -- before the Theseus of Socialism comes .
Opponents of Socialism , ignoring all these things and inventing with that profusion which is so remarkable a trait of the anti-Socialist campaign , are wont to declare that we , whose first and last thought is the honour and betterment of life , seek to destroy all beauty and freedom in love , accuse us of aiming at some `` human stud farm . ''
The reader will measure the justice of that by the next chapter , but here I would say that just as the private ownership of all that is necessary to humanity , except the air and sunlight and a few things that it has been difficult to appropriate , debases work and all the common services of life , so also it taints and thwarts the emotions , and degrades the intimate physical and emotional existence of an innumerable multitude of people .
All this amounts to a huge impoverishment of life , a loss of beauty and discrimination of rich and subtle values .
Human existence to-day is a mere tantalizing intimation of what it might be .
It is frostbitten and dwarfed from palace to slum .
It is not only that a great mass of our population is deprived of space , beauty and pleasure , but that a large proportion of such space , beauty and pleasure as there are in the world must necessarily have a meretricious taint and be in the nature of things bought and made for pay .
The Socialist 's remedy for this squalid state of affairs is plain and simple .
Medicine is a public service , an honourable devotion ; it should no more be a matter of profit-making than the food-supply service or the house-supply service -- or salvation .
It should be a part of the organization of a civilized State to have a Public Health service of well-paid , highly-educated men distributed over the country and closely correlated with public research departments and a reserve of specialists , who would be as ready and eager to face dangers and to sacrifice themselves for honour and social necessity as soldiers or sailors .
I believe every honourable man in the medical profession under forty now would rather it were so .
It is , indeed , a transition from private enterprise to public organization that is already beginning .
We have the first intimation of the change in the appearance of the medical officer of health , underpaid , overworked and powerless though he is at the present time .
It can not be long before the manifest absurdity of our present conditions begins a process of socialization of the medical profession entirely analogous to that which has changed three-fourths of the teachers in Great Britain from private adventurers to public servants in the last forty years .
And that is the aim of Socialism all along the line ; to convert one public service after another from a chaotic profit-scramble of proprietors amidst a mass of sweated employees into a secure and disciplined service , in which every man will work for honour , promotion , achievement and the commonweal .
Now I for one am prepared to take these difficulties very seriously , as the latter part of this book will show .
I will even go so far as to say that , to my mind , the contemporary Socialist controversialist meets all this system of objections far too cavalierly .
These difficulties are real difficulties for the convinced Socialist as for the inquirer ; they open up problems that have still to be solved before the equipment of Socialism is complete .
`` How will you Socialists get the right men in the right place for the work that has to be done ?
How will you arrange promotion ?
How will you determine '' ( I put the argument in its crudest form ) `` who is to engage in historical research in the Bodleian , and who is to go out seaward in November and catch mackerel ? ''
Such `` posers '' -- they have a thousand variants -- convey the spirit of the living resistance to Socialism ; they explain why every rational man is not an enraptured Socialist at the present time .
The home is wretched and practically without furniture .
The parents were married at ages 17 and 18 .
One child died , and their mode of life has been reckless , if not worse .
The present means of subsistence can not be ascertained , as the man is idle ; however , he recently joined the Salvation Army and signed the pledge .
The child at school is helped with food and clothes .
The girl very badly bitten ; lice and fleas , hair nits .
Housing : four in one room .
Evidence from Church , School Charity , Co-operative , Employer , Parish Sister , Police and School-mistress . ''
`` Our attention has been called to a sordid Herefordshire tragedy recently revealed at an inquest on a child aged one year and nine months , who died in Weobly Workhouse of pneumonia .
She entered the institution emaciated to half the proper weight of her age and with a broken arm -- till then undiscovered -- that the doctors found to be of about three weeks ' standing .
Her mother was shown to be in an advanced stage of consumption ; one child had died at the age of seven months , and seven now remain .
The father , whose work consists in tending eighty-nine head of cattle and ten pigs , is in receipt of eleven shillings a week , three pints of skim milk a day , and a cottage that has been condemned by the sanitary inspector and described as having no bedroom windows .
We are not surprised to learn that the coroner , before taking the verdict , asked the house surgeon , who gave evidence , whether he could say that death 'was accelerated by anything . '
Our wonder is that the reply was in the negative .
The cottage is in the possession of the farmer who employs the man , but his landlord is said to be liable for repairs .
That landlord is a clergyman of the Church of England , a J.P. , a preserver of game , and owner of three or four thousand acres of land . ''
Consider next the great army of employed men and women , shop assistants , clerks , and so forth , living in , milliners , typists , teachers , servants who have practically no prospect whatever of marrying and experiencing those domestic blisses the Socialist is supposed to want to rob them of .
They are involuntary monks and nuns , celibate not from any high or religious motive , but through economic hardship .
Consider all that amount of pent-up , thwarted or perverted emotional possibility , the sheer irrational waste of life implied ... .
And how will the endowment be done ?
Very probably it will be found that the most convenient and best method of doing this will be to subsidize the mother -- who is , or should be , the principal person concerned in this affair -- for her children ; to assist her , not as a charity , but as a right in the period before the birth of her anticipated child , and afterwards to provide her with support for that child so long as it is kept clean in a tolerable home , in good health , well taught and properly clad .
It will say to the sound mothering woman , Not type-writing , nor shirt-sewing , nor charing is your business -- these children are .
Neglect them , ill-treat them , prove incompetent , and your mother-right will cease and we shall take them away from you and do what we can for them ; love them , serve them and , through them , the State , and you will serve yourself .
Is that destroying the home ?
Is it not rather the rescue of the home from economic destruction ?
Moreover , as the present writer has pointed out elsewhere , [ 10 ] this putting of the home upon a public basis destroys its autonomy .
Just as the Socialist and all who have the cause of civilization at heart would substitute for the inefficient , wasteful , irresponsible , unqualified `` private adventure school '' that did such infinite injury to middle-class education in Great Britain during the Victorian period a public school , publicly and richly endowed and responsible and controlled , so the Socialist would put an end to the uncivilized go-as-you-please of the private adventure family .
`` Socialism in fact is the State family .
The old family of the private individual must vanish before it just as the old water-works of private enterprise or the old gas company .
`` [ 11 ] To any one not idiotic nor blind with a passionate desire to lie about Socialism , the meaning of this passage is perfectly plain .
Socialism seeks to broaden the basis of the family and to make the once irresponsible parent responsible to the State for its welfare .
Socialism creates parental responsibility .
Coming to graver matters there are ardent theologians who would create an absolute antagonism between Socialism and Christianity , who would tie up Socialism with some extraordinary doctrine of Predestination , or deny the possibility of a Christian being a Socialist or a Socialist being a Christian .
But these are matters on different planes .
In a sense Socialism is a religion ; to me it is a religion , in the sense , that is , that it gives a work to do that is not self-seeking , that it determines one in a thousand indecisions , that it supplies that imperative craving of so many human souls , a devotion .
But I do not see why a believer in any of the accepted creeds of Christianity , from the Apostles ' Creed upward , should not also whole-heartedly give himself to this great work of social reconstruction .
To believe in a real and personal Heaven is surely not to deny earth with its tragedy , its sorrows , its splendid possibilities .
It is simply to believe a little more concretely than I do , that is all .
To assert the brotherhood of man under God seems to me to lead logically to a repudiation of the severities of Private Ownership -- that is to Socialism .
When the rich young man was told to give up his property to follow Christ , when the disciples were told to leave father and mother , it seems to me ridiculous to present Christianity as opposed to the self-abnegation of the two main generalizations of Socialism -- that relating to property in things , and that relating to property in persons .
It is true that the Church of Rome has taken the deplorable step of forbidding Socialism ( or at least _Socialismus_ ) to its adherents ; but there is no need for Socialists to commit a reciprocal stupidity .
Let us Socialists at any rate keep our intellectual partitions up .
The Church that now quarrels with Socialism once quarrelled with astronomy and geology , and astronomers and geologists went on with their own business .
Both religion and astronomy are still alive and in the same world together .
And the Vatican observatory , by the bye , is honourably distinguished for its excellent stellar photographs .
Perhaps , after all , the Church does not mean by _Socialismus_ Socialism as it is understood in English ; perhaps it simply means the dogmatically anti-Christian Socialism of the Continental type .
There can be no doubt that many of those older writers who were `` Socialists before Socialism , '' Plato , for instance , and Sir Thomas More , did very roundly abolish private property altogether .
They were extreme Communists , and so were many of the earlier Socialists ; in More 's Utopia , doors might not be fastened , they stood open ; one had n't even a private room .
These earlier writers wished to insist upon the need of self-abnegation in the ideal State , and to startle and confound , they insisted overmuch .
The early Christians , one gathers , were almost completely communistic , and that interesting experiment in Christian Socialism ( of a rather unorthodox type of Christianity ) , the American Oneida community , was successfully communistic in every respect for many years .
But the modern Socialist is not a communist ; the modern Socialist , making his scheme of social reconstruction for the whole world and for every type of character , recognizes the entire impracticability of such dreams , recognizing , too , it may be , the sacrifice of human personality and distinction such ideals involve .
In all these respects modern Socialism tends to create and confirm property and rights , the property of the user , the rights of the creator .
It is quite other property it tends to destroy ; the property , the claim , of the creditor , the mortgagee , the landlord , and usurer , the forestaller , gambling speculator , monopolizer and absentee ... .
In very truth Socialism would destroy no property at all , but only that sham property that , like some wizard-cast illusion , robs us all .
These little investors , it is said , are the bitter champions of private finance against the municipalities and Socialists .
It is possible to argue that the small man ought to take more pains about his investments , but , as a matter of fact , investing money securely and profitably is a special occupation of extraordinary complexity , and the common man with a few hundred pounds has no more chance in that market than he would have under water in Sydney Harbour amidst a shoal of sharks .
It may be said that he is greedy , wants too much interest , but that is nonsense .
One of the crudest gulfs into which small savings have gone in the case of the British public has been the trap of Consols , which pay at the present price less than three per cent .
Servants and working men with Post Office Savings' Bank accounts were urged , tempted and assisted to invest in this solemn security -- even when it stood at 114 .
Those who did so have now ( November 1907 ) lost almost a third of their money .
Let me insert here a few remarks upon a question that arises naturally out of the preceding discussion , and that is the future of that miscellaneous section of the community known as the middle class .
It is one that I happen to know with a peculiar intimacy .
Then machinery came into the lives of men , and steam power , and there began that change of scale which is going on still to-day , making an ever-widening separation of master and man and an ever-enlarging organization of industry and social method .
Its most striking manifestation was at first the substitution of organized manufacture in factories for the half-domestic hand-industrialism of the earlier period ; the growth of the fortunes of some of the merchants and manufacturers to dimensions comparable with the wealth of the great landowners , and the sinking of the rest of their class towards the status of wage-earners .
The development of joint-stock enterprise arose concurrently with this to create a new sort of partnership capable of handling far greater concerns than any single wealthy person , as wealth was measured by the old scale , could do .
There followed a great development of transit , culminating for a time in the coming of the railways and steamships , which abolished the isolation of the old towns and brought men at the remotest quarters of the earth into business competition .
Big towns of the modern type , with half-a-million inhabitants or more , grew up rapidly all over Europe and America .
For the European big towns are as modern as New York , and the East End and south side of London scarcely older than Chicago .
Shopkeeping , like manufactures , began to concentrate in large establishments , and big wholesale distribution to replace individual buying and selling .
As the need for public education under the changing conditions of life grew more and more urgent , the individual enterprise of this school-master and that gave place to the organized effort of such giant societies as ( in Britain ) the old National School Society and the British School Society , and at last to State education .
And one after another the old prosperous middle-class callings fell under the stress of the new development .
`` 'So far as your specific questions go , I do not think there could possibly be anything in the nature of `` compulsory profit-sharing '' if a Socialist Government came into office .
There is at present a compulsory profit-sharing in the form of an income-tax , but that tax does not appeal to the Socialist as a particularly scientific one .
The advent of a strongly-Socialist Government would mean no immediate revolutionary changes at all .
There would be , no doubt , a vigorous acceleration of the educational movement to increase the economic value and productivity of the average citizen of the next generation , and legislation upon the lines laid down by the principle of the `` minimum wage '' to check the waste of our national resources by destructive employment .
Also a systematic shifting of the burthen of taxation from enterprise to rent would begin .
But nothing convulsive would occur . '
`` I have been one of a Royal Commission visiting the North of France , Belgium , and Northern Germany , and our duty has been to examine what those three countries have done in the improvement of their canals and their waterways .
We have been very deeply impressed by what we have seen , and I can tell you to-day , speaking as a man of business to men of business , that the fact that in these three countries there is communal effort -- that is to say , that the State in money and in credit for the benefit of the national trade -- has brought to those three countries enormous , almost incalculable , benefits ; and I think that any man , any intelligent man , who studies this matter as I have studied it for a great many years , will come the conclusion , as I have come very clearly and decidedly , that the old policy which we have adopted for generations of leaving all public works to private enterprise -- the old policy , so called , of _laissez faire_ -- is played out completely , and I am of opinion , very firmly , that , if we mean to hold our own in matters of trade , we must learn to follow the example that has been set us not only by France , Belgium , and Germany , but by the United States and by every one of the Colonies of our Empire .
Everywhere do you find that trade is helped by the effort of the community , by the force of the State , and I shall be very heartily pleased if those who hear me will think the matter over and decide for themselves whether or not we as business people -- preeminently the business people of the world -- are to maintain the old policy of leaving everything to private enterprise , or whether we are to act together for the good of all in this important matter of the national trade . ''
[ 14 ] See `` Scepticism of the Instrument , '' the Appendix to _A Modern Utopia_ .
( Chapman & Hall . )
_Socialism is economically unsound._ The student of Socialism who studies -- and every student of Socialism should study very carefully -- the literature directed against Socialism , will encounter a number of rather confused and frequently very confusing arguments running upon `` business '' or `` economic '' lines .
In nearly all of these the root error is a misconception of the nature and aim of Socialist claims .
Sometimes this misconception is stated and manifest , often it is subtly implied , and then it presents the greatest difficulties to the inexpert dialectician .
I find , for instance , Mr. W. H. Lever , in an article on Socialism and Business in the _Magazine of Commerce_ for October 1907 , assuming that there will be no increase in the total wealth of the community under Socialism , whereas , as my fourth chapter shows , Socialist proposals in the matter of property aim directly at the cessation of the waste occasioned by competition through the duplication and multiplication of material and organizations ( see for example the quotation from Elihu , p. 69 ) , and at the removal of the obstructive claims of private ownership ( see p. 65 ) from the path of production .
If Socialism does not increase the total wealth of the community , Socialism is impossible .
Socialism , as I have stated it thus far , and as it is commonly stated , would give economic liberty to men and women alike , it would save them from the cruel urgency of need , and so far it would enormously enlarge freedom , but it does not guarantee them political or intellectual liberty .
That I frankly admit , and accept as one of the incompletenesses of contemporary Socialism .
I conceive , therefore , as I shall explain at length in a later chapter , that it is necessary to supplement such Socialism as is currently received by certain new propositions .
But to admit that Socialism does not guarantee freedom , is not to admit that Socialism will destroy it .
It is possible , given certain conditions , for men to be nearly absolutely free in speech , in movement , in conduct ; enormously free , that is , as compared with our present conditions , in a Socialist State established upon the two great propositions I have formulated in Chapters III .
So that the statement that Socialism will destroy freedom is a baseless one of no value as a general argument against the Socialist idea .
_Socialism would reduce life to one monotonous dead level !
_ This in a world in which the majority of people live in cheap cottages , villa residences and tenement houses , read halfpenny newspapers and wear ready-made clothes !
The plain answer is that under our present conditions the _Breeding-Getter_ wins , the man who can hold and keep and reproduce his kind .
People with the instinct of owning stronger than any other instinct float out upon the top of our seething mass , and flourish there .
Aggressive , intensely acquisitive , reproductive people -- the ignoble sort of Jew is the very type of it -- are the people who will prevail in a social system based on private property and mercantile competition .
No creative power , no nobility , no courage can battle against them .
And below -- in the slums and factories , what will be going on ?
The survival of a race of stunted toilers , with great resisting power to infection , contagion and fatigue , omnivorous as rats ... .
_The fine big children are born in periods of low infantile mortality_ , that is the essential point .
_Socialism is against Human Nature._ This objection I have left until last because , firstly , it is absolutely true , and secondly , it leads naturally to the newer ideas that have already peeped out once or twice in my earlier chapters and which will now ride up to a predominance in what follows , and particularly the idea that an educational process and a moral discipline are not only a necessary part , but the most fundamental part of any complete Socialist scheme .
Socialism is against Human Nature .
That is true , and it is equally true of everything else ; capitalism is against human nature , competition is against human nature , cruelty , kindness , religion and doubt , monogamy , polygamy , celibacy , decency , indecency , piety and sin are all against human nature .
The present system in particular is against human nature , or what is the policeman for , the soldier , the debt-collector , the judge , the hangman ?
What means the glass along my neighbour 's wall ?
Human nature is against human nature .
For human nature is in a perpetual conflict ; it is the Ishmael of the universe , against everything , and with everything against it ; and within , no more and no less than a perpetual battleground of passion , desire , cowardice , indolence and good will .
So that our initial proposition as it stands at the head of this section , is , as an argument against Socialism , just worth nothing at all .
The new adherent to Socialism in particular must bear this in mind , that Socialism is no garment made and finished that we can reasonably ask the world to wear forthwith .
It is not that its essentials remain in doubt , it is not that it does not stand for things supremely true , but that its proper method and its proper expedients have still to be established .
Over and above the propaganda of its main constructive ideas and the political work for their more obvious and practical application , an immense amount of intellectual work remains to be done for Socialism .
The battle for Socialism is to be fought not simply at the polls and in the market-place , but at the writing-desk and in the study .
To many questions , the attitude of Socialism to-day is one of confessed inquiring imperfection .
[ 17 ] It would indeed be very remarkable if a proposition for changes so vast and comprehensive as Socialism advances was in any different state at this present time .
It is only to be expected that early Socialism should now appear as not only an extremely imperfect but a very inconsistent system of proposals .
Its value lay not so much in its plans as in its hopeful and confident denials .
It had hold of one great truth ; it moved one great amendment to the conception of practical equality the French Revolution had formulated , and that was its clear indication of the evil of unrestricted private property and of the necessary antagonism of the interests of the individual to the common-weal , of `` Wealth against Commonwealth , '' that went with that .
While most men had to go propertyless in a world that was privately owned , the assertion of equality was an empty lie .
For the rest , primordial Socialism was entirely sketchy and experimental .
It was wild as the talk of school-boys .
It disregarded the most obvious needs .
It did not provide for any principle of government , or for the maintenance of collective thought and social determination , it offered no safeguards and guarantees for even the most elementary privacies and freedoms ; it was extraordinarily non-constructive .
It was extreme in its proposed abolition of the home , and it flatly ignored the huge process of transition needed for a change so profound and universal .
Our present generation is less buoyant perhaps , but wiser .
However young you may be as a reformer , you know you must face certain facts those early Socialists ignored .
Whatever sort of community you dream of , you realize that it has to be made of the sort of people you meet every day or of the children growing up under their influence .
The damping words of the old philosopher to the ardent Social reformer of seventeen were really the quintessence of our criticism of revolutionary Socialism : `` Will your aunts join us , my dear ?
Well -- is the grocer on our side ?
And the family solicitor ?
We shall have to provide for them all , you know , unless you suggest a lethal chamber . ''
For a generation Socialism , in the exaltation of its self-discovery , failed to measure these primary obstacles , failed to recognize the real necessity , the quality of the task of making these people understand .
To this day the majority of Socialists still fail to grasp completely the Herbartian truth , the fact that every human soul moves within its _circle of ideas_ , resisting enlargement , incapable indeed if once it is adult of any extensive enlargement , and that all effectual human progress can be achieved only through such enlargement .
Only ideas cognate to a circle of ideas are assimilated or assimilable ; ideas too alien , though you shout them in the ear , thrust them in the face , remain foreign and incomprehensible .
[ 19 ] _The Future in America._ ( Chapman & Hall , 1906 . )
`` We 'll take over the Trusts and run them .
Now the questions were being handed in , written on strips of paper , and at last that listener 's difficulty cropped up .
But the business of Socialism lies at a lower level and concerns immediate things ; our material is the world as it is , full of unjust laws , bad traditions , bad habits , inherited diseases and weaknesses , germs and poisons , filths and envies .
We are not dealing with magnificent creatures such as one sees in ideal paintings and splendid sculpture , so beautiful they may face the world naked and unashamed ; we are dealing with hot-eared , ill-kempt people , who are liable to indigestion , baldness , corpulence and fluctuating tempers ; who wear top-hats and bowler hats or hats kept on by hat-pins ( and so with all the other necessary clothing ) ; who are pitiful and weak and vain and touchy almost beyond measure , and very naughty and intemperate ; who have , alas !
to be bound over to be in any degree faithful and just to one another .
To strip such people suddenly of law and restraint would be as dreadful and ugly as stripping the clothes from their poor bodies ... .
The broad lines of the process of transition from the present state of affairs to the Socialist state of the future as they are developed by administrative Socialism lie along the following lines .
The systematic raising of the minimum standard of life by factory and other labour legislation , and particularly by the establishment of a legal minimum wage ... .
Every movement has the defects of its virtues , and it is not , perhaps , very remarkable that the Fabian Society of the eighties and nineties , having introduced the conception of the historical continuity of institutions into the Propaganda of Socialism , did certainly for a time greatly over-accentuate that conception and draw away attention from aspects that may be ultimately more essential .
The process went even further than secretiveness in its reaction from the large rhetorical forms of revolutionary Socialism .
There arose even a repudiation of `` principles '' of action , and a type of worker which proclaimed itself `` Opportunist-Socialist . ''
It was another instance of Socialism losing sight of itself , it was a process quite parallel at the other extreme with the self-contradiction of the Anarchist-Socialist .
Socialism as distinguished from mere Liberalism , for example , is an organized plan for social reconstruction , while Liberalism relies upon certain vague `` principles '' ; Socialism declares that good intentions and doing what comes first to hand will not suffice .
Now Opportunism is essentially benevolent adventure and the doing of first-hand things .
The creation of the London Borough Councils found English Socialism unprepared .
They were bodies doomed by their nature to incapacity and waste .
They represented neither natural communities nor any practicable administrative unit of area .
Their creation was the result of quite silly political considerations .
The slowness with which Socialists have realized that for the larger duties that they wish to have done collectively , a new scheme of administration is necessary ; that bodies created to sweep the streets and admirably adapted to that duty may be conspicuously not adapted to supply electric power or interfere with transit , is accountable for much disheartening bungling .
Instead of taking a clear line from the outset , and denouncing these glorified vestries as useless , impossible and entirely unscientific organs , too many Socialists tried to claim Bumble as their friend and use him as their tool .
And Bumble turned out to be a very bad friend and a very poor tool ... .
[ 22 ] See Appendix to _Mankind in the Making_ .
( Chapman and Hall , 1905 . )
Above this fundamental mass is the growing moiety which has a conscious thought-process , of a sort .
Its fundamental ideas , its preconceptions , are begotten of a mixture of social traditions learnt at home and in school and from the suggestions of contemporary customs and affairs .
But it reads and listens more or less .
And scattered through this , here and there , are people really learning , really increasing and accumulating knowledge , really thinking and conversing -- the active mind-cells , as it were , of the world .
Their ideas are conveyed into the mass much as impulses are conveyed into an imperfectly innervated tissue , they are conveyed by books and pamphlets , by lecturing , by magazine articles and newspaper articles , by the agency of the pulpit , by organized propaganda , by political display and campaigns .
The gross effect is considerable , but it is just as well that the Socialist should look a little closely at the economic processes that underlie these intellectual activities at the present time .
Except for the universities and much of the public educational organization , except for a few pulpits endowed for good under conditions that limit freedom of thought and expression , except for certain needy and impecunious propagandas , the whole of this apparatus of public thought and discussion to-day has been created and is sustained by commercial necessity .
The first of these is the principle of _freedom of speech_ ; the second , _freedom of writing_ ; and the third , _universality of information_ .
In the civilized State every one must be free to know , knowledge must be patent and at hand , and any one must be free to discuss , write , suggest and persuade .
These freedoms must be guarded as sacred things .
It is not in the untutored nature of man to respect any of these freedoms ; it is not in the bureaucratic habit of mind .
Indeed , the desire to suppress opinions adverse to our own is almost instinctive in human nature .
It is an instinct we have to conquer .
Fair play in discussion is sustained by a cultivated respect , by a correction of natural instinct ; men need to be _trained_ to be jealous of obscurantism , of unfair argument , of authoritative interference with opinion when that opinion is against them .
In England such a jealousy does already largely exist , it has been cultivated with us since the seventeenth century at least ; America , it seemed to me during my short visit to the States , has somewhat retrograded from its former British standard in this respect , there is a crude majority tyranny in the matter of publication , an un-English disposition to boycott libraries , books , authors and publications upon petty issues , a growing disposition to discriminate in the mails against unpopular views .
These interferences with open statement and discussion are decivilizing forces .
I am naturally preoccupied with the Mind of that Civilized State we seek to make ; because my work lies in this department .
But while the writer , the publisher and printer , the bookseller and librarian , and teacher and preacher must chiefly direct himself to developing this great organized mind and intention in the world , other sorts of men will be concerned with parallel aspects of the Socialist synthesis .
The medical worker or the medical investigator will be building up the body of a new generation , the Body of the Civilized State , and he will be doing all he can not simply as an individual , but as a citizen , to _organize_ his services of cure and prevention , of hygiene and selection .
And the specialized man of science -- he will be concerned with his own special synthesis , the Knowledge of the Civilized State , whether he measure crystals or stain microtome sections or count stars .
A great and growing multitude of men will be working out the Apparatus of the Civilized State ; the students of transit and housing , the engineers in their incessantly increasing variety , the miners and geologists estimating the world 's resources in metals and minerals , the mechanical inventors perpetually economizing force .
The scientific agriculturist , again , will be studying the food supply of the world as a whole , and how it may be increased and distributed and economized .
And to the student of law comes the task of rephrasing his intricate and often quite beautiful science in relation to the new social assumptions we have laid down .
All these and a hundred other aspects are integral to the wide project of Constructive Socialism as it shapes itself now .
Before I conclude this compact exposition of modern Socialism , it is reasonable that the reader should ask for some little help in figuring to himself this new world at which we Socialists aim .
Theatrical productions will be run on a sort of improvement upon contemporary methods , but there will be no cornering of talent possible , no wild advertisement of favoured stars upon strictly commercial lines , no Theatrical Trust .
The theatres will be municipal buildings , every theatre-going voter will be keen to see them comfortable and fine ; they will , perhaps , be run in some cases by a public repertoire company and in another by a lessee , and this latter may be financed by his own private savings or by subscribers or partners , or by a loan from the public bank as the case may be .
This latter method of exploitation by a lessee will probably also work best in the public Music Halls , but it is quite equally possible that these may be controlled by managers under partly elected and partly appointed public committees .
In some cases the theatrical lessee might be a kind of stage society organized for the production of particular types of play .
The spectators will pay for admission , of course , as they do now , but to the municipal box offices ; and I suppose the lessee or the author and artists will divide up the surplus after the rent of the theatre has been deducted for the municipal treasury .
In every town of any importance there will be many theatres , music halls and the like , perhaps under competing committees .
In all these matters , as every intelligent person understands , one has to maintain variety of method , a choice of avenues , freedom from autocracies ; and since the Socialist community will contain a great number of intelligent persons with leisure and opportunity for artistic appreciation , there is little chance of this important principle being forgotten , much less than there is in this world where a group of dealers can often make an absolute corner in this artistic market or that .
You will not , under Socialism , see Sarah Bernhardt playing in a tent as she had to do in America , because all the theatres have been closed against her through some mean dispute with a Trust about the sharing of profits ... .
And if it is not too sudden a transition , it seems most convenient in a Socialist State to leave religious worship entirely to the care of private people ; to let them subscribe among themselves , subject , of course , to a reasonable statute of mortmain , to lease land , and build and endow and maintain churches and chapels , altars and holy places and meeting-houses , priests and devout ceremonies .
This will be the more easily done since the heavy social burthens that oppress religious bodies at the present time will be altogether lifted from them ; they will have no poor to support , no schools , no hospitals , no nursing sisters , the advance of civilization will have taken over these duties of education and humanity that Christianity first taught us to realize .
So , too , there seems no objection and no obstacle in Socialism to religious houses , to nunneries , monasteries and the like , so far as these institutions are compatible with personal freedom and the public health , but of course factory laws and building laws will run through all these places , and the common laws and limitations of contract override their vows , if their devotees repent .
So that you see Socialism will touch nothing living of religion , and if you are a religious minister , you will be very much as you are at the present time , but with lightened parochial duties .
If you are an earnest woman and want to nurse the sick and comfort the afflicted , you will need only , in addition to your religious profession , to qualify as a nurse or medical practitioner .
There will still be ample need of you .
Socialism will not make an end of human trouble , either of the body or of the soul , albeit it will put these things into such comfort and safety as it may .
Now frankly Socialism will be incompatible with this patrician style .
You must contemplate the end of all that .
You may still be healthy , refined , free , beautifully clothed and housed ; but you will not have either the space or the service or the sense of superiority you enjoy now , under Socialism .
You would have to take your place among the multitude again .
Only a moiety of your property will remain to your sort of person if any revolution is achieved .
The rents upon which you live , the investments that yield the income that makes the employment of that army of butlers and footmen , estate workers and underlings possible , that buys your dresses , your jewels , your motorcars , your splendid furnishings and equipments , will for the most part be public property , yielding revenue to some national or municipal treasury .
You will have to give up much of that .
There is no way out of it , your way to Socialism is through `` the needle 's eye . ''
From your rare class and from your class alone does Socialism require a real material sacrifice .
You must indeed give up much coarse pride .
There is no help for it , you must face that if you face Socialism at all .
You must come down to a simpler and , in many material aspects , less distinguished way of living .
That , at least , is my own dream of the order that may emerge from the confusion of distrusts and tentatives and dangerous absurdities , those reactions of fear and old traditional attitudes and racial misconceptions which one speaks of as international relations to-day .
For I do not believe that war is a necessary condition to human existence and progress , that it is anything more than a confusion we inherit from the less organized phases of social development .
I think but a little advancement in general intelligence will make it an impossible thing .
I have done my best to set out soberly and plainly this great idea of deliberately making a real civilization by the control and subordination of the instinct of property , and the systematic development of a state of consciousness out of the achievements and squalor , out of the fine forces and wasted opportunities of to-day .
I may have an unconscious bias perhaps , but so far as I have been able I have been just and frank , concealing nothing of the doubts and difficulties of Socialism , nothing of the divergencies of opinion among its supporters , nothing of the generous demands it makes upon the social conscience , the Good Will in man .
Its supporters are divergent upon a hundred points , but upon its fundamental generalizations they are all absolutely agreed , and some day the whole world will be agreed .
Their common purport is the resumption by the community of all property that is not justly and obviously personal , and the substitution of the spirit of service for the spirit of gain in all human affairs .
FIRST , and most important , is the primary intellectual process , the elaboration , criticism , discussion , enrichment and enlargement of the project of Socialism .
This includes all sorts of sociological and economic research , the critical literature of Socialism , and every possible way -- the drama , poetry , painting , music -- of expressing and refining its spirit , its attitudes and conceptions .
It includes , too , all sorts of experiments in living and association .
In its widest sense it includes all science , literature and invention .
RICHARD CLAY & SONS , LIMITED ,
BRUNSWICK STREET , STAMFORD STREET , S.E.
I Trade Unionism , Socialism , and Syndicalism II Political Action and the General Strike III The Philosophy of Sorel IV The Programme of Direct Action V Syndicalism in Europe and America VI Syndicalism in Great Britain VII An Examination of Syndicalist Principles VIII The Programme of Syndicalism IX Conclusion
_Crown 8vo , 2s .
The objects of this book are to present a record of the movement for labour representation in the United Kingdom from its first beginning in 1857 to the end of 1911 , and the arguments for and against class representation .
Professor Gilbert Slater in his introduction writes : `` Mr. Humphrey has earned the gratitude of students by the striking and straightforward narrative he has put together . ''
`` A well-studied and interesting account . ''
A small volume containing the history of the provision of meals to the children of poor parents , and an account of children 's care committees , their work and organization , with particular reference to the place of the voluntary worker and the duties of an official .
`` The history of the origin and work of the Care Committee is dealt with by Mr. Douglas Pepler in an interesting way , and he writes suggestively of the great problems with which its workers are brought into contact . ''
_Large Crown 8vo , 8s .
Introduction -- The Changing Status of Women -- The New Aspect of the Woman 's Movement -- The Emancipation of Women in relation to Romantic Love -- The Significance of a Falling Birth-rate -- Eugenics and Love -- Religion and the Child -- The Problem of Sexual Hygiene -- Immorality and Law -- The War against War -- The Problem of an International Language -- Individualism and Socialism -- Index .
`` Of extraordinary brilliance and suggestiveness . ''
London : CONSTABLE & COMPANY Ltd .
And he turned his face to the wall and never spoke again .
He did this of set intention .
He distrusted a certain freakishness of his finger-tips that he thought might have injured him with his multitudinous master .
He knew his holograph manuscript would certainly get him into trouble .
He employed a lady , the lady who figures in his will , Miss Bathwick , as his amanuensis .
In Miss Bathwick was all his security .
She was a large , cool , fresh-coloured , permanently young lady , full of serious enthusiasms ; she had been faultlessly educated in a girls ' high school of a not too modern type , and she regarded Boon with an invincible respect .
She wrote down his sentences ( spelling without blemish in all the European languages ) as they came from his lips , with the aid of a bright , efficient , new-looking typewriter .
If he used a rare word or a whimsical construction , she would say , `` I beg your pardon , Mr .
Boon , '' and he would at once correct it ; and if by any lapse of an always rather too nimble imagination he carried his thoughts into regions outside the tastes and interests of that enormous _ante-bellum_ public it was his fortune to please , then , according to the nature of his divagation , she would either cough or sigh or -- in certain eventualities -- get up and leave the room .
And then I remember he suddenly went off at a tangent to sketch out a great novel he was to call `` Aunt Columbia . ''
`` No , '' he said , `` they would suspect that -- 'Aunt Dove . '
'' She was to be a lady of great , unpremeditated wealth , living on a vast estate near a rather crowded and troublesome village .
Everything she did and said affected the village enormously .
She took the people 's children into her employment ; they lived on her surplus vegetables .
She was to have a particularly troublesome and dishonest household of servants and a spoiled nephew called Teddy .
And whenever she felt dull or energetic she drove down into the village and lectured and blamed the villagers -- for being overcrowded , for being quarrelsome , for being poor and numerous , for not , in fact , being spinster ladies of enormous good fortune ... .
That was only the beginning of one of those vast schemes of his that have left no trace now in all the collection .
But these scraps and fragments are of an irregularity diametrically contrasting with this .
They seem to have been begun upon impulse at any time , and abandoned with an equal impulsiveness , and they are written upon stationery of a variety and nature that alone would condemn them in the eyes of an alienist .
The handwriting is always atrocious and frequently illegible , the spelling is strange , and sometimes indecently bad , the punctuation is sporadic , and many of the fragments would be at once put out of court as modern literature by the fact that they are written in pencil on _both sides of the paper_ !
Such of the beginnings as achieve a qualified completeness are of impossible lengths ; the longest is a piece -- allowing for gaps -- of fourteen thousand words , and another a fragment shaping at about eleven .
These are , of course , quite impossible sizes , neither essay nor short story nor novel , and no editor or publisher would venture to annoy the public with writings of so bizarre a dimension .
In addition there are fragments of verse .
But I look in vain for anything beyond the first chapter of that tremendous serial , `` The Wild Asses of the Devil , '' that kept on day by day through June and July to the very outbreak of the war , and only a first chapter and a few illustrations and memoranda and fragments for our `` Mind of the Race , '' that went on intermittently for several years .
Whole volumes of that great hotchpotch of criticism are lost in the sandbanks of my treacherous memory for ever .
`` I admit nothing , '' said Dodd smartly .
But Boon was fairly launched now upon his topic , and from the first , I will confess , it took hold of me .
`` It will be as clear as day to him that a great effort of intellectual self-control must come if the race is to be saved from utter confusion and dementia .
And nobody seems to see it but he .
He will go about wringing his hands , so to speak .
I fancy him at last at a writing-desk , nervous white fingers clutched in his black hair .
'How can I put it so that they _must_ attend and see ? '
`` You will alter that phrase ? ''
Mallup did , ' says the aged custodian .
`` Owing it as we do , '' he said , `` very , very largely to our friend Gosse , to that peculiar , that honest but restless and , as it were , at times almost malignantly ambitious organizing energy of our friend , I can not altogether -- altogether , even if in any case I should have taken so extreme , so devastatingly isolating a step as , to put it violently , _stand out_ ; yet I must confess to a considerable anxiety , a kind of distress , an apprehension , the terror , so to speak , of the kerbstone , at all this stream of intellectual trafficking , of going to and fro , in a superb and towering manner enough no doubt , but still essentially going to and fro rather than in any of the completed senses of the word _getting there_ , that does so largely constitute the aggregations and activities we are invited to traverse .
My poor head , such as it is and as much as it can and upon such legs -- save the mark !
-- as it can claim , must , I suppose , play its inconsiderable part among the wheels and the rearings and the toots and the whistles and all this uproar , this -- Mm , Mm !
-- let us say , this _infernal_ uproar , of the occasion ; and if at times one has one 's doubts before plunging in , whether after all , after the plunging and the dodging and the close shaves and narrow squeaks , one does begin to feel that one is getting through , whether after all one _will_ get through , and whether indeed there is any getting through , whether , to deepen and enlarge and display one's doubt quite openly , there is in truth any sort of ostensible and recognizable other side attainable and definable at all , whether to put this thing with a lucidity that verges on the brutal , whether our amiable and in most respects our adorable Gosse is n't indeed preparing here and now , not the gathering together of a conference but the assembling , the _meet_ , so to speak , of a wild-goose chase of an entirely desperate and hopeless description . ''
`` In early life both these men poisoned their minds in studios .
Thought about pictures even might be less studio-ridden than it is .
But James has never discovered that a novel is n't a picture ... .
That life is n't a studio ... .
`` He wants a novel to be simply and completely _done_ .
He wants it to have a unity , he demands homogeneity ... .
Why _should_ a book have that ?
For a picture it 's reasonable , because you have to see it all at once .
But there 's no need to see a book all at once .
It 's like wanting to have a whole county done in one style and period of architecture .
It 's like insisting that a walking tour must stick to one valley ... .
I was able to secure the sketch .
`` He did n't marry , he did n't go upon adventures ; lust , avarice , ambition , all these things that as Milton says are to be got 'not without dust and heat , ' were not for him .
Blood and dust and heat -- he ruled them out .
But he had independent means , he could live freely and delicately and charmingly , he could travel and meet and be delighted by all the best sorts of people in the best sorts of places .
So for years he enriched his resonances , as an admirable violin grows richer with every note it sounds .
He went about elaborately , avoiding ugliness , death , suffering , industrialism , politics , sport , the thought of war , the red blaze of passion .
He travelled widely in the more settled parts of the world .
Chiefly he visited interesting and ancient places , putting his ever more exquisite sensorium at them , consciously taking delicate impressions upon the refined wax of his being .
In a manner most carefully occasional , he wrote .
Always of faded places .
His 'Ypres ' was wonderful .
His 'Bruges ' and his 'Hour of Van Eyk ' ... .
`` All this you must understand is told retrospectively as Blandish installs himself in Samphire House .
It is told to the refrain , 'Still , fresh every morning , came the persuasion `` This is too good to be true . ''
' And as it is told , something else , by the most imperceptible degrees , by a gathering up of hints and allusions and pointing details , gets itself told too , and that is the growing realization in the mind of Blandish of a something extra , of something not quite bargained for , -- the hoard and the haunting .
About the house hangs a presence ... .
`` And so at page a hundred and fifty or thereabouts we begin to get into the story , '' said Boon .
`` You wade through endless marshes of subtle intimation , to a sense of a Presence in Samphire House .
For a number of pages you are quite unable to tell whether this is a ghost or a legend or a foreboding or simply old-fashioned dreams that are being allusively placed before you .
But there is an effect piled up very wonderfully , of Mr. Blandish , obsessed , uneasy , watching furtively and steadfastly his guests , his callers , his domestics , continually asking himself , 'Do they note it ?
Are they feeling it ? '
`` We break at last into incidents .
A young friend of the impossible name of Deshman helps evolve the story ; he comes to stay ; he seems to feel the influence from the outset , he can not sleep , he wanders about the house ... .
The gardener takes to revisiting the gardens after nightfall .
He is met in the shrubbery with an unaccountable spade in his hand and answers huskily .
Why should a gardener carry a spade ?
Why should he answer huskily ?
Why should the presence , the doubt , the sense of something else elusively in the air about them , become intensified at the encounter ?
conceivably of course in many places , but just _there_ !
As some sort of protection , it may be ... .
Then suddenly as Mr. Blandish sits at his lonely but beautifully served dinner he becomes aware for the first time of a change in Mutimer .
`` 'So , ' said Mr. Blandish , pressing the point down towards the newly discovered sensitiveness , 'where we feel , he it seems _knows_ . '
`` On that the mind of Mr. Blandish played for a time .
`` 'He knows more than you do , ' she yielded .
`` 'More , I think , than he has admitted -- to any one . '
`` He perceived an interesting wave of irritation .
'Even to me , ' he had wrung from her , but at the price of all further discussion .
`` Through all the jam , I think we must have Ford Madox Hueffer , wandering to and fro up and down the corridor , with distraught blue eyes , laying his hands on heads and shoulders , the Only Uncle of the Gifted Young , talking in a languid , plangent tenor , now boasting about trivialities , and now making familiar criticisms ( which are invariably ill-received ) , and occasionally quite absent-mindedly producing splendid poetry ... . ''
`` Lord Morley , '' said Dodd .
Then we looked at one another .
`` Maunderings , of course .
It will make the book rather dull .
I doubt if I can report him at length ... .
He will speak upon contemporary letters , the lack of current achievement ... .
I doubt if a man like Lord Reay ever reads at all .
One wonders sometimes what these British literary aristocrats do with all their time .
Probably he left off reading somewhere in the eighties .
He wo n't have noted it , of course , and he will be under the impression that nothing has been written for the past thirty years . ''
I find among the fragments of my departed friend some notes that seem to me to be more or less relevant here .
They are an incomplete report of the proceedings of a section S , devoted to _Poiometry_ , apparently the scientific measurement of literary greatness .
It seems to have been under the control of a special committee , including Mr. James Huneker , Mr. Slosson , Sir Thomas Seccombe , Mr. James Douglas , Mr. Clement K. Shorter , the acting editor of the _Bookman_ , and the competition editress of the _Westminster Gazette_ ... .
The opening was evidently one of those rapid historical sketches frequent in such papers .
`` Little sense of contemporary Greatness among the Elizabethans .
[ Illustration : _Miss Rebecca West , pensive , after writing her well-known opinion of that Great Good Woman-Soul , Miss Ellen Key._ ]
[ Illustration : _The third departure._ ]
`` 'I put all these things together because , indeed , it is only associations of antiquity and prescription and prestige can separate them .
Altogether they constitute the great vague body of man's super-personal mental life , his unselfish life , his growing life , as a premeditating , self-conscious race and destiny .
Here in growing volume , in this comprehensive literature of ours , preserved , selected , criticized , re-stated , continually rather more fined , continually rather more clarified , we have the mind , not of a mortal but of an immortal adventurer .
Whom for the moment , fractionally , infinitesimally , whenever we can forget ourselves in pure feeling , in service , in creative effort or disinterested thought , we are privileged in that measure to become .
This wonder that we celebrate , this literature , is the dawn of human divinity .
In the same peculiar receptacle in which I find this presidential address I found a quantity of other papers and scraps of paper , upon which Boon , I should judge , had been thinking about that address and why he was ashamed to produce it to us , and why he perceived that this audience would dislike Hallery so much that he was obliged to admit that they would go out before his lecture was finished , and why he himself did n't somehow like this Hallery that he had made .
All these writings are in the nature of fragments , some are illegible and more are incomprehensible ; but it is clear that his mind attacked these questions with a most extraordinary width of reference .
I find him writing about the One and the Many , the General and the Particular , the Species and the Individual , declaring that it is through `` the dimensions ( _sic_ ) of space and time '' that `` individuation '' becomes possible , and citing Darwin , Heraclitus , Kant , Plato , and Tagore , all with a view to determining just exactly what it was that irritated people in the breadth and height and expression of Hallery 's views .
Or to be more exact , what he knew would have irritated people with these views if they had ever been expressed .
`` The individual human mind spends itself about equally in headlong flight from the Universal , which it dreads as something that will envelop and subjugate it , and in headlong flight to the Universal , which it seeks as a refuge from its own loneliness and silliness .
It knows very certainly that the Universal will ultimately comprehend and incorporate it , yet it desires always that the Universal should _mother_ it , take it up without injuring it in the slightest degree , foment and nourish its egotism , cherish fondly all its distinctions , give it all the kingdoms of existence to play with ... .
`` I invented Hallery to get rid of myself , but , after all , Hallery is really no more than the shadow of myself , and if I were impersonal and well bred , and if I spoke behind a black screen , it would still be as much my voice as ever .
I do not see how it is possible to prevent the impersonal things coming by and through persons ; but at any rate we can begin to recognize that the person who brings the message is only in his way like the messenger-boy who brings the telegrams .
The writer may have a sensitive mind , the messenger-boy may have nimble heels ; that does not make him the creator of the thing that comes .
Then I think people will be able to listen to such lectures as this of Hallery 's without remembering all the time that it 's a particular human being with a white face and a lisp ... .
And perhaps they will be able to respect literature and fine thought for the sake of the general human mind for which they live and for the sake of their own receptiveness ... . ''
And from that Boon suddenly went off into absurdities .
This Royal Society was essentially an organization of the conservative instincts of man .
Its aim was to stop all this thinking ... .
`` Essentially the work of the schoolmaster is to prepare the young and naturally over-individualized mind for communion with the Mind of the Race .
Essentially his curriculum deals with modes of expression , with languages , grammar , the mathematical system of statement , the various scientific systems of statement , the common legend of history .
All leads up , as the scholar approaches adolescence , to the introduction to living literature , living thought , criticism , and religion .
But when we consider how literature is taught in schools -- -- ''
`` Then one has to assume it is a continuing , coherent mind , that is slowly becoming wider , saner , profounder , more powerful ? ''
`` No , '' said Boon , `` of a child . ''
Boon argued that behind the individualities and immediacies of life there was in reality a consecutive growth of wisdom , that larger numbers of people and a larger proportion of people than ever before were taking part in the World Mind process , and that presently this would become a great conscious general thinking of the race together .
Wilkins admitted that there had been a number of starts in the direction of impersonal understanding and explanation ; indeed , there was something of the sort in every fresh religious beginning ; but he argued that these starts do not show a regular progressive movement , and that none of them had ever achieved any real directive and unifying power over their adherents ; that only a few Christians had ever grasped Christianity , that Brahminism fell to intellectual powder before it touched the crowd , that nowadays there was less sign than ever of the honest intellectuals getting any hold whatever upon the minds and movements of the popular mass ... .
`` The Mind of the Race , '' said Wilkins , `` seems at times to me much more like a scared child cowering in the corner of a cage full of apes . ''
`` It will grow up , '' he snatched .
Boon maintained that there was a spreading thought process , clearly perceptible nowadays , and that those detachments of Wilkins ' were not complete .
He instanced the cheap editions of broad-thinking books , the variety of articles in the modern newspaper , the signs of wide discussions .
Wilkins , on the other hand , asserted a predominant intellectual degeneration ... .
Moreover , Wilkins declared , with the murmurous approval of Dodd , that much even of the Academic thought process was going wrong , that Bergson 's Pragmatism for Ladies was a poor substitute even for Herbert Spencer , that the boom about `` Mendelism '' was a triumph of weak thinking over comprehensive ideas .
`` Exactly why I begin with him , '' said Wilkins .
`` He was a contemporary of Darwin , and it was while Darwin was patiently and industriously building up evidence , that this nonsense , a whole torrent of it , a complete doctrine about the Will to Live , was being poured out .
But what I want you to notice is that while the sort of cautious massing of evidence , the close reasoning , the honesty and veracity , that distinguished the method of Darwin and Huxley , are scarcely to be met with anywhere to-day , this spouting style of doing things is everywhere .
Take any of the stuff of that intellectual jackdaw , Bernard Shaw , and you will find the Schopenhauer method in full development ; caught-up ideas , glib , irrational transitions , wild assertions about the Life Force , about the effects of alcohol , about 'fear-poisoned ' meat , about medical science , about economic processes , about Russia , about the Irish temperament and the English intelligence , about the thoughts and mental processes of everybody and every sort of mind , stuff too incoherent and recklessly positive ever to be systematically answered .
And yet half at least of the English-speaking intelligenzia regards Shaw as a part of the thought process of the world .
Schopenhauer was a pioneer in the game of impudent assertion , very properly disregarded by his own generation ; Shaw 's dementia samples this age .
You see my case ?
In any rationally trained , clear-headed period Shaw would have been looked into , dissected , and disposed of long ago ... .
And here I have two other of the voices that this time respects .
It is all my argument that they are respected now enormously , Boon ; not merely that they exist .
Men to talk and write foolishly , to make groundless positive statements and to misapprehend an opponent there have always been , but this age now tolerates and accepts them .
Here is that invalid Englishman , Houston Stewart Chamberlain , who found a more congenial , intellectual atmosphere in Germany , and this is his great book , 'The Foundations of the Nineteenth Century . '
This book has been received with the utmost solemnity in the highest quarters ; nowhere has it been handed over to the derision which is its only proper treatment .
You remember a rather readable and rather pretentious history we had in our schooldays , full of bad ethnology about Kelts and Anglo-Saxons , called J. R. Green's 'History of the English People ' ; it was part of that movement of professorial barbarity , of braggart race-Imperialism and anti-Irishism , of which Froude and Freeman were leaders ; it smelt of Carlyle and Germany , it helped provoke the Keltic Renascence .
Well , that was evidently , the germ of Herr Chamberlain .
Wilkins turned over the pages .
`` It makes a born Teuton like myself feel his divinity , '' said Wilkins , and read , browsing : `` 'From the moment the Teuton awakes a new world begins to open out -- -- ' Um !
... Oh , here we are again !
`` The stalwart ignorance of it !
Little Latin and less Greek even Ben Jonson allowed our William , and manifestly he was fed on Tudor translations .
And the illiteracy of Michael Angelo is just an inspiration of Chamberlain 's .
He knows his readers .
Now , in itself there is no marvel in this assertive , prejudiced , garrulous ignorance ; it is semi-sober Bierhalle chatter , written down ; and , God forgive us !
most of us have talked in this way at one time or another ; the sign and the wonder for you , Boon , is that this stuff has been taken quite seriously by all Germany and England and America , that it is accepted as first-rank stuff , that it has never been challenged , cut up , and sent to the butterman .
It is Modern Thought .
It is my second sample of the contemporary Mind of the Race .
And now , gentlemen , we come to the third great intellectual high-kicker , Nietzsche .
Nietzsche , I admit , had once a real and valid idea , and his work is built upon that real and valid idea ; it is an idea that comes into the head of every intelligent person who grasps the idea of the secular change of species , the idea of Darwinism , in the course of five or six minutes after the effective grasping .
This is the idea that _man is not final_ .
But Nietzsche was so constituted that to get an idea was to receive a revelation ; this step , that every bright mind does under certain circumstances take , seemed a gigantic stride to him , a stride only possible to him , and for the rest of his lucid existence he resounded variations , he wrote epigrammatic cracker-mottoes and sham Indian apophthegms , round and about his amazing discovery .
And the whole thing is summed up in the title of Dr. Alexander Tille 's 'Von Darwin bis Nietzsche , ' in which this miracle of the obvious , this necessary corollary , is treated as a huge advance of the mind of mankind .
No one slays this kind of thing nowadays .
It goes on and goes on , a perpetually reinforced torrent of unreason washing through the brain of the race .
There was a time when the general intelligence would have resisted and rejected Schopenhauer , Nietzsche , Chamberlain , Shaw ; now it resists such invasions less and less .
That , Boon , is my case . ''
Wilkins , with his little pile of books for reference , his sombre manner , and his persistence , was indeed curiously suggestive of an advocate opening a trial .
The Mind of the Race was far less of a continuity than it was when a generally recognized and understood orthodox Christianity held it together , as a backbone holds together the ribs and limbs and head of a body .
That manifestly was what he was driving at , as Dodd presently complained .
In those stabler days every one with ideas , willingly or unwillingly , had to refer to that doctrinal core , had to link up to it even if the connection was used only as a point of departure .
Now more and more , as in these three examples , people began irresponsibly in the air , with rash assertions about life and race and the tendency of things .
And the louder they shouted , the more fantastic and remarkable they were , the more likely they were to gather a following and establish a fresh vortex in the deliquescent confusion .
On the whole , Boon was disposed to tolerate these dispersed beginnings .
`` We attack truth in open order , '' he said , `` instead of in column . ''
`` Naturally , '' cried Boon , `` after a great achievement there must be a pause .
The Mind of the Race must have its digestive interludes . ''
`` But this is indigestion !
First comes Herbert Spencer , with his misconception of the life process as a struggle of individuals to survive .
His word 'Evolution ' is the quintessence of the misunderstanding ; his image of a steadfast , mechanical unfolding through selfishness , masked plausibly and disastrously the intricate , perplexing vision of the truth .
From that sort of thing we go at a stride to the inevitable Super Man , the megatherium individual of futurity , the large egoist , and all that nonsense .
Then comes a swarm of shallow , incontinent thinkers , anxious to find a simple driving force with a simple name for the whole process ; the 'Life Force ' and 'Will , ' and so on .
These things , my dear Boon , are just the appalling bubbles of gas that show how completely the Mind of the Race has failed to assimilate ... . ''
`` You started the metaphor , '' said Wilkins .
`` But Wilkins perhaps would n't contradict that .
His point is merely that to be exact about words , that God-Mind , that General Mind of yours , is n't exactly to be called the Mind of the Race . ''
The Beginning of `` The Wild Asses of the Devil ''
The winter at the seaside is less agreeable and more bracing than the summer , and there were days when this Author had almost to force himself through the wholesome , necessary routines of his life , when the south-west wind savaged his villa and roared in the chimneys and slapped its windows with gustsful of rain and promised to wet that Author thoroughly and exasperatingly down his neck and round his wrists and ankles directly he put his nose outside his door .
And the grey waves he saw from his window came rolling inshore under the hurrying grey rain-bursts , line after line , to smash along the undercliff into vast , feathering fountains of foam and sud and send a salt-tasting spin-drift into his eyes .
But manfully he would put on his puttees and his water-proof cape and his biggest brierwood pipe , and out he would go into the whurryballoo of it all , knowing that so he would be all the brighter for his nice story-writing after tea .
As he passed this individual the Author had a transitory thought of how much Authors do n't know in the world , how much , for instance , this shivering , cringing body might be hiding within itself , of inestimable value as `` local colour '' if only one could get hold of it for `` putting into '' one 's large acceptable novels .
Why does n't one sometimes tap these sources ?
Kipling , for example , used to do so , with most successful results ... .
And then the Author became aware that this enigma was hurrying to overtake him .
He slackened his pace ... .
The creature was n't asking for a light ; it was begging for a box of matches .
And , what was odd , in quite good English .
`` It 's a hell of a day ! ''
said the Author , more forcible than ever .
The Author slapped his pockets again .
`` You 've got an infernal cold .
Look here , my man -- confound it !
would you like a hot grog ?
He does not simply accept a hot drink ; he informs his host just how hot the drink must be to satisfy him .
He saw the stoker , after a furtive glance at him , deliberately turn the cigar round , place the lighted end in his mouth , inhale strongly , and blow a torrent of sparks and smoke out of his nose .
His firelit face as he did this expressed a diabolical relief .
Then very hastily he reversed the cigar again , and turned round to look at the Author .
The Author turned slowly towards him .
`` We get so tough down there , '' said the stoker , and paused discreetly as the servant came in with the red pepper .
`` I know -- I know I 'm not .
I 'm a devil .
A poor , lost , homeless devil . ''
Do n't mind my rudeness .
Have another nice drink .
Have a hell of a drink .
I wo n't turn you out if you're unhappy -- on a day like this .
Have just a mouthful of pepper , man , and pull yourself together . ''
And suddenly the poor devil caught hold of his arm .
`` Nobody good to me , '' he sobbed .
`` Nobody good to me . ''
And his tears ran down over the Author 's plump little hand -- scalding tears .
And then it became apparent that this person was one of the very lowest types of infernal denizen , and that his role in the dark realms of Dis had been that of watcher and minder of a herd of sinister beings hitherto unknown to our Author , the Devil 's Wild Asses , which pastured in a stretch of meadows near the Styx .
They were , he gathered , unruly , dangerous , and enterprising beasts , amenable only to a certain formula of expletives , which instantly reduced them to obedience .
These expletives the stoker-devil would not repeat ; to do so except when actually addressing one of the Wild Asses would , he explained , involve torments of the most terrible description .
The bare thought of them gave him a shivering fit .
But he gave the Author to understand that to crack these curses as one drove the Wild Asses to and from their grazing on the Elysian fields was a by no means disagreeable amusement .
The ass-herds would try who could crack the loudest until the welkin rang .
But he never found his Wild Asses and after a little time he gave up trying .
`` On a man named Sir Edward Carson . ''
He sought warmth and dryness .
For a time he found a kind of contentment in charge of the upcast furnace of a mine , and then he was superseded by an electric-fan .
While in this position he read a vivid account of the intense heat in the Red Sea , and he was struck by the idea that if he could get a job as stoker upon an Indian liner he might snatch some days of real happiness during that portion of the voyage .
For some time his natural ineptitude prevented his realizing this project , but at last , after some bitter experiences of homelessness during a London December , he had been able to ship on an Indiaward boat -- only to get stranded in Folkestone in consequence of a propeller breakdown .
And so here he was !
`` If I had some one to go with me .
Some one who knew his way about . ''
`` We were wrong , '' said the Author .
`` Say those words ! ''
he shouted quite loudly -- '' say those words !
Then -- we shall have him . ''
But you know those House of Commons ushers .
And at that time their usual alertness had been much quickened by several Suffragette outrages .
Before the devil had got through his second sentence or the Author could get his salt out of his pocket both devil and Author were travelling violently , scruff and pant-seat irresistibly gripped , down Saint Stephen 's Hall ... .
`` There has always been something convulsive and extravagant in human affairs , '' said Wilkins .
`` No public thing , no collective thing , has ever had the sanity of men thinking quietly in a study . ''
There were times during his illness and depression when we sat about Boon very much after the fashion of Job 's Comforters .
And I remember an occasion when Wilkins took upon himself the responsibility for a hopeful view .
There was about Wilkins 's realistic sentimentality something at once akin and repugnant to Boon 's intellectual mysticism , so that for a time Boon listened resentfully , and then was moved to spirited contradiction .
Wilkins declared that the war was like one of those great illnesses that purge the system of a multitude of minor ills .
It was changing the spirit of life about us ; it would end a vast amount of mere pleasure-seeking and aimless extravagance ; it was giving people a sterner sense of duty and a more vivid apprehension of human brotherhood .
This ineffective triviality in so much of our literary life of which Boon complained would give place to a sense of urgent purpose ... .
`` Oh , if you choose to dwell on the horrors -- -- ! ''
`` 'Spartan ideal of duty and discipline . '
`` You have to realize that while the Pacificists talk of the horrible ugliness of war and the necessity of establishing an everlasting world-peace , whiskered old ladies in hydropaths , dons on the _Morning Post_ , chattering district visitors and blustering , bellowing parsons , people who are ever so much more representative of general humanity than we literary oddities -- all that sort of people tucked away somewhere safe , are in a state of belligerent lustfulness and prepared -- oh , prepared to give the very eyes of everybody else in this country , prepared to sacrifice the lives of all their servants and see the poor taxed to the devil , first for a victory over Germany and then for the closest , silliest , loudest imitation of Prussian swagger on our part ( with them , of course , on the very top of it all ) that we can contrive .
That spirit is loose , Wilkins .
All the dowagers are mewing for blood , all the male old women who teach classics and dream of re-action at Oxford and Cambridge , are having the time of their lives .
They trust to panic , to loud accusations , to that fear of complexity that comes with fatigue .
They trust to the exhaustion of delicate purposes and sensitive nerves .
And this force-loving , bullying silliness is far more likely to come out on top , after the distresses of this war , after the decent men are dead in the trenches and the wise ones shouted to silence , than any finely intellectual , necessarily difficult plan to put an end for ever to all such senseless brutalities . ''
The Story of the Last Trump
But he tried in vain .
Whereupon there arose a great argument about the trumpet , whether it was in order or not , whether it was possible for any one to sound it .
For if not , then clearly it was outside the condition of the bet .
And then something incomprehensible happened .
And that was not all , that was not the only strange thing about the disappearance of that battered trumpet .
There was something else , even more difficult to describe , an effect as though for one instant something opened ... .
The young men who worked with Hoskin and Briggs had that clearness of mind which comes of dealing with machinery , and they all felt this indescribable something else , as if for an instant the world wasn't the world , but something lit and wonderful , larger -- --
This is what one of them said of it .
But none of the others felt that they could say anything more definite than that .
Moreover , there was a storm .
All over the world there was a storm that puzzled meteorology , a moment 's gale that left the atmosphere in a state of wild swaygog , rains , tornadoes , depressions , irregularities for weeks .
News came of it from all the quarters of the earth .
`` Now what was that ? ''
`` Now to God the Father , God the Son -- -- ''
He stood up , as though Divinity had come into the room before him .
He felt smitten and about to be smitten .
`` I thought it was because I was rubbing my eyes . ''
`` Brompton , '' he said , `` what are you doing ? ''
He experienced a curious little recession of confidence .
He went on past quite a number of people without saying anything further , and the next person he accosted was a flower-woman sitting by her basket at the corner of Chexington Square .
She was unable to stop him at once when he began to talk to her because she was tying up a big bundle of white chrysanthemums and had an end of string behind her teeth .
And her daughter who stood beside her was the sort of girl who wouldn't say `` Bo ! ''
At that a kind of chill fell upon Mr. Parchester .
He went on across Chexington Square by his own inertia .
He was still about as sure that he had seen God as he had been in his study , but now he was no longer sure that the world would believe that he had .
He felt perhaps that this idea of rushing out to tell people was precipitate and inadvisable .
After all , a priest in the Church of England is only one unit in a great machine ; and in a world-wide spiritual crisis it should be the task of that great machine to act as one resolute body .
This isolated crying aloud in the street was unworthy of a consecrated priest .
It was a dissenting kind of thing to do .
A vulgar individualistic screaming .
He thought suddenly that he would go and tell his Bishop -- the great Bishop Wampach .
He called a taxicab , and within half an hour he was in the presence of his commanding officer .
It was an extraordinarily difficult and painful interview ... .
There was something of invalid peevishness even in the handwriting of Boon 's last story , the Story of the Last Trump .
The distresses of the war had for a time broken down his faith in the Mind of the Race , and so he mocked at the idea that under any sort of threat or warning whatever men 's minds can move out of the grooves in which they run .
And yet in happier moods that was his own idea , and my belief in it came from him .
That he should , in his illness , fall away from that saving confidence which he could give to me , and that he should die before his courage returned , seems just a part of the inexplicable tragedy of life .
Because clearly this end of the Story of the Last Trump is forced and false , is unjust to life .
I know how feebly we apprehend things , I know how we forget , but because we forget it does not follow that we never remember , because we fail to apprehend perfectly it does not follow that we have no understanding .
And so I feel that the true course of the Story of the Last Trump should have been far larger and much more wonderful and subtle than Boon made it .
That instant vision of God would not have been dismissed altogether .
People might have gone on , as Boon tells us they went on , but they would have been haunted nevertheless by a new sense of deep , tremendous things ... .
And so , too , about this war , this dreadful outbreak of brutish violence which has darkened all our lives , I do not think he would have remained despairful .
As his health mended , as the braveries of spring drew near , he would have risen again to the assurance he gave me that the Mind is immortal and invincible .
FLOOR GAMES by ( H ) erbert ( G ) eorge Wells Contents I .
The Toys To Have II .
The Game Of The Wonderful Islands III .
Of The Building Of Cities IV .
Funiculars , Marble Towers , Castles And War Games , But Very Little Of War Games Section I THE TOYS TO HAVE The jolliest indoor games for boys and girls demand a floor , and the home that has no floor upon which games may be played falls so far short of happiness .
It must be a floor covered with linoleum or cork carpet , so that toy soldiers and such-like will stand up upon it , and of a color and surface that will take and show chalk marks ; the common green-colored cork carpet without a pattern is the best of all .
It must be no highway to other rooms , and well lit and airy .
it must be scrubbed -- and then a truce to Floor Games .
Upon such a floor may be made an infinitude of imaginative games , not only keeping boys and girls happy for days together , but building up a framework of spacious and inspiring ideas in them for after life .
The men of tomorrow will gain new strength from nursery floors .
I am going to tell of some of these games and what is most needed to play them ; I have tried them all and a score of others like them with my sons , and all of the games here illustrated have been set out by us .
I am going to tell of them here because I think what we have done will interest other fathers and mothers , and perhaps be of use to them ( and to uncles and such-like tributary sub-species of humanity ) in buying presents for their own and other people 's children .
Now , the toys we play with time after time , and in a thousand permutations and combinations , belong to four main groups .
We have ( 1 ) SOLDIERS , and with these I class sailors , railway porters , civilians , and the lower animals generally , such as I will presently describe in greater detail ; ( 2 ) BRICKS ; ( 3 ) BOARDS and PLANKS ; and ( 4 ) a lot of CLOCKWORK RAILWAY ROLLING-STOCK AND RAILS .
Also there are certain minor objects -- tin ships , Easter eggs , and the like -- of which I shall make incidental mention , that like the kiwi and the duck-billed platypus refuse to be classified .
These we arrange and rearrange in various ways upon our floor , making a world of them .
In doing so we have found out all sorts of pleasant facts , and also many undesirable possibilities ; and very probably our experience will help a reader here and there to the former and save him from the latter .
For instance , our planks and boards , and what one can do with them , have been a great discovery .
Lots of boys and girls seem to be quite without planks and boards at all , and there is no regular trade in them .
The toyshops , we found , did not keep anything of the kind we wanted , and our boards , which we had to get made by a carpenter , are the basis of half the games we play .
The planks and boards we have are of various sizes .
We began with three of two yards by one ; they were made with cross pieces like small doors ; but these we found unnecessarily large , and we would not get them now after our present experience .
The best thickness , we think , is an inch for the larger sizes and three-quarters and a half inch for the smaller ; and the best sizes are a yard square , thirty inches square , two feet , and eighteen inches square -- one or two of each , and a greater number of smaller ones , 18 x 9 , 9 x 9 , and 9 x 4-1/2 .
With the larger ones we make islands and archipelagos on our floor while the floor is a sea , or we make a large island or a couple on the Venice pattern , or we pile the smaller on the larger to make hills when the floor is a level plain , or they roof in railway stations or serve as bridges , in such manner as I will presently illustrate .
And these boards of ours pass into our next most important possession , which is our box of bricks .
( But I was nearly forgetting to tell this , that all the thicker and larger of these boards have holes bored through them .
At about every four inches is a hole , a little larger than an ordinary gimlet hole .
These holes have their uses , as I will tell later , but now let me get on to the box of bricks . )
This , again , was n't a toy-shop acquisition .
It came to us by gift from two generous friends , unhappily growing up and very tall at that ; and they had it from parents who were one of several families who shared in the benefit of a Good Uncle .
I know nothing certainly of this man except that he was a Radford of Plymouth .
I have never learned nor cared to learn of his commoner occupations , but certainly he was one of those shining and distinguished uncles that tower up at times above the common levels of humanity .
At times , when we consider our derived and undeserved share of his inheritance and count the joys it gives us , we have projected half in jest and half in earnest the putting together of a little exemplary book upon the subject of such exceptional men : Celebrated Uncles , it should be called ; and it should stir up all who read it to some striving at least towards the glories of the avuncular crown .
What this great benefactor did was to engage a deserving unemployed carpenter through an entire winter making big boxes of wooden bricks for the almost innumerable nephews and nieces with which an appreciative circle of brothers and sisters had blessed him .
There are whole bricks 4-1/2 inches x 2-1/4 x 1-1/8 ; and there are quarters -- called by those previous owners ( who have now ascended to , we hope but scarcely believe , a happier life near the ceiling ) `` piggys . ''
You note how these sizes fit into the sizes of the boards , and of each size -- we have never counted them , but we must have hundreds .
We can pave a dozen square yards of floor with them .
How utterly we despise the silly little bricks of the toyshops !
They are too small to make a decent home for even the poorest lead soldiers , even if there were hundreds of them , and there are never enough , never nearly enough ; even if you take one at a time and lay it down and say , `` This is a house , '' even then there are not enough .
We see rich people , rich people out of motor cars , rich people beyond the dreams of avarice , going into toyshops and buying these skimpy , sickly , ridiculous pseudo-boxes of bricklets , because they do not know what to ask for , and the toyshops are just the merciless mercenary enemies of youth and happiness -- so far , that is , as bricks are concerned .
Their unfortunate under-parented offspring mess about with these gifts , and do n't make very much of them , and put them away ; and you see their consequences in after life in the weakly-conceived villas and silly suburbs that people have built all round big cities .
Such poor under-nourished nurseries must needs fall back upon the Encyclopedia Britannica , and even that is becoming flexible on India paper !
But our box of bricks almost satisfies .
With our box of bricks we can scheme and build , all three of us , for the best part of the hour , and still have more bricks in the box .
So much now for the bricks .
I will tell later how we use cartridge paper and cardboard and other things to help in our and of the decorative make of plasticine .
Of course , it goes without saying that we despise those foolish , expensive , made-up wooden and pasteboard castles that are sold in shops -- playing with them is like playing with somebody else 's dead game in a state of rigor mortis .
Let me now say a little about toy soldiers and the world to which they belong .
Toy soldiers used to be flat , small creatures in my own boyhood , in comparison with the magnificent beings one can buy to-day .
There has been an enormous improvement in our national physique in this respect .
Now they stand nearly two inches high and look you broadly in the face , and they have the movable arms and alert intelligence of scientifically exercised men .
You get five of them mounted or nine afoot in a box for a small price .
We three like those of British manufacture best ; other makes are of incompatible sizes , and we have a rule that saves much trouble , that all red coats belong to G. P. W. , and all other colored coats to F. R. W. , all gifts , bequests , and accidents notwithstanding .
Also we have sailors ; but , since there are no red-coated sailors , blue counts as red .
Then we have `` beefeaters , '' ( Footnote ; The warders in the Tower of London are called `` beefeaters '' ; the origin of the term is obscure . )
Indians , Zulus , for whom there are special rules .
We find we can buy lead dogs , cats , lions , tigers , horses , camels , cattle , and elephants of a reasonably corresponding size , and we have also several boxes of railway porters , and some soldiers we bought in Hesse-Darmstadt that we pass off on an unsuspecting home world as policemen .
But we want civilians very badly .
We found a box of German from an exaggerated curse of militarism , and even the grocer wears epaulettes .
This might please Lord Roberts and Mr. Leo Maxse , but it certainly does not please us .
I wish , indeed , that we could buy boxes of tradesmen : a blue butcher , a white baker with a loaf of standard bread , a merchant or so ; boxes of servants , boxes of street traffic , smart sets , and so forth .
We could do with a judge and lawyers , or a box of vestrymen .
It is true that we can buy Salvation Army lasses and football players , but we are cold to both of these .
We have , of course , boy scouts .
With such boxes of civilians we could have much more fun than with the running , marching , swashbuckling soldiery that pervades us .
They drive us to reviews ; and it is only emperors , kings , and very silly small boys who can take an undying interest in uniforms and reviews .
And lastly , of our railways , let me merely remark here that we have always insisted upon one uniform gauge and everything we buy fits into and develops our existing railway system .
Nothing is more indicative of the wambling sort of parent and a coterie of witless , worthless uncles than a heap of railway toys of different gauges and natures in the children 's playroom .
And so , having told you of the material we have , let me now tell you of one or two games ( out of the innumerable many ) that we have played .
Of course , in this I have to be a little artificial .
Actual games of the kind I am illustrating here have been played by us , many and many a time , with joy and happy invention and no thought of publication .
They have gone now , those games , into that vaguely luminous and iridescent into which happiness have tried out again points in world of memories all love-engendering must go .
But we our best to set them and recall the good them here .
Section II THE GAME OF THE WONDERFUL ISLANDS In this game the floor is the sea .
Half -- rather the larger half because of some instinctive right of primogeniture -- is assigned to the elder of my two sons ( he is , as it were , its Olympian ) , and the other half goes to his brother .
We distribute our boards about the sea in an archipelagic manner .
We then dress our islands , objecting strongly to too close a scrutiny of our proceedings until we have done .
Here , in the illustration , is such an archipelago ready for its explorers , or rather on the verge of exploration .
There are altogether four islands , two to the reader 's right and two to the left , and the nearer ones are the more northerly ; it is as many as we could get into the camera .
The northern island to the right is most advanced in civilization , and is chiefly temple .
That temple has a flat roof , diversified by domes made of half Easter eggs and cardboard cones .
These are surmounted by decorative work of a flamboyant character in plasticine , designed by G. P. W. An oriental population crowds the courtyard and pours out upon the roadway .
Note the grotesque plasticine monsters who guard the portals , also by G. P. W. , who had a free hand with the architecture of this remarkable specimen of eastern religiosity .
They are nothing , you may be sure , to the gigantic idols inside , out of the reach of the sacrilegious camera .
To the right is a tropical thatched hut .
The thatched roof is really that nice ribbed paper that comes round bottles -- a priceless boon to these games .
All that comes into the house is saved for us .
The owner of the hut lounges outside the door .
He is a dismounted cavalry-corps man , and he owns one cow .
His fence , I may note , belonged to a little wooden farm we bought in Switzerland .
Its human inhabitants are scattered ; its beasts follow a precarious living as wild guinea-pigs on the islands to the south .
Your attention is particularly directed to the trees about and behind the temple , which thicken to a forest on the further island to the right .
These trees we make of twigs taken from trees and bushes in the garden , and stuck into holes in our boards .
Formerly we lived in a house with a little wood close by , and our forests were wonderful .
Now we are restricted to our garden , and we could get nothing for this set out but jasmine and pear .
Both have wilted a little , and are not nearly such spirited trees as you can make out of fir trees , for instance .
It is for these woods chiefly that we have our planks perforated with little holes .
No tin trees can ever be so plausible and various and jolly as these .
With a good garden to draw upon one can make terrific sombre woods , and then lie down and look through them at lonely horsemen or wandering beasts .
( `` What is he doing , the great god Pan , Down in the reeds by the river ? ''
The fences at the ends of the platforms are pieces of wood belonging to the game of Matador -- that splendid and very educational construction game , hailing , I believe , from Hungary .
There is also , I regret to say , a blatant advertisement of Jab 's `` Hair Color , '' showing the hair .
( In the photograph the hair does not come out very plainly . )
This is by G. P. W. , who seems marked out by destiny to be the advertisement-writer of the next generation .
He spends much of his scanty leisure inventing and drawing advertisements of imaginary commodities .
Oblivious to many happy , beautiful , and noble things in life , he goes about studying and imitating the literature of the billboards .
He and his brother write newspapers almost entirely devoted to these annoying appeals .
You will note , too , the placard at the mouth of the railway tunnel urging the existence of Jinks ' Soap upon the passing traveller .
The oblong object on the placard represents , no doubt , a cake of this offensive and aggressive commodity .
The zoological garden flaunts a placard , `` Zoo , two cents pay , '' and the grocer 's picture of a cabbage with `` Get Them '' is not to be ignored .
F. R. W. is more like the London County Council in this respect , and prefers bare walls .
`` Returning from the station , '' as the guide-books say , and `` giving one more glance '' at the passengers who are waiting for the privilege of going round the circle in open cars and returning in a prostrated condition to the station again , and `` observing '' what admirable platforms are made by our 9 x 4-1/2 pieces , we pass out to the left into the village street .
A motor omnibus ( a one-horse hospital cart in less progressive days ) stands waiting for passengers ; and , on our way to the Cherry Tree Inn , we remark two nurses , one in charge of a child with a plasticine head .
The landlord of the inn is a small grotesque figure of plaster ; his sign is fastened on by a pin .
No doubt the refreshment supplied here has an enviable reputation , to judge by the alacrity with which a number of riflemen move to-wards the door .
The inn , by the by , like the station and some private houses , is roofed with stiff paper .
These stiff-paper roofs are one of our great inventions .
We get thick , stiff paper at twopence a sheet and cut it to the sizes we need .
After the game is over , we put these roofs inside one another and stick them into the bookshelves .
The roof one folds and puts away will live to roof another day .
Passing in front of the town hall , and turning to the right , we approach the zoological gardens .
Here we pass two of our civilians : a gentleman in black , a lady , and a large boy scout , presumably their son .
We enter the gardens , which are protected by a bearded janitor , and remark at once a band of three performing dogs , who are , as the guide-book would say , `` discoursing sweet music . ''
In neither ward of the city does there seem to be the slightest restraint upon the use of musical instruments .
It is no place for neurotic people .
We then began to humanise that wild and fearful fowl , the gun .
We decided that a gun could not be fired if there were not six -- afterwards we reduced the number to four -- men within six inches of it .
And we ruled that a gun could not both fire and move in the same general move : it could either be fired or moved ( or left alone ) .
If there were less than six men within six inches of a gun , then we tried letting it fire as many shots as there were men , and we permitted a single man to move a gun , and move with it as far as he could go by the rules -- a foot , that is , if he was an infantry-man , and two feet if he was a cavalry-man .
We abolished altogether that magical freedom of an unassisted gun to move two feet .
And on such rules as these we fought a number of battles .
They were interesting , but not entirely satisfactory .
We took no prisoners -- a feature at once barbaric and unconvincing .
The battles lingered on a long time , because we shot with extreme care and deliberation , and they were hard to bring to a decisive finish .
The guns were altogether too predominant .
They prevented attacks getting home , and they made it possible for a timid player to put all his soldiers out of sight behind hills and houses , and bang away if his opponent showed as much as the tip of a bayonet .
Monsieur Bloch seemed vindicated , and Little War had become impossible .
And there was something a little absurd , too , in the spectacle of a solitary drummer-boy , for example , marching off with a gun .
So the fight wears on .
Guns are lost or won , hills or villages stormed or held ; suddenly it grows clear that the scales are tilting beyond recovery , and the loser has nothing left but to contrive how he may get to the back line and safety with the vestiges of his command ... .
[ Illustration : Fig .
2 -- Battle of Hook 's Farm .
A Near View of the Blue Army ]
( 5 ) In making his move a player must move or fire his guns if he wants to do so , before moving his men .
To this rule of `` Guns First '' there is to be no exception .
Either the numbers taking part in the melee on each side are equal or unequal .
( b ) If they are unequal , then the inferior force is either isolated or ( measuring from the points of contact ) not isolated .
And the player who has just completed the move , the one who has charged , decides , when there is any choice , which men in the melee , both of his own and of his antagonist , shall die and which shall be prisoners or captors .
( 1 ) One is the Fight to the Finish .
You move in from any points you like on the back line and try to kill , capture , or drive over his back line the whole of the enemy 's force .
You play the game for points ; you score 100 for the victory , and 10 for every gun you hold or are in a position to take , 1-1/2 for every cavalry-man , 1 for every infantry-man still alive and uncaptured , 1/2 for every man of yours prisoner in the hands of the enemy , and 1/2 for every prisoner you have taken .
If the battle is still undecided when both forces are reduced below fifteen men , the battle is drawn and the 100 points for victory are divided .
( 3 ) In the Defensive Game , a force , the defenders , two-thirds as strong as its antagonist , tries to prevent the latter arriving , while still a quarter of its original strength , upon the defender 's back line .
The Country must be made by one or both of the players before it is determined which shall be defender .
The players then toss for choice of sides , and the winner of the toss becomes the defender .
He puts out his force over the field on his own side , anywhere up to the distance of one move off the middle line -- that is to say , he must not put any man within one move of the middle line , but he may do so anywhere on his own side of that limit -- and then the loser of the toss becomes first player , and sets out his men a move from his back line .
The defender may open fire forthwith ; he need not wait until after the second move of the first player , as the second player has to do .
Now for a while you listen to General H. G. W. , of the Blue Army .
You hear tales of victory .
The photographs of the battlefields are by a woman war-correspondent , A. C. W. , a daring ornament of her sex .
I vanish , but I will return .
Here , then , is the story of the battle of Hook 's Farm .
`` Red had now sighted us .
Throughout the affair he showed a remarkably poor stomach for gun-fire , and this was his undoing .
Moreover , he was tempted by the poorness of our cover on our right to attempt to outflank and enfilade us there .
Accordingly , partly to get cover from our two central guns and partly to outflank us , he sent the whole of his left wing to the left of Firely Church , where , except for the gun , it became almost a negligible quantity .
The gun came out between the church and the wood into a position from which it did a considerable amount of mischief to the infantry on our right , and nearly drove our rightmost gun in upon its supports .
Meanwhile , Red 's two guns on his right came forward to Hook 's Farm , rather badly supported by his infantry .
Figure 6b shows exactly the same stage as figure 6a , that is to say , the end of Blue 's third move .
A cavalry-man lies dead at the tail of Red's middle gun , an infantry-man a little behind it .
His rightmost gun is abandoned and partly masked , but not hidden , from the observer , by a tree to the side of the farmhouse .
And now , what is Red to do ?
Moreover , on a big floor with an extensive country it is possible to begin moving with moves double or treble the length here specified , and to come down to moves of the ordinary lengths when the troops are within fifteen or twelve or ten feet of each other .
To players with the time and space available I would suggest using a quite large country , beginning with treble moves , and , with the exception of a select number of cavalry scouts , keeping the soldiers in their boxes with the lids on , and moving the boxes as units .
( This boxing idea is a new one , and affords a very good substitute for the curtain ; I have tried it twice for games in the open air where the curtain was not available . )
Neither side would , of course , know what the other had in its boxes ; they might be packed regiments or a mere skeleton force .
Each side would advance on the other by double or treble moves behind a screen of cavalry scouts , until a scout was within ten feet of a box on the opposite side .
Then the contents of that particular box would have to be disclosed and the men stood out .
Troops without any enemy within twenty feet could be returned to their boxes for facility in moving .
Playing on such a scale would admit also of the introduction of the problem of provisions and supplies .
Little toy Army Service waggons can be bought , and it could be ruled that troops must have one such waggon for every fifty men within at least six moves .
Moreover , ammunition carts may be got , and it may be ruled that one must be within two moves of a gun before the latter can be fired .
All these are complications of the War Game , and so far I have not been able to get together sufficient experienced players to play on this larger , more elaborate scale .
It is only after the smaller simpler war game here described has been played a number of times , and its little dodges mastered completely , that such more warlike devices become practicable .
THIS little book has , I hope , been perfectly frank about its intentions .
It is not a book upon Kriegspiel .
It gives merely a game that may be played by two or four or six amateurish persons in an afternoon and evening with toy soldiers .
But it has a very distinct relation to Kriegspiel ; and since the main portion of it was written and published in a magazine , I have had quite a considerable correspondence with military people who have been interested by it , and who have shown a very friendly spirit towards it -- in spite of the pacific outbreak in its concluding section .
They tell me -- what I already a little suspected -- that Kriegspiel , as it is played by the British Army , is a very dull and unsatisfactory exercise , lacking in realism , in stir and the unexpected , obsessed by the umpire at every turn , and of very doubtful value in waking up the imagination , which should be its chief function .
I am particularly indebted to Colonel Mark Sykes for advice and information in this matter .
He has pointed out to me the possibility of developing Little Wars into a vivid and inspiring Kriegspiel , in which the element of the umpire would be reduced to a minimum ; and it would be ungrateful to him , and a waste of an interesting opportunity , if I did not add this Appendix , pointing out how a Kriegspiel of real educational value for junior officers may be developed out of the amusing methods of Little War .
If Great War is to be played at all , the better it is played the more humanely it will be done .
I see no inconsistency in deploring the practice while perfecting the method .
But I am a civilian , and Kriegspiel is not my proper business .
I am deeply preoccupied with a novel I am writing , and so I think the best thing I can do is just to set down here all the ideas that have cropped up in my mind , in the footsteps , so to speak , of Colonel Sykes , and leave it to the military expert , if he cares to take the matter up , to reduce my scattered suggestions to a system .
Upon such a country a Kriegspiel could be played with rules upon the lines of the following sketch rules , which are the result of a discussion between Colonel Sykes and myself , and in which most of the new ideas are to be ascribed to Colonel Sykes .
We proffer them , not as a finished set of rules , but as material for anyone who chooses to work over them , in the elaboration of what we believe will be a far more exciting and edifying Kriegspiel than any that exists at the present time .
The game may be played by any number of players , according to the forces engaged and the size of the country available .
Each side will be under the supreme command of a General , who will be represented by a cavalry soldier .
The player who is General must stand at or behind his representative image and within six feet of it .
His signalling will be supposed to be perfect , and he will communicate with his subordinates by shout , whisper , or note , as he thinks fit .
I suggest he should be considered invulnerable , but Colonel Sykes has proposed arrangements for his disablement .
He would have it that if the General falls within the zone of destruction of a shell he must go out of the room for three moves ( injured ) ; and that if he is hit by rifle-fire or captured he shall quit the game , and be succeeded by his next subordinate .
It is suggested that : Infantry shall move one foot .
Cavalry shall move three feet .
The above moves are increased by one half for troops in twos or fours on a road .
Royal Engineers shall move two feet .
Royal Artillery shall move two feet .
Transport and Supply shall move one foot on roads , half foot across country .
The General shall move six feet ( per motor ) , three feet across country .
Boats shall move one foot .
In moving uphill , one contour counts as one foot ; downhill , two contours count as one foot .
Where there are four contours to one foot vertical the hill is impassable for wheels unless there is a road .
Men surrounded and besieged must be victualled at the following rate : --
In the event of supplies failing , the following consequences ensue : --
To destroy a railway bridge R.E .
take two moves ; to repair , R.E .
To destroy a railway culvert R.E .
take one move ; to repair R.E .
To destroy a river road bridge R.E .
take one move ; to repair , R.E .
Entrenchments can be made by infantry in four moves .
* They are to be strips of wood two inches high tacked to the country , or wooden bricks two inches high .
Two men may make an inch of entrenchment .
At less than two feet and more than one foot , the cavalry loses one man for every ten charged , and the infantry two men for each sabre charging .
Thus at more than two feet one infantry-man kills three cavalry-men , and fifteen cavalry-men one infantry-man .
If the numbers are unequal , the melee rules for Little Wars obtain if the ground is level .
We hope , if these suggestions `` catch on , '' to induce them to manufacture a type of soldier more exactly suited to the needs of the game , including tray carriers for troops in formation and ( what is at present not attainable ) dismountable cavalry that will stand .
he said , looking up in response to an inquiry .
`` For my part I incline to the good old classical allusion .
It -- it makes Science res -- .
Gives it a touch of old-fashioned dignity .
I have been thinking ...
I do n't know if you will think it absurd of me ... .
A little fancy is surely occasionally permissible ... .
The nutrition of a possible Hercules ?
You know it _might_ ...
The idea was Mr. Bensington 's .
But as it was suggested to him by one of Professor Redwood 's contributions to the Philosophical Transactions , he very properly consulted that gentleman before he carried it further .
Besides which it was , as a research , a physiological , quite as much as a chemical inquiry .
but with bursts and intermissions of this sort ,
_____ / / _____/ / / _____/ / / /
The night after his conversation with Redwood Mr. Bensington could scarcely sleep a wink .
He did seem once to get into a sort of doze , but it was only for a moment , and then he dreamt he had dug a deep hole into the earth and poured in tons and tons of the Food of the Gods , and the earth was swelling and swelling , and all the boundaries of the countries were bursting , and the Royal Geographical Society was all at work like one great guild of tailors letting out the equator ... .
And after that she was greatly offended and had to be apologised to , and the prospect of ever trying the Food of the Gods upon tadpoles in their flat at any rate vanished completely in the apology .
Directly he thought of it , he thought of it as a poultry farm .
He was suddenly taken with a vision of wildly growing chicks .
He conceived a picture of coops and runs , outsize and still more outsize coops , and runs progressively larger .
Chicks are so accessible , so easily fed and observed , so much drier to handle and measure , that for his purpose tadpoles seemed to him now , in comparison with them , quite wild and uncontrollable beasts .
He was quite puzzled to understand why he had not thought of chicks instead of tadpoles from the beginning .
Among other things it would have saved all this trouble with his cousin Jane .
And when he suggested this to Redwood , Redwood quite agreed with him .
`` I have n't theen much of 'im yet , '' said Mr. Skinner .
`` But as far as I can make 'im out 'e theems to be a thtewpid o ' fool . ''
The allusion towards the end referred to a milk pudding with which some Herakleophorbia II .
had got itself mixed with painful and very nearly fatal results to the Skinners .
These things brought back to Mr. Bensington his early and forgotten delight in life ; before him the promise of his discovery grew bright and joyful , and it seemed to him that indeed he must have come upon the happiest day in his life .
And when in the sunlit run by the sandy bank under the shadow of the pine trees he saw the chicks that had eaten the food he had mixed for them , gigantic and gawky , bigger already than many a hen that is married and settled and still growing , still in their first soft yellow plumage ( just faintly marked with brown along the back ) , he knew indeed that his happiest day had come .
`` That it _asn't_ , Sir , '' said Mrs. Skinner with her arms folded , smiling coyly behind her nose .
`` We do n't seem to have had time to clean it not since we been 'ere ... . ''
And he turned from these things at once to remark -- what had been for some time in his mind -- '' I _think_ , Skinner -- you know , I shall kill one of these chicks -- as a specimen .
I think we will kill it this afternoon , and I will take it back with me to London . ''
`` I should like , '' he said , `` I should like very much , to have some relic -- some memento -- of this particular brood at this particular day . ''
`` Oh I if you do _that_ , '' said Mr. Bensington 's cousin Jane , `` instead of using your eyes like a sensible person -- ''
`` I _think_ it 's a chick , '' said Redwood .
`` Hang Winkles ! ''
`` Big as horses , '' said Bensington .
`` And by Jove ! ''
said Bensington , coming round suddenly with a flash in his spectacles , `` so will your little boy ! ''
That happened early in June .
For some weeks Bensington was kept from revisiting the Experimental Farm by a severe imaginary catarrh , and one necessary flying visit was made by Redwood .
He returned an even more anxious-looking parent than he had gone .
Altogether there were seven weeks of steady , uninterrupted growth ... .
Most of the other reports were of mere passings or descents .
A picnic party was dispersed at Aldington Knoll and all its sweets and jam consumed , and a puppy was killed and torn to pieces near Whitstable under the very eyes of its mistress ... .
`` We fed 'em up to yethterday , thwelp me , '' said Mr. Skinner , `` But thith morning we did n't _dare_ , Thir .
The noithe of the waptheth wath -- thomething awful , Thir .
They wath coming ont -- dothenth .
Ath big ath 'enth .
I thayth , to 'er , I thayth you juth thow me on a button or two , I thayth , for I ca n't go to London like thith , I thayth , and I'll go up to Mithter Benthington , I thayth , and ekthplain thingth to 'im .
And you thtop in thith room till I come back to you , I thayth , and keep the windowth thhut jutht ath tight ath ever you can , I thayth . ''
The features about the roots of her nose wrinkled with determination .
She had had enough of it !
Skinner might come back there if he liked .
You figure her , I hope , with her white bundle , a sort of erect black ant , hurrying along the little white path-thread athwart the downland slopes under the hot sun of the summer afternoon .
On she struggled after her resolute indefatigable nose , and the poppies in her bonnet quivered perpetually and her spring-side boots grew whiter and whiter with the downland dust .
Flip-flap , flip-flap went her footfalls through the still heat of the day , and persistently , incurably , her umbrella sought to slip from under the elbow that retained it .
The mouth wrinkle under her nose was pursed to an extreme resolution , and ever and again she told her umbrella to come up or gave her tightly clutched bundle a vindictive jerk .
And at times her lips mumbled with fragments of some foreseen argument between herself and Skinner .
`` We 'ave n't 'ad much time to think of _waptheth_ , '' said the station-master agreeably .
`` We 've been too busy with your brasted 'ens , '' and he broke the news of the pullets to Mr. Skinner as one might break the window of an adverse politician .
`` No fear ! ''
said the station-master -- as though even he drew the line somewhere in the matter of knowledge .
`` I wath thinking of the waptheth more particularly , '' said Skinner .
And then , with , an air of circumspection that would have awakened suspicion in a week-old baby , and laying the accent heavily on most of the words he chose , he asked , `` I _thuppothe nobody_ 'ath n't '_eard_ of any other _big_ thingth , about , 'ave they ?
Big _dogth_ or _catth_ or anything of _that_ thort ?
Theemth to me if thereth big henth and big waptheth comin ' on -- ''
`` More'n a tiger , '' said Witherspoon ... .
When at last Skinner followed the lonely footpath over the swelling field that separated Hickleybrow from the sombre pine-shaded hollow in whose black shadows the gigantic canary-creeper grappled silently with the Experimental Farm , he followed it alone .
`` It 's all right , '' said young Fulcher , ending a silence .
`` Do n't see any lights , '' said Witherspoon .
The inexplicable part of it all is the absence of any indisputable remains of Skinner !
`` Nonsense , '' said he .
Then he heard quite distinctly a soft pattering of feet in pursuit along the road .
That was the first thing the brickmaker saw .
There are those who have blamed the man for that , but until I know my own courage better , I hesitate to join their number .
`` It 's too much to hope , '' said Bensington , `` that one of the wasps -- ''
Bensington had put the most exciting novel conceivable on the little table that carried his electric standard .
He joined the fingers of his opposed hands very carefully and regarded them .
`` Redwood , '' he said .
`` Do they say much about _Us_ ? ''
`` I wonder if Skinner was right about those big rats -- ''
He came and stood by Bensington 's chair .
He indicated the closed door .
`` It is another instance , '' he generalised , `` of the thing that is continually happening .
We -- if indeed I may presume to the adjective -- _scientific_ men -- we work of course always for a theoretical result -- a purely theoretical result .
But , incidentally , we do set forces in operation -- _new_ forces .
We must n't control them -- and nobody else _can_ .
Practically , Redwood , the thing is out of our hands .
_We_ supply the material -- ''
`` And then what 'll he do ? ''
`` Why solitary ? ''
he said , and repeated still more darkly , `` _Why_ solitary ? ''
`` But you do n't propose -- - ? ''
`` What do you mean ? ''
Bensington was saying , regardless of his approach .
`` Well , why do n't you stop it ? ''
`` _Buy the place_ ? ''
I knew you chaps would fumble this .
_What are you to do_ ?
Why -- what I tell you .
Go up the street to the gunsmith 's , of course .
Yes -- there 's only one shop .
Not elephant guns -- no !
Not army rifles -- too small .
Say it 's to kill -- kill a bull .
Say it 's to shoot buffalo !
How the deuce are they to understand that ?
Because we _want_ eight .
Get a lot of ammunition .
Do n't get guns without ammunition -- No !
Take the lot in a cab to -- where 's the place ?
Charing Cross , then .
There 's a train -- -Well , the first train that starts after two .
Think you can do it ?
Get eight at a post-office , of course .
Gun licenses , you know .
It 's rats , man .
`` Where 's the telephone , Bensington ? ''
Bensington wheeled about obediently and led the way .
`` Plaster of Paris -- any sort of plaster -- bung up nest -- holes -- you know .
That _I'd_ better get . ''
He dismissed this obscure problem , meditated for a space upon his watch , and decided there would be just time to drop into a restaurant and get some lunch before he hunted up the plaster of Paris and took it to Charing Cross .
`` Who _was_ he ? ''
said the high official , caressing the arm Cossar had gripped , and smiling with knit brows .
Bensington , with a gun between his knees , sitting beside Cossar in the dog-cart , developed a long germinated amazement .
All they were doing was , no doubt , as Cossar insisted , quite the obvious thing to do , only -- !
In England one so rarely does the obvious thing .
He glanced from his neighbour 's feet to the boldly sketched hands upon the reins .
Cossar had apparently never driven before , and he was keeping the line of least resistance down the middle of the road by some no doubt quite obvious but certainly unusual light of his own .
`` Them big rats is nuts on 'orses , '' the trolley driver kept on repeating .
Cossar surveyed the controversy for a moment .
`` Get the things out of that waggonette , '' he said , and one of his men , a tall , fair , dirty engineer , obeyed .
These men turned about and stared at Redwood 's party .
`` The waspses keeps a comin ' and a goin ' , '' said old Fulcher .
`` Ca n't see as they bring anything . ''
`` The canary creeper 's got in among the pine trees now , '' said the man with the lorgnette .
`` It was n't there this morning .
You can see it grow while you watch it . ''
`` Rats about ? ''
`` Hullo there ! ''
A sense of the duties of friendship returned to Redwood .
`` Is Mr. Bensington hurt ? ''
It became clearer to Redwood that he must have shot Bensington .
He forgot the cuts upon his face , arose and came back to find Bensington seated on the ground and rubbing his shoulder .
Bensington looked over his glasses .
`` We peppered him , Redwood , '' he said , and then : `` He tried to jump over me , and knocked me down .
But I let him have it with both barrels , and my !
how it has hurt my shoulder , to be sure . ''
`` I killed that rat , '' said one of the men .
When things were a little ship-shape again Redwood went and stared at the huge misshapen corpse .
The brute lay on its side , with its body slightly bent .
Its rodent teeth overhanging its receding lower jaw gave its face a look of colossal feebleness , of weak avidity .
It seemed not in the least ferocious or terrible .
Its fore-paws reminded him of lank emaciated hands .
Except for one neat round hole with a scorched rim on either side of its neck , the creature was absolutely intact .
He meditated over this fact for some time .
`` There must have been two rats , '' he said at last , turning away .
`` Whoo-z-z z-z-z-z-Z-Z-Z , '' from the distant wasps ' nest , `` whoo oo zoo-oo . ''
They got their stores into the house , which had evidently been ransacked by the rats after the flight of Mrs. Skinner , and four of the men took the two horses back to Hickleybrow .
They dragged the dead rat through the hedge and into a position commanded by the windows of the house , and incidentally came upon a cluster of giant earwigs in the ditch .
These creatures dispersed hastily , but Cossar reached out incalculable limbs and managed to kill several with his boots and gun-butt .
Then two of the men hacked through several of the main stems of the canary creeper -- huge cylinders they were , a couple of feet in diameter , that came out by the sink at the back ; and while Cossar set the house in order for the night , Bensington , Redwood , and one of the assistant electricians went cautiously round by the fowl runs in search of the rat-holes .
`` If they do n't -- '' reflected Bensington .
To think of all that a harmless-looking discovery in chemistry may lead to !
A sequence of echoes and a shout .
When the Expedition had finished refreshment , the night had fully come .
The stars were at their brightest , and a growing pallor towards Hankey heralded the moon .
The watch on the rat-holes had been maintained , but the watchers had shifted to the hill slope above the holes , feeling this a safer firing-point .
They squatted there in a rather abundant dew , fighting the damp with whisky .
The others rested in the house , and the three leaders discussed the night 's work with the men .
The moon rose towards midnight , and as soon as it was clear of the downs , every one except the rat-hole sentinels started off in single file , led by Cossar , towards the wasps ' nest .
said one of the men .
`` He fell down . ''
`` They came out one after the other . ''
`` He ran past the nettles and fell down , '' volunteered the man who ran away .
Cossar was able to take care of himself , of course !
Suddenly Bensington saw something that made him shout a windless `` HI ! ''
In a second three rats had projected themselves from the dark tangle of the creeper towards Cossar .
For three seconds Cossar stood unaware of them , and then he had become the most active thing in the world .
He did n't fire his gun .
Apparently he had no time to aim , or to think of aiming ; he ducked a leaping rat , Bensington saw , and then smashed at the back of its head with the butt of his gun .
The monster gave one leap and fell over itself .
Cossar was continually more wonderful .
He produced great handfuls of cotton wool and stuffed them in his ears -- Bensington wondered why .
Then he loaded his gun with a quarter charge of powder .
Who else could have thought of that ?
Wonderland culminated with the disappearance of Cossar 's twin realms of boot sole up the central hole .
Cossar was on all fours with two guns , one trailing on each side from a string under his chin , and his most trusted assistant , a little dark man with a grave face , was to go in stooping behind him , holding a lantern over his head .
Everything had been made as sane and obvious and proper as a lunatic 's dream .
The wool , it seems , was on account of the concussion of the rifle ; the man had some too .
So long as the rats turned tail on Cossar no harm could come to him , and directly they headed for him he would see their eyes and fire between them .
Since they would have to come down the cylinder of the hole , Cossar could hardly fail to hit them .
It was , Cossar insisted , the obvious method , a little tedious perhaps , but absolutely certain .
As the assistant stooped to enter , Bensington saw that the end of a ball of twine had been tied to the tail of his coat .
By this he was to draw in the rope if it should be needed to drag out the bodies of the rats .
There was an interminable suspense .
He watched the rope creep into the hole , and it seemed as though it had become animated by a serpentine intelligence -- for the darkness made the twine invisible .
At last it stopped crawling , and there was a long pause .
Then what seemed to Bensington the queerest monster of all crept slowly from the hole , and resolved itself into the little engineer emerging backwards .
After him , and ploughing deep furrows , Cossar's boots thrust out , and then came his lantern-illuminated back ... .
But there were one or two people outside the public , as it were , who did already take that further glance , and some it seems were frightened by what they saw there .
There was young Caterham , for example , cousin of the Earl of Pewterstone , and one of the most promising of English politicians , who , taking the risk of being thought a faddist , wrote a long article in the _Nineteenth Century and After_ to suggest its total suppression .
And -- in certain of his moods , there was Bensington .
`` Serious consequences , '' he screamed , `` of course !
Why , man , it 's the only chance you 'll ever get of a serious consequence !
And you want to shirk it ! ''
For a moment his indignation was speechless , `` It 's downright Wicked ! ''
he said at last , and repeated explosively , `` Wicked ! ''
`` What did you say ? ''
`` Mere obvious nothings .
But as you see -- - !
Takes it up with perfect gravity .
Treats the thing as an attack .
Says there is already a sufficient waste of public money in elementary schools without this .
Tells the old stories about piano lessons again -- _you_ know .
No one ; he says , wishes to prevent the children of the lower classes obtaining an education suited to their condition , but to give them a food of this sort will be to destroy their sense of proportion utterly .
What Good will it do , he asks , to make poor people six-and-thirty feet high ?
He really believes , you know , that they _will_ be thirty-six feet high . ''
`` So they would _be_ , '' said Bensington , `` if you gave them our food at all regularly .
But nobody said anything -- - ''
`` It 's in many ways an Exceptional discovery . ''
`` There is , '' said Redwood , `` in every discovery . ''
`` If the worst comes to the worst , '' said Redwood at last , in a strenuously calm voice , `` I shall give the Food to my little Teddy with my own hands . ''
Then he turned to Redwood .
`` I 'm glad to find you here , '' he began ; `` the fact is -- ''
`` I can put the whole thing right .
I can make it perfectly clear , first , that the stuff is controllable , and , secondly , that nothing short of a miracle is needed before anything like that catastrophe at Hickleybrow can possibly happen again .
That is just what is wanted , an authoritative assurance .
Of course , I could speak with more confidence if I knew -- But that 's quite by the way .
And just at present there 's something else , another little matter , upon which I 'm wanting to consult you .
The fact is -- Well -- I happen to be in a slight difficulty , and you can help me out . ''
`` No fear , '' said Redwood .
`` There is n't a recipe .
It 's no good , Winkles , if you 'll pardon my frankness .
I 'll make you the powders myself . ''
When Winkles had gone Bensington came and stood on the hearth-rug and looked down at Redwood .
`` Her Serene Highness ! ''
`` There 'll be a fearful row , '' said Bensington .
`` So soon as they really see she is going on growing . ''
`` They 're bound to do something . ''
`` I suppose we have , '' said Bensington , staring at his toes .
We've got to swim .
And your boy will have to swim , and Cossar 's boys -- he's given it to all three of them .
Nothing partial about Cossar -- all or nothing !
And Her Serene Highness .
We are going on making the Food .
We 're only just in the dawn of the beginning , Redwood .
It 's evident all sorts of things are to follow .
But I ca n't imagine them , Redwood .
`` I 've half a mind , '' he adventured , `` that Caterham is right .
It 's going to destroy the Proportions of Things .
It 's going to dislocate -- What is n't it going to dislocate ? ''
`` You ought to have been some sort of little vegetable , Bensington , '' said Cossar -- '' that 's what you ought to have been .
Something growing over a rockery .
Here you are , fearfully and wonderfully made , and all you think you 're made for is just to sit about and take your vittles .
D'you think this world was made for old women to mop about in ?
Well , anyhow , you ca n't help yourselves now -- you 've _got_ to go on . ''
he said , to point the allusion , `` make it SO ! ''
There is , it seems , an upward limit to the pride of maternity , and this in the case of Mrs. Redwood was reached when her offspring completed his sixth month of terrestrial existence , broke down his high-class bassinet-perambulator , and was brought home , bawling , in the milk-truck .
Young Redwood at that time weighed fifty-nine and a half pounds , measured forty-eight inches in height , and gripped about sixty pounds .
He was carried upstairs to the nursery by the cook and housemaid .
After that , discovery was only a question of days .
One afternoon Redwood came home from his laboratory to find his unfortunate wife deep in the fascinating pages of _The Mighty Atom_ , and at the sight of him she put the book aside and ran violently forward and burst into tears on his shoulder .
`` A baby in a bath-chair ? ''
`` It 's like a cripple . ''
`` I can never love him , '' she wailed , `` never !
He 's too much for me !
I can never be a mother to him , such as I meant to be ! ''
They worked together harmoniously , but Redwood supplied most of the educational theory required ...
`` I think I must give him a little theatre .
`` The best thing I can do , '' said Redwood , following out some divergent line of thought , `` is to teach him myself . ''
`` Come in , '' said Redwood , and he did , shutting the door behind him .
`` There is n't a moment , Sir , '' he said .
`` They 've got your number from the board in the hall !
They 're coming straight up ! ''
`` It 's our only chance now , '' he said .
`` Steady on ! ''
cried the clerk , and gripped his ankle .
It was quite horrible having his ankle gripped like that , and Mr. Bensington tightened his hold on the iron staple above to a drowning clutch , and gave a faint squeal of terror .
His stooping shoulders , his pink appearance , his beaming glasses , became a `` feature '' of Tunbridge Wells .
No one was the least bit unkind to him , and indeed the place and the Hotel seemed very glad to have the distinction of his presence .
Nothing could rob him of that distinction now .
And though he preferred not to follow the development of his great invention in the daily papers , yet when he crossed the Lounge of the Hotel or walked down the Pantiles and heard the whisper , `` There he is !
That 's him ! ''
it was not dissatisfaction that softened his mouth and gleamed for a moment in his eye .
This little figure , this minute little figure , launched the Food of the Gods upon the world !
One does not know which is the most amazing , the greatness or the littleness of these scientific and philosophical men .
You figure him there on the Pantiles , in the overcoat trimmed with fur .
He stands under that chinaware window where the spring spouts , and holds and sips the glass of chalybeate water in his hand .
One bright eye over the gilt rim is fixed , with an expression of inscrutable severity , on Cousin Jane , `` Mm , '' he says , and sips .
The village was looking its very best just then , under that western light .
It lay down along the valley beneath the beechwoods of the Hanger , a beading of thatched and red-tiled cottages -- cottages with trellised porches and pyracanthus-lined faces , that clustered closer and closer as the road dropped from the yew trees by the church towards the bridge .
The vicarage peeped not too ostentatiously between the trees beyond the inn , an early Georgian front ripened by time , and the spire of the church rose happily in the depression made by the valley in the outline of the hills .
A winding stream , a thin intermittency of sky blue and foam , glittered amidst a thick margin of reeds and loosestrife and overhanging willows , along the centre of a sinuous pennant of meadow .
The whole prospect had that curiously English quality of ripened cultivation -- that look of still completeness -- that apes perfection , under the sunset warmth .
No one knows what the Vicar made of the Giant Puff-Balls .
But Mrs. Greenfield could observe no evidence of peculation , and the order for an increasing daily supply to the Caddles ' nursery was issued .
Scarcely had the first instalment gone , when Caddles was back again at the great house in a state abjectly apologetic .
`` Tut , tut ! ''
said the Vicar to his breakfast things -- the day after the coming of Mrs. Skinner .
`` Tut , tut !
what 's this ? ''
and poised his glasses at his paper with a general air of remonstrance .
said the Vicar , and drank off his coffee at a gulp , eyes steadfast on the paper , and smacked his lips incredulously .
It 's a pretty clear case of spreading . ''
The doctor smiled gently and rubbed one hand against the other .
`` That I could n't say , '' he said .
But on the way he reflected that one case had been in the village a month without any one catching the disease , and after a pause of hesitation decided to be as brave as a doctor should be and take the risks like a man .
`` By Jove ! ''
`` That 's my missing Mrs .
He descended upon her suddenly in the afternoon of the following day .
`` I thought I should find you , '' said Redwood .
`` He was always a great one for looking after 'imself and leaving them that was near and dear to 'im in trouble , was Skinner .
Though clever as could be , '' said Mrs. Skinner ... .
`` This child I hear about , the child you 've been giving our stuff to -- the child that weighs two stone . ''
Mrs. Skinner unmasked an eye at him as she led the way towards the barn .
`` Of course , Sir , there may 'ave been a _little_ , in a little can of Nicey I give his father to bring over from the farm , or a little perhaps what I happened to bring about with me , so to speak .
Me packing in a hurry and all ... ''
said Redwood , after he had cluckered to the infant for a space .
He turned on her abruptly .
`` Do n't splash it about _this_ time , '' he said .
She indicated knowledge by convulsive gestures .
`` You have n't told these people here ?
The parents , the squire and so on at the big house , the doctor , no one ? ''
The Vicar passing on the other side swept off the hat from his David's brow unheeded ... .
Mrs. Skinner mumbled something about `` if you think so , Sir , '' and `` probably got packed by mistake ... .
Thought no harm in giving him a little , '' and so by the aid of various aspen gestures indicated that she understood .
But even so secluded a place as Cheasing Eyebright could not rest for long in the theory of Hypertrophy -- Contagious or not -- in view of the growing hubbub about the Food .
In a little while there were painful explanations for Mrs. Skinner -- explanations that reduced her to speechless mumblings of her remaining tooth -- explanations that probed her and ransacked her and exposed her -- until at last she was driven to take refuge from a universal convergence of blame in the dignity of inconsolable widowhood .
She turned her eye -- which she constrained to be watery -- upon the angry Lady of the Manor , and wiped suds from her hands .
A firm of solicitors , with a snake of a style -- Banghurst , Brown , Flapp , Codlin , Brown , Tedder , and Snoxton , they called themselves , and appeared invariably in the form of a small rufous cunning-looking gentleman with a pointed nose -- said vague things about damages , and there was a polished personage , her ladyship 's agent , who came in suddenly upon Redwood one day and asked , `` Well , Sir , and what do you propose to do ? ''
`` The mischief 's done , '' Lady Wondershoot decided when they told her -- with expurgations -- what Redwood had said .
Though indeed as a matter of fact the mischief was only beginning .
Indisputably the child was troublesome and out of place , `` He was always about , '' the Vicar used to say .
He could not go to school ; he could not go to church by virtue of the obvious limitations of its cubical content .
There was some attempt to satisfy the spirit of that `` most foolish and destructive law '' -- I quote the Vicar -- the Elementary Education Act of 1870 , by getting him to sit outside the open window while instruction was going on within .
But his presence there destroyed the discipline of the other children .
They were always popping up and peering at him , and every time he spoke they laughed together .
His voice was so odd !
So they let him stay away .
Presently it became evident that the effect of the growing giant on unaccustomed horses was like that of a camel , and he was told to keep off the highroad , not only near the shrubbery ( where the oafish smile over the wall had exasperated her ladyship extremely ) , but altogether .
That law he never completely obeyed , because of the vast interest the highroad had for him .
But it turned what had been his constant resort into a stolen pleasure .
He was limited at last almost entirely to old pasture and the Downs .
He would wander over the Downs as far as the hill above Wreckstone , but not farther , because there he came upon cultivated land , and the people , by reason of his depredations upon their root-crops , and inspired moreover by a sort of hostile timidity his big unkempt appearance frequently evoked , always came out against him with yapping dogs to drive him away .
They would threaten him and lash at him with cart whips .
I have heard that they would sometimes fire at him with shot guns .
And in the other direction he ranged within sight of Hickleybrow .
From above Thursley Hanger he could get a glimpse of the London , Chatham , and Dover railway , but ploughed fields and a suspicious hamlet prevented his nearer access .
`` Good thing that was put a stop to , '' some spacious thinking mind would suggest .
`` Nice to 'ave a few thousand of _them_ on the rates , eh ? ''
`` It 's the Tip , I fancy , for all Humanity , '' said the Vicar .
`` The simple duties , the modest round , seed-time and harvest -- ''
That was a little difficult .
They thought of many things , and meanwhile they broke him in to labour a bit by using him instead of a horse messenger to carry telegrams and notes when extra speed was needed , and he also carried luggage and packing-cases and things of that sort very conveniently in a big net they found for him .
He seemed to like employment , regarding it as a sort of game , and Kinkle , Lady Wondershoot 's agent , seeing him shift a rockery for her one day , was struck by the brilliant idea of putting him into her chalk quarry at Thursley Hanger , hard by Hickleybrow .
This idea was carried out , and it seemed they had settled his problem .
`` _Why_ do you like doing that ? ''
`` Kissing we was -- _you_ know .
`` She 's a lady , '' said Mrs. Caddles .
He was thinking too four years after , when the Vicar , now no longer ripe but over-ripe , saw him for the last time of all .
You figure the old gentleman visibly a little older now , slacker in his girth , a little coarsened and a little weakened in his thought and speech , with a quivering shakiness in his hand and a quivering shakiness in his convictions , but his eye still bright and merry for all the trouble the Food had caused his village and himself .
He had been frightened at times and disturbed , but was he not alive still and the same still ?
and fifteen long years -- a fair sample of eternity -- had turned the trouble into use and wont .
`` She played pretty boldly , I 'm told .
Died in a hotel there .
Very sad end ... Exile ... Not -- not what one considers meet ... A natural leader of our English people ... Uprooted .
And so at last it came to the last time .
They sat for a space in a public-house , the one answering the questions of the other about this person and that , reviving queer old points of view , brushing aside endless new aspects and new perspectives , and then it was time to go to the station and take the London train .
Their names and the personal things they had to talk of do not matter to our story , but only the changes and all the strangeness that this poor returning soul found in the once familiar world .
He thought prison had made his brother a fearful duffer not to know that .
They made wide shots at each other by way of question and answer .
Between these scraps of talk were intervals of window-gazing .
At first the man 's interest in things was vague and general .
His imagination had been busy with what old so-and-so would say , how so-and-so would look , how he would say to all and sundry certain things that would present his `` putting away '' in a mitigated light .
This Boomfood came in at first as it were a thing in an odd paragraph of the newspapers , then as a source of intellectual difficulty with his brother .
But it came to him presently that Boomfood was persistently coming in upon any topic he began .
`` That 's the Cossars ! ''
The eyes of the released prisoner followed the finger 's direction and saw --
A hugely banked entrenchment overhung the chalk pit , in which stood the house , a monstrous squat Egyptian shape that Cossar had built for his sons when the Giant Nursery had served its turn , and behind was a great dark shed that might have covered a cathedral , in which a spluttering incandescence came and went , and from out of which came a Titanic hammering to beat upon the ear .
Then the attention leapt back to the giant as the great ball of iron-bound timber soared up out of his hand .
The train looked on these things only for the fraction of a minute and then passed behind trees into the Chislehurst tunnel .
`` My Gawd ! ''
said the man from prison again , as the darkness closed about them .
that chap was as 'igh as a 'ouse . ''
And at last the man from prison had the luck to find himself wedged into a packed multitude and staring from afar at a little brightly lit platform under an organ and a gallery .
The organist had been playing something that had set boots tramping as the people swarmed in ; but that was over now .
`` I wo n't say it would n't be advantageous , but -- ''
`` It is n't to be done , '' said the eldest Cossar boy , picking up his tools .
`` Not in this way , '' said the lawyer , `` certainly . ''
But for all that the Cossar lads brooded a little .
But they left the big weeds and the big water voles and all sorts of big undesirable things still living and breeding on the site they had chosen -- the site on which the fair great house of the little people might have towered to heaven ...
`` They have arms -- they have weapons even , that our brothers in Sunderland have made . ''
He closed his knife with a snap -- the blade was the length of a man -- and used his new pine staff to help himself rise .
He stood up and turned towards the squat grey immensity of the house .
The crimson of the sunset caught him as he rose , caught the mail and clasps about his neck and the woven metal of his arms , and to the eyes of his brother it seemed as though he was suddenly suffused with blood ...
`` For a mighty end .
And if we do n't ?
Do n't you see the prospect before us clear as day ?
Everywhere the giants will increase and multiply ; everywhere they will make and scatter the Food .
The grass will grow gigantic in our fields , the weeds in our hedges , the vermin in the thickets , the rats in the drains .
More and more and more .
This is only a beginning .
The insect world will rise on us , the plant world , the very fishes in the sea , will swamp and drown our ships .
Tremendous growths will obscure and hide our houses , smother our churches , smash and destroy all the order of our cities , and we shall become no more than a feeble vermin under the heels of the new race .
Mankind will be swamped and drowned in things of its own begetting !
And all for nothing !
Enlargement and _da capo_ .
Already we go picking our way among the first beginnings of the coming time .
And all we do is to say 'How inconvenient ! '
To grumble and do nothing .
The Great Park near the Palace where she lodged stretched , for a score of miles and more , west and south of the western palace gates .
The chestnut trees of its avenues reached high above her head .
Each one as she passed it seemed to proffer a more abundant wealth of blossom .
For a time she was content with sight and scent , but at last she was won over by these offers , and set herself so busily to choose and pick that she did not perceive young Redwood until he was close upon her .
She turned upon him with a start , saw him , and for a space they regarded one another .
For her , the sight of him was so amazing , so incredible , as to be , for some moments at least , terrible .
He came to her with the shock of a supernatural apparition ; he broke all the established law of her world .
He was a youth of one-and-twenty then , slenderly built , with his father 's darkness and his father 's gravity .
He was clad in a sober soft brown leather , close-fitting easy garments , and in brown hose , that shaped him bravely .
His head went uncovered in all weathers .
They stood regarding one another -- she incredulously amazed , and he with his heart beating fast .
It was a moment without a prelude , the cardinal meeting of their lives .
`` I am the Princess -- yes , '' she said , with eyes of wonder .
`` But -- what are you ? ''
There was terror still in the eyes that stared at him .
Her hand rose towards her throat and fell again .
She whispered , `` _No_ . ''
`` Our easy paces are wild flights to them , and all they deem great and wonderful no more than dolls ' pyramids to us .
Their pettiness of method and appliance and imagination hampers and defeats our powers .
There are no machines to the power of our hands , no helps to fit our needs .
They hold our greatness in servitude by a thousand invisible bands .
We are stronger , man for man , a hundred times , but we are disarmed ; our very greatness makes us debtors ; they claim the land we stand upon ; they tax our ampler need of food and shelter , and for all these things we must toil with the tools these dwarfs can make us -- and to satisfy their dwarfish fancies ...
`` They pen us in , in every way .
Even to live one must cross their boundaries .
Even to meet you here to-day I have passed a limit .
All that is reasonable and desirable in life they make out of bounds for us .
We may not go into the towns ; we may not cross the bridges ; we may not step on their ploughed fields or into the harbours of the game they kill .
I am cut off now from all our Brethren except the three sons of Cossar , and even that way the passage narrows day by day .
One could think they sought occasion against us to do some more evil thing ... ''
`` But we are strong , '' she said .
`` Nor to live in futility .
But if we would not do that , it is already plain to all our Brethren a conflict must come .
I know not what bitterness of conflict must presently come , before the little folks will suffer us to live as we need to live .
All the Brethren have thought of that .
Cossar , of whom I told you : he too has thought of that . ''
`` They are very little and weak . ''
He turned at the direction of her eyes , and found a bright yellow motor car , with dark goggled driver and fur-clad passengers , whooping , throbbing , and buzzing resentfully at his heel .
He moved his foot , and the mechanism , with three angry snorts , resumed its fussy way towards the town .
`` Filling up the roadway ! ''
floated up to him .
`` They say that we must part , '' the Princess said to her lover .
`` It was the queerest little man who came to me with a soft , beautifully modulated voice , a softly moving little gentleman who sidled into the room like a cat and put his pretty white hand up so , whenever he had anything significant to say .
He is bald , but not of course nakedly bald , and his nose and face are chubby rosy little things , and his beard is trimmed to a point in quite the loveliest way .
He pretended to have emotions several times and made his eyes shine .
You know he is quite a friend of the real royal family here , and he called me his dear young lady and was perfectly sympathetic even from the beginning .
'My dear young lady , ' he said , 'you know -- _you must n't , '_ several times , and then , 'You owe a duty . '
`` I mean that without knowing it we have been trampling on the most sacred conceptions of the little folks .
We who are royal are a class apart .
We are worshipped prisoners , processional toys .
We pay for worship by losing -- our elementary freedom .
And I was to have married that Prince -- You know nothing of him though .
Well , a pigmy Prince .
He does n't matter ... .
It seems it would have strengthened the bonds between my country and another .
And this country also was to profit .
-- strengthening the bonds ! ''
`` They want me to go on with it -- as though there was nothing between us two . ''
But that is n't all .
`` Who cares what they can do , or what they will do ?
I am yours and you are mine .
What is there more than that ?
I am yours and you are mine -- for ever .
Do you think I will stop for their little rules , for their little prohibitions , their scarlet boards indeed !
-- and keep from _you_ ? ''
`` You mean , '' he said , `` what are we to do ? ''
`` We could go .
We could swim the seas together .
Beyond the seas -- ''
Then , a grateful sight for her , she saw young Redwood far away over a gap in the tree masses that bounded her view .
He looked about him as if he feared to see the little people coming as he spoke .
And then : `` It may mean death . ''
`` We will not . ''
`` I 'd like to 'ave a look at 'im , '' said the young man at the bar recklessly , and added , `` I _seen_ the Princess . ''
Now that he had fairly entered London he had had to slacken his pace more and more , the little folks crowded so mightily upon him .
The crowd grew denser at every step , and at last , at a corner where two great ways converged , he came to a stop , and the multitude flowed about him and closed him in .
The pavement to his left became invitingly bare , and young Caddles went slowly on his way .
But now his tongue was loosened .
And none of them seemed to see , as he could do , the drink-sodden wretchedness of the painted women at the corner , the ragged misery that sneaked along the gutters , the infinite futility of all this employment .
None of them seemed to feel the shadow of that giant 's need , that shadow of the future , that lay athwart their paths ...
Then when he was beginning his third baker 's shop , he was stopped by half a dozen policemen hammering with truncheons at his shins .
`` Look here , my fine giant , you come along o ' me , '' said the officer in charge .
`` You ai n't allowed away from home like this .
You come off home with me . ''
They did their best to arrest him .
There was a trolley , I am told , chasing up and down streets at that time , bearing rolls of chain and ship 's cable to play the part of handcuffs in that great arrest .
There was no intention then of killing him .
`` He is no party to the plot , '' Caterham had said .
`` I will not have innocent blood upon my hands . ''
And added : `` -- until everything else has been tried . ''
the little people ! ''
`` Lea ' me alone , '' grunted the giant .
`` Lea ' me alone . ''
`` I got to do my duty , '' said the little policeman , with a face that was white and resolute .
`` You lea ' me alone .
I got to live as well as you .
I got to think .
I got to eat .
You lea ' me alone . ''
But his praise of Redwood 's consideration was presently dashed .
The officers found him troublesome at first until they had made it clear that it was useless for him to ask questions or beg for papers .
They made a sort of inspection of his study indeed , and cleared away even the papers he had .
Redwood 's voice was high and expostulatory .
`` But do n't you see , '' he said over and over again , `` it 's my Son , my only Son , that is in this trouble .
It is n't the Food I care for , but my Son . ''
`` Then it is a bit rough on him , '' the third policeman said .
He ate a mouthful and tumbled the food about a little in order to get it taken away , drank freely of whisky , and then took a chair and went back to the window .
The minutes expanded into grey immensities , and for a time perhaps he slept ... .
Caterham was a religious man , a civilised man .
And besides after all these years , after all these hopes !
He pulled up short .
`` Your Son , Sir ?
Your Son is doing well .
So at least we gather . ''
`` I mean , Sir , the Giants have -- to a certain extent -- held their own . ''
`` He was wounded . ''
`` No , Sir .
Some shot at him -- wildly -- against orders . ''
`` Some got to the encampment during the fighting , Sir ...
They seem to have known -- ''
`` It is a fact , Sir , '' he interrupted , `` that the Giants insist that they shall see you .
They will have no ambassador but you .
Unless you come to them , I am afraid , Sir , there will be more bloodshed . ''
Here was not the face of the caricatures and portraits , but the face of a worn and sleepless man , lined and drawn , yellow in the whites of the eyes , a little weakened about the mouth .
Here , indeed , were the red-brown eyes , the black hair , the distinctive aquiline profile of the great demagogue , but here was also something else that smote any premeditated scorn and rhetoric aside .
This man was suffering ; he was suffering acutely ; he was under enormous stress .
From the beginning he had an air of impersonating himself .
Presently , with a single gesture , the slightest movement , he revealed to Redwood that he was keeping himself up with drugs .
He moved a thumb to his waistcoat pocket , and then , after a few sentences more , threw concealment aside , and slipped the little tabloid to his lips .
It was so evident that even now he had everything to learn .
He did not know there were physical laws and economic laws , quantities and reactions that all humanity voting _nemine contradicente_ can not vote away , and that are disobeyed only at the price of destruction .
He did not know there are moral laws that can not be bent by any force of glamour , or are bent only to fly back with vindictive violence .
In the face of shrapnel or the Judgment Day , it was evident to Redwood that this man would have sheltered behind some curiously dodged vote of the House of Commons .
The more he talked the more certain Redwood 's sense of stupendous futility grew .
Did this man realise that while he stood and talked there , the whole great world was moving , that the invincible tide of growth flowed and flowed , that there were any hours but parliamentary hours , or any weapons in the hands of the Avengers of Blood ?
Outside , darkling the whole room , a single leaf of giant Virginian creeper tapped unheeded on the pane .
Caterham made a speech upon his terms .
The Children are for us .
And so , Sir , we shall save the world , we shall save it absolutely from the fruits of your terrible discovery .
It is not too late for us .
Only we are eager to temper expediency with mercy .
Even now we are burning and searing the places their shells hit yesterday .
We can get it under .
Trust me we shall get it under .
But in that way , without cruelty , without injustice -- ''
`` And suppose the Children do not agree ? ''
`` Then go now ... . ''
Caterham 's private secretary came to him from the other carriage and told him that half a mile farther the line had been wrecked , and that the rest of the journey was to be made in a motor car .
Redwood descended upon a platform lit only by a hand lantern and swept by the cool night breeze .
The quiet of that derelict , wood-set , weed-embedded suburb -- for all the inhabitants had taken refuge in London at the outbreak of yesterday 's conflict -- became instantly impressive .
His conductor took him down the steps to where a motor car was waiting with blazing lights -- the only lights to be seen -- handed him over to the care of the driver and bade him farewell .
So soon as Redwood could be wrapped about they started out into the night .
At one moment they stood still , and then the motor car was rushing softly and swiftly down the station incline .
They turned one corner and another , followed the windings of a lane of villas , and then before them stretched the road .
The motor droned up to its topmost speed , and the black night swept past them .
Everything was very dark under the starlight , and the whole world crouched mysteriously and was gone without a sound .
Not a breath stirred the flying things by the wayside ; the deserted , pallid white villas on either hand , with their black unlit windows , reminded him of a noiseless procession of skulls .
The driver beside him was a silent man , or stricken into silence by the conditions of his journey .
He answered Redwood 's brief questions in monosyllables , and gruffly .
Athwart the southern sky the beams of searchlights waved noiseless passes ; the sole strange evidences of life they seemed in all that derelict world about the hurrying machine .
Far away as it seemed , the great embankment , crested by the blaze from which the searchlights sprang , rose up against the sky .
Those beams went and came among the clouds and the hilly land about them as if they traced mysterious incantations .
To Redwood it seemed for a long time they were no longer on earth , but in a state of palpitating hurry through a luminous cloud .
Teuf , teuf , teuf , teuf , went the machine , and ever and again -- obeying I know not what nervous impulse -- the driver sounded his horn .
They passed into the welcome darkness of a high-fenced lane , and down into a hollow and past some houses into that blinding stare again .
Then for a space the road ran naked across a down , and they seemed to hang throbbing in immensity .
Once more giant weeds rose about them and whirled past .
Then quite abruptly close upon them loomed the figure of a giant , shining brightly where the searchlight caught him below , and black against the sky above .
`` Hullo there ! ''
he cried , and `` stop !
There's no more road beyond ... Is that Father Redwood ? ''
Redwood 's first impression was of an enormous arena bounded by very high cliffs and with its floor greatly encumbered .
It was in darkness save for the passing reflections of the watchman 's searchlights that whirled perpetually high overhead , and for a red glow that came and went from a distant corner where two Giants worked together amidst a metallic clangour .
Against the sky , as the glare came about , his eye caught the familiar outlines of the old worksheds and playsheds that were made for the Cossar boys .
They were hanging now , as it were , at a cliff brow , and strangely twisted and distorted with the guns of Caterham 's bombardment .
There were suggestions of huge gun emplacements above there , and nearer were piles of mighty cylinders that were perhaps ammunition .
All about the wide space below , the forms of great engines and incomprehensible bulks were scattered in vague disorder .
The Giants appeared and vanished among these masses and in the uncertain light ; great shapes they were , not disproportionate to the things amidst which they moved .
Some were actively employed , some sitting and lying as if they courted sleep , and one near at hand , whose body was bandaged , lay on a rough litter of pine boughs and was certainly asleep .
Redwood peered at these dim forms ; his eyes went from one stirring outline to another .
`` Presently , '' said Cossar .
`` First there is your message . ''
She paused , and the red blaze showed her eyes bright with unshed tears .
She bent nearer him and spoke still lower .
There was something so intimate and private in their bearing , in their soft tones , that Redwood -- Redwood who had thought for two whole days of nothing but his son -- felt himself intrusive there .
Abruptly he was checked .
For the first time in his life perhaps he realised how much more a son may be to his father than a father can ever be to a son ; he realised the full predominance of the future over the past .
Here between these two he had no part .
His part was played .
He turned to Cossar , in the instant realisation .
His voice was changed to the tone of a grey resolve .
`` I will deliver my message now , '' he said .
It will be soon enough then . ''
`` Big , '' said Cossar .
And strange that it should be strange to me -- I , who am , in a sense , the beginning of it all .
Cossar saw now his dim gesture to the things about them .
I have given it to my sons . ''
`` That is it .
We are over -- or almost over . ''
Ever and again some chance glare would pick out and display this group or that of tall and powerful forms , the Giants from Sunderland clothed in overlapping metal plates , and the others clad in leather , in woven rope or in woven metal , as their conditions had determined .
They sat amidst or rested their hands upon , or stood erect among machines and weapons as mighty as themselves , and all their faces , as they came and went from visible to invisible , had steadfast eyes .
`` So it may be .
But the thing is as I have said . ''
`` But we held our own . ''
`` If it is God 's will , we may still hold our own . ''
But think of the dead ! ''
`` Our terms are the Food .
It is not as though little and great could live together in any perfection of compromise .
It is one thing or the other .
What right have parents to say , My child shall have no light but the light I have had , shall grow no greater than the greatness to which I have grown ?
Do I speak for you , Brothers ? ''
All life is that .
Great and little can not understand one another .
But in every child born of man , Father Redwood , lurks some seed of greatness -- waiting for the Food . ''
`` So be it , '' said young Redwood , and his brethren murmured assent .
`` _The iron waits_ , '' cried a voice , and the two giants who were working in the corner began a rhythmic hammering that made a mighty music to the scene .
The metal glowed out far more brightly than it had done before , and gave Redwood a clearer view of the encampment than had yet come to him .
He saw the oblong space to its full extent , with the great engines of warfare ranged ready to hand .
Beyond , and at a higher level , the house of the Cossars stood .
About him were the young giants , huge and beautiful , glittering in their mail , amidst the preparations for the morrow .
The sight of them lifted his heart .
They were so easily powerful !
They were so tall and gracious !
They were so steadfast in their movements !
There was his son amongst them , and the first of all giant women , the Princess ... .
Now it not only stands in our way to a permanent peace of the world that the great mass of men are not prepared for even the most obvious implications of such an idea , but there is also a second invincible difficulty -- that there is nowhere in the world anybody , any type of men , any organisation , any idea , any nucleus or germ , that could possibly develop into the necessary over-Government .
We are asking for something out of the air , out of nothingness , that will necessarily array against itself the resistance of all those who are in control , or interested in the control , of the affairs of sovereign States of the world as they are at present ; the resistance of a gigantic network of Government organisations , interests , privileges , assumptions .
The first , most distinctive thing about this conflict is the exceptionally searching way in which it attacks human happiness .
No war has ever destroyed happiness so widely .
It has not only killed and wounded an unprecedented proportion of the male population of all the combatant nations , but it has also destroyed wealth beyond precedent .
It has also destroyed freedom -- of movement , of speech , of economic enterprise .
Hardly anyone alive has escaped the worry of it and the threat of it .
It has left scarcely a life untouched , and made scarcely a life happier .
There is a limit to the principle that `` everybody's business is nobody 's business . ''
The establishment of a world State , which was interesting only to a few cranks and visionaries before the war , is now the lively interest of a very great number of people .
They inquire about it ; they have become accessible to ideas about it .
THE END OF THE WAR [ 1 ]
The prophet who emerges with the most honour from this war is Bloch .
It must be fifteen or sixteen years ago since this gifted Pole made his forecast of the future .
Perhaps it is more , for the French translation of his book was certainly in existence before the Boer War .
His case was that war between antagonists of fairly equal equipment must end in a deadlock because of the continually increasing defensive efficiency of entrenched infantry .
This would give the defensive an advantage over the most brilliant strategy and over considerably superior numbers that would completely discourage all aggression .
He concluded that war was played out .
But all these questions can really be deferred or set aside in our present discussion , which is a discussion of the main war .
Whatever surprises or changes this last phase of the Eastern Empire , that blood-clotted melodrama , may involve , they will but assist and hasten on the essential conclusion of the great war , that the Central Powers and their pledged antagonists are in a deadlock , unable to reach a decision , and steadily , day by day , hour by hour , losing men , destroying material , spending credit , approaching something unprecedented , unknown , that we try to express to ourselves by the word exhaustion .
Compared with the world behind the Allies the Turkish Empire is a country of mountains , desert and undeveloped lands .
To develop these regions into a source of supplies under the strains and shortages of war-time , will be an immense and dangerous undertaking for Germany .
She may open mines she may never work , build railways that others will enjoy , sow harvests for alien reaping .
The people the Bulgarians want in Bulgaria are not Germans but Bulgarians ; the people the Turks want in Anatolia are not Germans but Turks .
And for all these tasks Germany must send men .
But these things form only the main outline of a story with a vast amount of collateral interest .
It is to these collateral issues that the amateur in prophecy must give his attention .
It is here that the German will be induced by his Government to see his compensations .
He will be consoled for the restoration of Serbia by the prospect of future conflicts between Italian and Jugoslav that will let him in again to the Adriatic .
His attention will be directed to his newer , closer association with Bulgaria and Turkey .
In those countries he will be told he may yet repeat the miracle of Hungary .
And there may be also another Hungary in Poland .
It will be whispered to him that he has really conquered those countries when indeed it is highly probable he has only spent his substance in setting up new assertive alien allies .
The Kaiser , if he is not too afraid of the precedent of Sarajevo , may make a great entry into Constantinople , with an effect of conquering what is after all only a temporarily allied capital .
The German will hope also to retain his fleet , and no peace , he will be reminded , can rob him of his hard-earned technical superiority in the air .
The German air fleet of 1930 may yet be something as predominant as the British Navy of 1915 , and capable of delivering a much more intimate blow .
Had he not better wait for that ?
When such consolations as these become popular in the German Press we of the Pledged Allies may begin to talk of peace , for these will be its necessary heralds .
The owner and the creditor have never had any other power to give or withhold credit than the credit that was given to them .
They exist by sufferance or superstition and not of necessity .
The exhaustion that will bring this war to its end at last is a process of destruction of men and material .
The process of bankruptcy that is also going on is nothing of the sort .
Bankruptcy destroys no concrete thing ; it merely writes off a debt ; it destroys a financial but not an economic reality .
It is , in itself , a mental , not a physical fact .
`` A '' owes `` B '' a debt ; he goes bankrupt and pays a dividend , a fraction of his debt , and gets his discharge .
`` B 's '' feelings , as we novelists used to say , are `` better imagined than described '' ; he does his best to satisfy himself that `` A '' can pay no more , and then `` A '' and `` B '' both go about their business again .
In England , if `` A '' is a sufficiently poor man not to be formidable , and has gone bankrupt on a small scale , he gets squeezed ferociously to extract the last farthing from him ; he may find himself in jail and his home utterly smashed up .
If he is a richer man , and has failed on a larger scale , our law is more sympathetic , and he gets off much more easily .
Often his creditors find it advisable to arrange with him so that he will still carry on with his bankrupt concern .
They find it is better to allow him to carry on than to smash him up .
That is how quite a lot of people seem to imagine national bankruptcy : as a catastrophic jolt .
It is a quite impossible nightmare of cessation .
The reality is the completest contrast .
All the belligerent countries of the world are at the present moment quietly , steadily and progressively going bankrupt , and the mass of people are not even aware of this process of insolvency .
An age of cheapness is an old usurers ' age .
England before the war was a paradise of ancient usuries ; everywhere were great houses and enclosed parks ; the multitude of gentlemen 's servants and golf clubs and such like excrescences of the comfort of prosperous people was perpetually increasing ; it did not `` pay '' to build labourers ' cottages , and the more expensive sort of automobile had driven the bicycle as a pleasure vehicle off the roads .
Western Europe was running to fat and not to muscle , as America is to-day .
So far we have followed this speculation upon fairly firm ground , but now our inquiry must plunge into a jungle of far more difficult and uncertain possibilities .
Our next stage brings us to the question of how people and peoples and classes of people are going to react to the new conditions of need and knowledge this war will have brought about , and to the new demands that will be made upon them .
This is really a question of how far they will prove able to get out of the habits and traditions of their former social state , how far they will be able to take generous views and make sacrifices and unselfish efforts , and how far they will go in self-seeking or class selfishness regardless of the common welfare .
This is a question we have to ask separately of each great nation , and of the Central Powers as a whole , and of the Allies as a whole , before we can begin to estimate the posture of the peoples of the world in , say , 1946 .
So far as I have been able to observe , nobody lives steadily at one moral level .
If we are wise we shall treat no man and no class -- and for the matter of that no nation -- as either steadfastly malignant or steadfastly disinterested .
There are phases in my life when I could die quite cheerfully for an idea ; there are phases when I would not stir six yards to save a human life .
Most people fluctuate between such extremes .
Most people are self-seeking , but most people will desist from a self-seeking cause if they see plainly and clearly that it is not in the general interest , and much more readily if they also perceive that other people are of the same mind and know that they know their course is unsound .
And having made this parenthesis , I may perhaps go on to point out the peculiar limitations under which various classes will be approaching the phase of reorganisation , without being accused of making this or that class the villain of an anticipatory drama .
How far will these men get out of the tradition of their birth and upbringing ?
In order to secure a certain independence and integrity in its courts , Great Britain long ago established the principle of enormously overpaying its judges and lawyers .
The natural result has been to give our law courts and the legal profession generally a bias in favour of private wealth against both the public interest and the proletariat .
It has also given our higher national education an overwhelming direction towards the training of advocates and against science and constructive statecraft .
An ordinary lawyer has no idea of making anything ; that tendency has been destroyed in his mind ; he waits and sees and takes advantage of opportunity .
Everything that can possibly be done in England is done to make our rulers Micawbers and Artful Dodgers .
To what extent can the world produce the imagination it needs ?
That , so far , is the most fundamental question to which our prophetic explorations have brought us .
It is also a nuisance to the passing public because of such inconvenience as the asymmetrical main road .
It hinders local development and the development of a local spirit .
It may , of course , appeal perhaps to the humorous outlook of the followers of Mr. G.K. Chesterton and Mr. Belloc , who believe that this war is really a war in the interests of the Athanasian Creed , fatness , and unrestricted drink against science , discipline , and priggishly keeping fit enough to join the army , as very good fun indeed , good matter for some jolly reeling ballad about Roundabout and Roundabout , the jolly town of Roundabout ; but to anyone else the question of how it is that this wasteful Bocking-Braintree muddle , with its two boards , its two clerks , its two series of jobs and contracts , manages to keep on , was even before the war a sufficiently discouraging one .
It is -- or shall I write , `` it may be '' ?
For everyone there are two diametrically different ways of thinking about life ; there is individualism , the way that comes as naturally as the grunt from a pig , of thinking outwardly from oneself as the centre of the universe , and there is the way that every religion is trying in some form to teach , of thinking back to oneself from greater standards and realities .
There is the Braintree that is Braintree against England and the world , giving as little as possible and getting the best of the bargain , and there is the Braintree that identifies itself with England and asks how can we do best for the world with this little place of ours , how can we educate best , produce most , and make our roads straight and good for the world to go through .
So the red god , Mars ; and in these days of universal education the great mass of people will understand plainly now that that is his message and intention .
Men who can not be swayed by the love of order and creation may be swayed by the thought of death and destruction ... .
There , I think , is the overriding argument that will burst the proprietorships and divisions and boundaries , the web of ineffectiveness that has held the world so long .
Labour returning from the trenches to its country and demanding promptness , planning , generous and devoted leaderships and organisation , demanding that the usurer and financier , the landlord and lawyer shall , if need be , get themselves altogether out of the way , will have behind its arguments the thought of the enemy still unsubdued , still formidable , recovering .
Both sides will feel that .
This world is a more illuminated world than 1816 ; a thousand questions between law and duty have been discussed since then ; beyond all comparison we know better what we are doing .
I think the broad side of John Smith ( and Sir John Smith and John Smith , K.C . )
will get the better of his narrow ends -- and that so it will be with Jean Dupont and Hans Meyer and the rest of them .
There may be riots here and there ; there may be some pretty considerable rows ; but I do not think there is going to be a chaotic and merely destructive phase in Great Britain or any Western European country .
I cast my guess for reconstruction and not for revolt .
A number of people are saying that this war is to be the end of Individualism .
`` Go as you please '' has had its death-blow .
Out of this war , whatever else emerges , there will emerge a more highly organised State than existed before -- that is to say , a less individualistic and more socialistic State .
And there seems a heavy weight of probability on the side of this view .
But there are also a number of less obvious countervailing considerations that may quite possibly modify or reverse this tendency .
Despite these patent conditions there has been , and is , a steady increase in the cost of provisions , coal , and every sort of necessity .
This increase means an increase in the cost of production of many commodities , and so contributes again to the general scarcity .
This is the domestic aspect of a difficulty that has also its military side .
It is not sufficient merely to make munitions ; they must also be delivered , Great Britain is suffering very seriously from congestion of the railways .
She suffers both in social and military efficiency , and she is so suffering because her railways , instead of being planned as one great and simple national distributing system , have grown up under conditions of clumsy , dividend-seeking competition .
And another bright instance of the value of individualism is the selling of British shipping to neutral buyers just when the country is in the most urgent need of every ship it can get , and the deliberate transfer to America of a number of British businesses to evade paying a proper share of the national bill in taxation .
The English who have gone to America at different times have been of very different qualities ; at the head of the list are the English who went over in the _Mayflower_ ; at the bottom will be the rich accessions of this war ... .
In the face of these facts , will any of the Allied Powers be so foolish as to disband this great system of national factories and nationally worked communications ?
Moreover , we have already risked the prophecy that this war will not end with such conclusiveness as to justify an immediate beating out of our swords into ploughshares .
There will be a military as well as a social reason for keeping the national factories in a going state .
The experience of history is that nations do not take the obviously right course , but the obviously wrong one .
The present prophet knows only his England , but , so far as England is concerned , he can cover a sheet of paper with scarcely a pause , jotting down memoranda of numberless forces that make against any such rational reconstruction .
Most of these forces , in greater or less proportion , must be present in the case of every other country under consideration .
Every step in the mobilisation of Great Britain 's vast resources for the purposes of the war has been hampered by the tricks , the failures to understand , and the almost instinctive disloyalties of private owners .
The raising of rents in Glasgow drove the infuriated workmen of the Clyde district into an unwilling strike .
It was an exasperating piece of private selfishness , quite typical of the individualistic state of mind , and the failure to anticipate or arrest it on the part of the Government was a worse failure than Suvla Bay .
And everywhere the officials of the Ministry of Munitions find private employers holding back workers and machinery from munition works , intriguing -- more particularly through the Board of Trade -- to have all sorts of manufactures for private profit recognised as munition work , or if that contention is too utterly absurd , then as work vitally necessary to the maintenance of British export trade and the financial position of the country .
It is an undeniable fact that employers and men alike have been found far readier to risk their lives for their country than to lay aside any scale of profits to which they have grown accustomed .
This conflict of individualistic enterprise and class suspicion against the synthesis of the public welfare is not peculiar to Great Britain ; it is probably going on with local variations in Germany , Russia , Italy , France , and , indeed , in every combatant country .
Because of the individualistic forces and feelings , none of us , either friends or enemies , are really getting anything like our full possible result out of our national efforts .
But in Germany there is a greater tradition of subordination ; in France there is a greater clarity of mind than in any other country .
In the face of the manifest determination of the Central Powers to do as much , the Allies will be forced also to link their various State firms together into a great allied trust , trading with a common interest and a common plan with Germany and America and the rest of the world ... .
Youth and necessity will carry this against selfishness , against the unimaginative , against the unteachable , the suspicious , the `` _old fool_ . ''
But I do not venture to prophesy that this will come about as if it were a slick and easy deduction from present circumstances .
Even in France I do not think things will move as lucidly and generously as that .
There will be a conflict everywhere between wisdom and cunning , between the eyes of youth and the purblind , between energy and obstinacy .
I believe that out of the ruins of the nineteenth century system of private capitalism that this war has smashed for ever , there will arise , there does even now arise , in this strange scaffolding of national munition factories and hastily nationalised public services , the framework of a new economic and social order based upon national ownership and service .
The real case we British have against our lawyers , if I may adopt an expressive colloquialism , is not that they are lawyers , but that they are such infernal lawyers .
They trail into modern life most of the faults of a mediaeval guild .
They seem to have no sense of the State they could develop , no sense of the future they might control .
Their law and procedure has never been remodelled upon the framework of modern ideas ; their minds are still set to the tune of mediaeval bickerings , traditionalism , and State blindness .
They are mystery dealers , almost unanimously they have resisted giving the common man the protection of a code .
But while everyone would be shocked at some great doctor , or some great research institution , in these days of urgent necessity spending two or three weeks on the minor ailments of some rich person 's lapdog , nobody is scandalised at the spectacle of Sir Edward Carson and a costly law court spending long days upon the sordid disputes that centre upon young Master Slingsby 's ear -- whether it is the Slingsby family ear or the ear of a supposititious child -- a question that any three old women might be trusted to settle .
After that he rests for a fortnight and recuperates , and returns -- to take up a will case turning upon the toy rabbits and suchlike trifles which entertained the declining years of a nonagenarian .
This , when we are assured that the country awaits Sir Edward as its Deliverer .
It is as if Lord Kitchener took a month off to act at specially high rates for the `` movies . ''
Our standard for the lawyer is older and lower than it is for other men .
I am inclined to foretell as one most highly probable development of the present vague but very considerable revolt against the lawyer in British public life , first , some clumsy proposals or even attempts to leave him out , and use `` business men , '' soldiers , admirals , dictators , or men of science , in his place -- which is rather like throwing away a blottesque fountain-pen and trying to write with a walking-stick or a revolver or a flash-light -- and then when that is found to be impossible , a resolute attempt to clean and reconstitute the legal profession on modern and more honourable lines ; a movement into which , quite possibly , a number of the younger British lawyers , so soon as they realise that the movement is good enough to risk careers upon , may throw themselves .
A large share in such a reform movement , if it occurs , will be brought about by the Press ; by which I mean not simply the periodical Press , but all books and contemporary discussion .
It is only by the natural playing off of Press against lawyer-politician that democratic States can ever come to their own .
If the lawyer-politician is unavoidable , the Press is indispensable .
It is not in the clash and manoeuvres and mutual correction of party , but in the essential conflict of political authority on the one hand and Press on the other that the future of democratic government apparently lies .
In the clearer , simpler case of France , a less wealthy and finer type of lawyer interacts with a less impersonal Press .
It is in the great contrasts and the essential parallelism of the French and the Anglo-Saxon democratic systems that one finds the best practical reason for anticipating very profound changes in these two inevitables of democracy , the Press and the lawyer-politician , and for assuming that the method of democracy has still a vast range of experimental adjustment between them still untried .
Such experimental adjustment will be the chief necessity and business of political life in every country of the world for the next few decades .
Now there is considerable validity in this claim .
It is easy to say that a paper may be bought by any proprietor and set to put what he chooses into the public mind .
As a matter of fact , buying a newspaper is far more costly and public a proceeding than buying a politician .
And if on the one hand the public has no control over what is printed in a paper , it has on the other the very completest control over what is read .
A politician is checked by votes cast once in several years , a newspaper is checked by sales that vary significantly from day to day .
A newspaper with no circulation is a newspaper that does not matter ; a few weeks will suffice to show if it has carried its public with it or gone out of influence .
It is absurd to speak of a newspaper as being less responsible than a politician .
It is not only that I look to the indignation and energy of intelligent men who are outside our legal and political system to reform it , but to those who are in it now .
A man may be quietly parasitic upon his mother , and yet incapable of matricide .
So much of our national energy and ability has been attracted to the law in Great Britain that our nation , with our lawyers in modern clothing instead of wigs and gowns , lawyers who have studied science and social theory instead of the spoutings of Cicero and the loquacious artfulness of W.E .
Gladstone , lawyers who look forward at the destiny of their country instead of backward and at the markings on their briefs , may yet astonish the world .
The British lawyer really holds the future of the British Empire and , indeed , I could almost say , of the whole world in his hands at the present time , as much as any single sort of man can be said to hold it .
Inside his skull imagination and a heavy devil of evil precedent fight for his soul and the welfare of the world .
And generosity fights against tradition and individualism .
Only the men of the Press have anything like the same great possibilities of betrayal .
For my own part , as the father of two sons who are at present in mid-school , I hope with all my heart that they will not .
I hope that the Oxford and Cambridge of unphilosophical classics and Little-go Greek for everybody , don 's mathematics , bad French , ignorance of all Europe except Switzerland , forensic exercises in the Union Debating Society , and cant about the Gothic , the Oxford and Cambridge that turned boys full of life and hope and infinite possibility into barristers , politicians , mono-lingual diplomatists , bishops , schoolmasters , company directors , and remittance men , are even now dead .
In this manner , through all the most sensitive and receptive years of life , our boys have been trained in `` how not to get there , '' in a variety of disconnected subjects , by men who have never `` got there , '' and it would be difficult to imagine any curriculum more calculated to produce a miscellaneous incompetence .
They have also , it happens , received a certain training in _savoir faire_ through the collective necessities of school life , and a certain sharpening in the arts of advocacy through the debating society .
Except for these latter helps , they have had to face the world with minds neither more braced , nor more trained , nor more informed than any `` uneducated '' man 's .
Surely the first condition that should be laid down for the new education in Europe is that whatever is undertaken must be undertaken in grim earnest and done .
It is ridiculous to talk about the `` character-forming '' value of any study that does not go through to an end .
Manifestly Greek must be dropped as a part of the general curriculum for a highly educated man , for the simple reason that now there are scarcely any competent teachers , and because the sham of teaching it partially and pretentiously demoralises student and school alike .
The claim of the clergy and so forth to `` know '' Greek is one of the many corrupting lies in British intellectual life .
English comic writers never weary of sneering at the Hindu who claimed to be a `` failed B.A.
, '' but what is the ordinary classical degree man of an English university but a `` failed '' Greek scholar ?
Latin , too , must be either reduced to the position of a study supplementary to the native tongue , or brought up to an honest level of efficiency .
If Great Britain means business after this war , if she is to do her duty by the Eastern world she controls , she will not stick at the petty expense of getting a few hundreds of good Russian and Hindu teachers into the country , and she will place Russian and Hindustani upon at least an equal footing with Greek in all her university and competitive examinations .
Moreover , it is necessary to set a definite aim of application before university mathematical teaching .
As the first condition of character-building in all these things , the student should do what he ostensibly sets out to do .
No degree and no position should be attainable by half accomplishment .
So that this war involves , in this as in so many matters , no fundamental set-back , no reversals nor restorations .
At the most it will but realise things already imagined , release things latent .
The nineteenth century was a period of unprecedented modification of social relationships ; but great as these changes were , they were trivial in comparison with the changes in religious thought and the criticism of moral ideals .
Hell was the basis of religious thinking in A.D. 1800 , and the hangman was at the back of the law ; in 1900 both Hell and the hangman seemed on the verge of extinction .
The creative impulse was everywhere replacing fear and compulsion in human motives .
The opening decade of the twentieth century was a period of unprecedented abundance in everything necessary to human life , of vast accumulated resources , of leisure and release .
It was also , because of that and because of the changed social and religious spirit , a period of great social disorganisation and confused impulses .
We British can already look back to the opening half of 1914 as to an age gone for ever .
Except that we were all alive then and can remember , it has become now almost as remote , almost as `` historical , '' as the days before the French Revolution .
Our days , our methods and reactions , are already so different .
The greater part of the freedom of movement , the travel and going to and fro , the leisure , the plenty and carelessness , that distinguished early twentieth century life from early nineteenth century life , has disappeared .
Most men are under military discipline , and every household economises .
The whole British people has been brought up against such elementary realities of need , danger , and restraint as it never realised before .
We discover that we had been living like Olympians in regard to worldly affairs , we had been irresponsibles , amateurs .
Much of that fatness of life , the wrappings and trimmings of our life , has been stripped off altogether .
That has not altered the bones of life ; it has only made them plainer ; but it has astonished us as much as if looking into a looking-glass one suddenly found oneself a skeleton .
But the general trend of mankind towards intelligence and reason has been also a trend away from a superstitious treatment of sexual questions and a recognition , so to speak , that a woman 's `` a man for a' that , '' that she is indeed as entitled to an independent soul and a separate voice in collective affairs .
As brain has counted for more and more in the human effort and brute strength and the advantage of not bearing children for less and less , as man has felt a greater need for a companion and a lesser need for a slave , and as the increase of food and the protection of the girl from premature child-bearing has approximated the stature and strength and enterprise of the woman more and more to that of the man , this secular emancipation of the human female from the old herd subordination and servitude to the patriarchal male has gone on .
Essentially the secular process has been an equalising process .
It was merely the exaggeration of its sustaining causes during the plenty and social and intellectual expansion of the last half-century that had stimulated this secular process to the pitch of crisis .
Chitra in Rabindranath Tagore 's play , for example , tried both aspects of the woman 's life , and Tagore is at one with Plato in preferring the Rosalind type to the houri .
And with him I venture to think is the clear reason of mankind .
The real `` emancipation '' to which reason and the trend of things makes is from the yielding to the energetic side of a woman's disposition , from beauty enthroned for love towards the tall , weather-hardened woman with a spear , loving her mate as her mate loves her , and as sexless as a man in all her busy hours .
It is a little detail , but a very significant one in this connection , that the committee that organised the various great suffrage processions in London were torn by dispute about the dresses of the processionists .
It was urged that a `` masculine style of costume '' discredited the movement , and women were urged to dress with a maximum of feminine charm .
Many women obtained finery they could ill afford , to take part in these demonstrations , and minced their steps as womanly as possible to freedom ... .
It would be easy to overstate the efflorescence of distinctively feminine emotion , dressiness , mysticism , and vanity upon the suffrage movement .
Those things showed for anyone to see .
This was the froth of the whirlpool .
What did not show was the tremendous development of the sense of solidarity among women .
Everybody knew that women had been hitting policemen at Westminster ; it was not nearly so showy a fact that women of title , working women , domestic servants , tradesmen 's wives , professional workers , had all been meeting together and working together in a common cause , working with an unprecedented capacity and an unprecedented disregard of social barriers .
One noted the nonsensical by-play of the movement ; the way in which women were accustoming themselves to higher standards of achievement was not so immediately noticeable .
That a small number of women were apparently bent on rendering the Vote impossible by a campaign of violence and malicious mischief very completely masked the fact that a very great number of girls and young women no longer considered it seemly to hang about at home trying by a few crude inducements to tempt men to marry them , but were setting out very seriously and capably to master the young man's way of finding a place for oneself in the world .
Beneath the dust and noise realities were coming about that the dust and noise entirely failed to represent .
We know that some women were shrieking for the Vote ; we did not realise that a generation of women was qualifying for it .
It is not simply that the British women have so bountifully produced intelligence and industry ; that does not begin their record .
They have been willing to go dowdy .
The mass of women in Great Britain are wearing the clothes of 1914 .
In 1913 every girl and woman one saw in the streets of London had an air of doing her best to keep in the fashion .
Now they are for the most part as carelessly dressed as a busy business man or a clever young student might have been .
They are none the less pretty for that , and far more beautiful .
But the fashions have floated away to absurdity .
Every now and then through the austere bustle of London in war time drifts a last practitioner of the `` eternal feminine '' -- with the air of a foreign visitor , with the air of devotion to some peculiar cult .
She has very high-heeled boots ; she shows a leg , she has a short skirt with a peculiar hang , due no doubt to mysteries about the waist ; she wears a comic little hat over one brow ; there is something of Columbine about her , something of the Watteau shepherdess , something of a vivandiere , something of every age but the present age .
Her face , subject to the strange dictates of the mode , is smooth like the back of a spoon , with small features and little whisker-like curls before the ears such as butcher-boys used to wear half a century ago .
Even so , she dare not do this thing alone .
Something in khaki is with her , to justify her .
You are to understand that this strange rig is for seeing him off or giving him a good time during his leave .
Sometimes she is quite elderly , sometimes nothing khaki is to be got , and the pretence that this is desired of her wears thin .
Still , the type will out .
Contributing very largely to the establishment of this greatly enlarged class of independent women will be the great shortage for the next decade of marriageable men , due to the killing and disablement of the war .
The women of the next decades will not only be able to get along economically without marriage , but they will find it much more difficult to marry .
It will also probably be a period in which a rise in prices may , as it usually does , precede the compensating rise in wages .
It may be that for some years it will be more difficult to maintain a family .
This will be a third factor in the fixation of this class of bachelor women .
I do not pretend to know with any degree of certainty what peculiar forms of muddle and aggression may not record themselves upon the maps of 2200 ; I do not certainly know whether mankind will be better off or worse off then , more or less civilised ; but I do know , with a very considerable degree of certainty , that in A.D. 2200 there will still be a France , an Ireland , a Germany , a Jugo-Slav region , a Constantinople , a Rajputana , and a Bengal .
I do not mean that these are absolutely fixed things ; they may have receded or expanded .
But these are the more permanent things ; these are the field , the groundwork , the basic reality ; these are fundamental forces over which play the ambitions , treacheries , delusions , traditions , tyrannies of international politics .
All boundaries will tend to reveal these fundamental forms as all clothing tends to reveal the body .
You may hide the waist ; you will only reveal the shoulders the more .
You may mask , you may muffle the body ; it is still alive inside , and the ultimate determining thing .
But I do not see how France , unless she is really convinced she is beaten , can content herself with anything less than a strong Franco-Belgian frontier from Aix , that will take in at least Metz and Saarburg .
She knows best the psychology of the lost provinces , and what amount of annexation will spell weakness or strength .
If she demands all Alsace-Lorraine back from the Hohenzollerns , British opinion is resolved to support her , and to go through with this struggle until she gets it .
To guess at the direction of the new line is not to express a British opinion , but to speculate upon the opinion of France .
After the experience of Luxembourg and Belgium no one now dreams of a neutralised buffer State .
What does not become French or Belgian of the Rhineland will remain German -- for ever .
That is perhaps conceivable , for example , of Strassburg and the low-lying parts of Alsace .
I do not know enough to do more than guess .
There have recently been revelations , more or less trustworthy , of German schemes for a rearrangement of Eastern Europe .
They implied a German victory .
Bohemia , Poland , Galicia and Ruthenia were to make a Habsburg-ruled State from the Baltic to the Black Sea .
The Jugo-Slav and the Magyar were to be linked ( uneasy bedfellows ) into a second kingdom , also Habsburg ruled ; Austria was to come into the German Empire as a third Habsburg dukedom or kingdom ; Roumania , Bulgaria and Greece were to continue as independent Powers , German ruled .
Recently German proposals published in America have shown a disposition to admit the claims of Roumania to the Wallachian districts of Transylvania .
The destiny of the Serbo-Croatian future lies largely in the hands of Italy and Bulgaria .
Bulgaria was not in this war at the beginning , and she may not be in it at the end .
Her King is neither immortal nor irreplaceable .
Her desire now must be largely to retain her winnings in Macedonia , and keep the frontier posts of a too embracing Germany as far off as possible .
She has nothing to gain and much to fear from Roumania and Greece .
Her present relations with Turkey are unnatural .
She has everything to gain from a prompt recovery of the friendship of Italy and the sea Powers .
A friendly Serbo-Croatian buffer State against Germany will probably be of equal comfort in the future to Italy and Bulgaria ; more especially if Italy has pushed down the Adriatic coast along the line of the former Venetian possessions .
Serbia has been overrun , but never were the convergent forces of adjacent interests so clearly in favour of her recuperation .
The possibility of Italy and that strange Latin outlier , Roumania , joining hands through an allied and friendly Serbia must be very present in Italian thought .
The allied conception of the land route from the West and America to Bagdad and India is by Mont Cenis , Trieste , Serbia and Constantinople , as their North European line to India is through Russia by Baku .
There is evidence of a real search for American affinities among the other peoples of the world ; it is a new war-made feature of the thoughtful literature and journalists of America .
And it is interesting to note how partial and divided these affinities must necessarily be .
Historically and politically , the citizen of the United States must be drawn most closely to France .
France is the one other successful modern republic ; she was the instigator and friend of American liberation .
With Great Britain the tie of language , the tradition of personal freedom , and the strain in the blood are powerful links .
But both France and Britain are old countries , thickly populated , with a great and ancient finish and completeness , full of implicit relationships ; America is by comparison crude , uninformed , explicit , a new country , still turning fresh soil , still turning over but half-explored natural resources .
Learning a language is one thing and memorising an illogical system of visual images -- for that is what reading ordinary English spelling comes to -- is quite another .
A man can learn to play first chess and then bridge in half the time that these two games would require if he began by attempting simultaneous play , and exactly the same principle applies to the language problem .
The problem becomes at once graver , less hopeful , and more urgent when we take up the case of Russian .
I have looked closely into this business of Russian teaching , and I am convinced that only a very , very small number of French-and English-speaking people are going to master Russian under the existing conditions of instruction .
If we Westerns want to get at Russia in good earnest we must take up this Russian language problem with an imaginative courage and upon a scale of which at present I see no signs .
If we do not , then the Belgians , French , Americans and English will be doing business in Russia after the war in the German language -- or through a friendly German interpreter .
That , I am afraid , is the probability of the case .
But it need not be the case .
Will and intelligence could alter all that .
What has to be done is to have Russian taught at first in a Western phonetic type .
Then it becomes a language not very much more difficult to acquire than , say , German by a Frenchman .
When the learner can talk with some freedom , has a fairly full vocabulary , a phraseology , knows his verb and so on , then and then only should he take up the unfamiliar and confusing set of visual images of Russian lettering -- I speak from the point of view of those who read the Latin alphabet .
How confusing it may be only those who have tried it can tell .
Its familiarity to the eye increases the difficulty ; totally unfamiliar forms would be easier to learn .
The Frenchman or Englishman is confronted with
Nevertheless almost all the instruction in Russian of which I can get an account begins with the alphabet , and must , I suppose , begin with the alphabet until teachers have a suitably printed set of instruction books to enable them to take the better line .
One school teacher I know , in a public school , devoted the entire first term , the third of a year , to the alphabet .
At the end he was still dissatisfied with the progress of his pupils .
He gave them Russian words , of course , words of which they knew nothing -- in Russian characters .
It was too much for them to take hold of at one and the same time .
He did not even think of teaching them to write French and English words in the strange lettering .
He did not attempt to write his Russian in Latin letters .
He was apparently ignorant of any system of transliteration , and he did nothing to mitigate the impossible task before him .
At the end of the term most of his pupils gave up the hopeless effort .
It is not too much to say that for a great number of `` visualising '' people , the double effort at the outset of Russian is entirely too much .
It stops them altogether .
But to almost anyone it is possible to learn Russian if at first it is presented in a lettering that gives no trouble .
One of the most curious aspects of the British `` Pacifist '' is his willingness to give over great blocks of the black and coloured races to the Hohenzollerns to exploit and experiment upon .
I myself being something of a pacifist , and doing what I can , in my corner , to bring about the Peace of the World , the Peace of the World triumphant and armed against every disturber , could the more readily sympathise with the passive school of Pacifists if its proposals involved the idea that England should keep to England and Germany to Germany .
My political ideal is the United States of the World , a union of states whose state boundaries are determined by what I have defined as the natural map of mankind .
I can not understand those pacifists who talk about the German right to `` expansion , '' and babble about a return of her justly lost colonies .
That seems to me not pacificism but patriotic inversion .
This large disposition to hand over our fellow-creatures to a Teutonic educational system , with `` frightfulness '' in reserve , to `` efficiency '' on Wittenberg lines , leaves me -- hot .
The ghosts of the thirst-tormented Hereros rise up in their thousands from the African dust , protesting .
There is nothing so very fantastic in this idea of a sort of World-Admiralty ; it is not even completely novel .
Such bodies as the Knights Templars transcended nationality in the Middle Ages .
I do not see how some such synthetic control of the seas is to be avoided in the future .
And now coming back to the `` White Man 's Burthen , '' is there not a possibility that such a board of marine and international control as the naval and international problems of the future may produce ( or some closely parallel body with a stronger Latin element ) , would also be capable of dealing with these barbaric `` Administered Territories '' ?
A day may come when Tripoli , Nigeria , the French and the Belgian Congo will be all under one supreme control .
We may be laying the foundations of such a system to-day unawares .
The unstable and fluctuating conferences of the Allies to-day , their repeated experiences of the disadvantages of evanescent and discontinuous co-ordinations , may press them almost unconsciously toward this building up of things greater than they know .
There is a great deal of cant in this matter in Great Britain .
Genteel English people with relations in the Indian Civil Service and habits of self-delusion , believe that Indians are `` grateful '' for British rule .
The sort of `` patriotic '' self-flattery that prevailed in the Victorian age , and which is so closely akin to contemporary German follies , fostered and cultivated this sweet delusion .
There are , no doubt , old ladies in Germany to-day who believe that Belgium will presently be `` grateful '' for the present German administration .
Let us clear our minds of such cant .
As a matter of fact no Indians really like British rule or think of it as anything better than a necessary , temporary evil .
Let me put the parallel case to an Englishman or a Frenchman .
Through various political ineptitudes our country has , we will suppose , fallen under the rule of the Chinese .
They administer it , we will further assume , with an efficiency and honesty unparalleled in the bad old times of our lawyer politicians .
They do not admit us to the higher branches of the administration ; they go about our country wearing a strange costume , professing a strange religion -- which implies that ours is wrong -- speaking an unfamiliar tongue .
They control our financial system and our economic development -- on Chinese lines of the highest merit .
They take the utmost care of our Gothic cathedrals for us .
They put our dearest racial possessions into museums and admire them very much indeed .
They teach our young men to fly kites and eat bird 's nest soup .
They do all that a well-bred people can do to conceal their habit and persuasion of a racial superiority .
But they keep up their `` prestige . ''
... You know , we should n't love them .
It really is n't a question of whether they rule well or ill , but that the position is against certain fundamentals of human nature .
The only possible footing upon which we could meet them with comfortable minds would be the footing that we and they were discussing the terms of the restoration of our country .
Then indeed we might almost feel friendly with them .
That is the case with all civilised `` possessions . ''
The only terms upon which educated British and Indians can meet to-day with any comfort is precisely that .
The living intercourse of the British and Indian mind to-day is the discussion of the restoration .
Everything else is humbug on the one side and self-deception on the other .
Whatever some of us among the Allies may say , the future of Germany lies with Germany .
The utmost ambition of the Allies falls far short of destroying or obliterating Germany ; it is to give the Germans so thorough and memorable an experience of war that they will want no more of it for a few generations , and , failing the learning of that lesson , to make sure that they will not be in a position to resume their military aggressions upon mankind with any hope of success .
After all , it is not the will of the Allies that has determined even this resolve .
It is the declared and manifest will of Germany to become predominant in the world that has created the Alliance against Germany , and forged and tempered our implacable resolution to bring militarist Germany down .
And the nature of the coming peace and of the politics that will follow the peace are much more dependent upon German affairs than upon anything else whatever .
This is so clearly understood in Great Britain that there is scarcely a newspaper that does not devote two or three columns daily to extracts from the German newspapers , and from letters found upon German killed , wounded , or prisoners , and to letters and descriptive articles from neutrals upon the state of the German mind .
There can be no doubt that the British intelligence has grasped and kept its hold upon the real issue of this war with an unprecedented clarity .
At the outset there came declarations from nearly every type of British opinion that this war was a war against the Hohenzollern militarist idea , against Prussianism , and not against Germany .
That lack of any essential hatred does not mean that British opinion is not solidly for the continuation of this war against militarist imperialism to its complete and final defeat .
But if that can be defeated to any extent in Germany by the Germans , if the way opens to a Germany as unmilitary and pacific as was Great Britain before this war , there remains from the British point of view nothing else to fight about .
With the Germany of _Vorwaerts_ which , I understand , would evacuate and compensate Belgium and Serbia , set up a buffer state in Alsace-Lorraine , and another in a restored Poland ( including Posen ) , the spirit of the Allies has no profound quarrel at all , has never had any quarrel .
We would only too gladly meet that Germany at a green table to-morrow , and set to work arranging the compensation of Belgium and Serbia , and tracing over the outlines of the natural map of mankind the new political map of Europe .
Still it must be admitted that not only in Great Britain but in all the allied countries one finds a certain active minority corresponding to Sir George Makgill 's noisy following , who profess to believe that all Germans to the third and fourth generation ( save and except the Hanoverian royal family domiciled in Great Britain ) are a vile , treacherous , and impossible race , a race animated by an incredible racial vanity , a race which is indeed scarcely anything but a conspiracy against the rest of mankind .
Consider the names of the chief exponents of the aggressive German idea , and you will find that not one is German .
The first begetter of Nietzsche 's `` blond beast , '' and of all that great flood of rubbish about a strange superior race with whitish hair and blue eyes , that has so fatally rotted the German imagination , was a Frenchman named Gobineau .
We British are not altogether free from the disease .
As a small boy I read the History of J.R. Green , and fed my pride upon the peculiar virtues of my Anglo-Saxon blood .
, '' as they say in footnotes , Carlyle and Froude . )
It was not a German but a renegade Englishman of the Englishman-hating Whig type , Mr. Houston Stewart Chamberlain , who carried the Gobineau theory to that delirious level which claims Dante and Leonardo as Germans , and again it was not a German but a British peer , still among us , Lord Redesdale , who in his eulogistic preface to the English translation of Chamberlain 's torrent of folly , hinted not obscurely that the real father of Christ was not the Jew , Joseph , but a much more Germanic person .
Neither Clausewitz , who first impressed upon the German mind the theory of ruthless warfare , nor Bernhardi , nor Treitschke , who did as much to build up the Emperor 's political imagination , strike one as bearing particularly German names .
There are indeed very grave grounds for the German complaint that Germany has been the victim of alien flattery and alien precedents .
And what after all is the Prussian dream of world empire but an imitative response to the British empire and the adventure of Napoleon ?
The very title of the German emperor is the name of an Italian , Caesar , far gone in decay .
And the backbone of the German system at the present time is the Prussian , who is not really a German at all but a Germanised Wend .
Take away the imported and imposed elements from the things we fight to-day , leave nothing but what is purely and originally German , and you leave very little .
We fight dynastic ambition , national vanity , greed , and the fruits of fifty years of basely conceived and efficiently conducted education .
What will be the quality of the monarch and court and junkerdom that will face this awaking new Germany ?
`` Thou Prince of Peace , Thou God of War , ''
`` I remember little things .
We passed an old man musing among laurels , I remember , and a place gay with paroquets , and came through a broad shaded colonnade to a spacious cool palace , full of pleasant fountains , full of beautiful things , full of the quality and promise of heart 's desire .
And there were many things and many people , some that still seem to stand out clearly and some that are a little vague , but all these people were beautiful and kind .
In some way -- I do n't know how -- it was conveyed to me that they all were kind to me , glad to have me there , and filling me with gladness by their gestures , by the touch of their hands , by the welcome and love in their eyes .
I asked an obvious question .
Wallace 's voice sank with the keen memory of that shame .
`` I pretended not to hear , '' he said .
`` Well , then Carnaby suddenly called me a young liar and disputed with me when I said the thing was true .
I said I knew where to find the green door , could lead them all there in ten minutes .
Carnaby became outrageously virtuous , and said I 'd have to -- and bear out my words or suffer .
Did you ever have Carnaby twist your arm ?
Then perhaps you'll understand how it went with me .
I swore my story was true .
There was nobody in the school then to save a chap from Carnaby though Crawshaw put in a word or so .
Carnaby had got his game .
I grew excited and red-eared , and a little frightened , I behaved altogether like a silly little chap , and the outcome of it all was that instead of starting alone for my enchanted garden , I led the way presently -- cheeks flushed , ears hot , eyes smarting , and my soul one burning misery and shame -- for a party of six mocking , curious and threatening school-fellows .
`` I mean I could n't find it .
I would have found it if I could .
Carnaby held a council over me for wanton lying .
I remember how I sneaked home and upstairs to hide the marks of my blubbering .
But when I cried myself to sleep at last it was n't for Carnaby , but for the garden , for the beautiful afternoon I had hoped for , for the sweet friendly women and the waiting playfellows and the game I had hoped to learn again , that beautiful forgotten game .
`` I believed firmly that if I had not told -- .
I had bad times after that -- crying at night and wool-gathering by day .
For two terms I slackened and had bad reports .
Of course you would !
It was _you_ -- your beating me in mathematics that brought me back to the grind again . ''
`` Well '' , he said and sighed , `` I have served that career .
I have done -- much work , much hard work .
But I have dreamt of the enchanted garden a thousand dreams , and seen its door , or at least glimpsed its door , four times since then .
Yes -- four times .
For a while this world was so bright and interesting , seemed so full of meaning and opportunity that the half-effaced charm of the garden was by comparison gentle and remote .
Who wants to pat panthers on the way to dinner with pretty women and distinguished men ?
I came down to London from Oxford , a man of bold promise that I have done something to redeem .
Something -- and yet there have been disappointments .
I do not know .
I have told his story as he told it to me .
There are times when I believe that Wallace was no more than the victim of the coincidence between a rare but not unprecedented type of hallucination and a careless trap , but that indeed is not my profoundest belief .
You may think me superstitious if you will , and foolish ; but , indeed , I am more than half convinced that he had in truth , an abnormal gift , and a sense , something -- I know not what -- that in the guise of wall and door offered him an outlet , a secret and peculiar passage of escape into another and altogether more beautiful world .
At any rate , you will say , it betrayed him in the end .
But did it betray him ?
There you touch the inmost mystery of these dreamers , these men of vision and the imagination .
We see our world fair and common , the hoarding and the pit .
By our daylight standard he walked out of security into darkness , danger and death .
But did he see like that ?
Until it was dawn in London and Pollux setting and the stars overhead grown pale .
The Winter 's dawn it was , a sickly filtering accumulation of daylight , and the light of gas and candles shone yellow in the windows to show where people were astir .
But the yawning policeman saw the thing , the busy crowds in the markets stopped agape , workmen going to their work betimes , milkmen , the drivers of news-carts , dissipation going home jaded and pale , homeless wanderers , sentinels on their beats , and in the country , labourers trudging afield , poachers slinking home , all over the dusky quickening country it could be seen -- and out at sea by seamen watching for the day -- a great white star , come suddenly into the westward sky !
He looked at the little phial .
`` There will be no need of sleep again , '' he said .
The next day at noon -- punctual to the minute , he entered his lecture theatre , put his hat on the end of the table as his habit was , and carefully selected a large piece of chalk .
It was a joke among his students that he could not lecture without that piece of chalk to fumble in his fingers , and once he had been stricken to impotence by their hiding his supply .
He came and looked under his grey eyebrows at the rising tiers of young fresh faces , and spoke with his accustomed studied commonness of phrasing .
`` Circumstances have arisen -- circumstances beyond my control , '' he said and paused , `` which will debar me from completing the course I had designed .
It would seem , gentlemen , if I may put the thing clearly and briefly , that -- Man has lived in vain . ''
And yet , when at last the watchers in the European States saw the star rise , an hour later it is true , but no larger than it had been the night before , there were still plenty awake to laugh at the master mathematician -- to take the danger as if it had passed .
Larger grew the star , and larger , hotter , and brighter with a terrible swiftness now .
The tropical ocean had lost its phosphorescence , and the whirling steam rose in ghostly wreaths from the black waves that plunged incessantly , speckled with storm-tossed ships .
I looked a little more attentively at his face .
`` No , '' he said .
That was the end of the dream .
`` Yes , the girl .
You must not interrupt or you will put me out . ''
`` This seems bosh to you ? ''
`` Left whom ? ''
I asked , puzzled .
`` 'Come and see , ' she cried -- I can hear her now -- 'come and see the sunrise upon Monte Solaro . '
`` 'I have taken no heed of any news for many days , ' I said .
'What has Evesham been saying ? '
`` 'No , ' I cried .
'I wo n't hear you .
I took count of all those things , I weighed them -- and I have come away . '
`` 'Dear , ' she said ; 'but if they had need of you -- '
`` In truth , I could not believe it a dream for all the sobering reality of things about me .
I bathed and dressed as it were by habit , and as I shaved I argued why I of all men should leave the woman I loved to go back to fantastic politics in the hard and strenuous north .
Even if Evesham did force the world back to war , what was that to me ?
I was a man with the heart of a man , and why should I feel the responsibility of a deity for the way the world might go ?
The man seemed hesitating on the verge of a description .
`` They had never fought , '' he said .
`` They were just like our ironclads are nowadays ; they had never fought .
No one knew what they might do , with excited men inside them ; few even cared to speculate .
They were great driving things shaped like spear-heads without a shaft , with a propeller in the place of the shaft . ''
`` No , no , nothing of that sort .
An alloy that was very common -- as common as brass , for example .
It was called -- let me see -- '' He squeezed his forehead with the fingers of one hand .
`` I am forgetting everything , '' he said .
`` We did n't go into the city until the sky was full of stars , so we walked out upon the high terrace , to and fro , and -- she counselled me to go back .
The man with the white face paused .
I glanced at him , and his face was intent on the floor of the carriage .
A little railway station , a string of loaded trucks , a signal-box , and the back of a cottage , shot by the carriage window , and a bridge passed with a clap of noise , echoing the tumult of the train .
`` 'We must get out of this place , ' I said over and over .
'I have made my choice , and I will have no hand in these troubles .
I will have nothing of this war .
We have taken our lives out of all these things .
This is no refuge for us .
Let us go . '
His face was white and drawn and his hands were clenched .
He took no heed of my curiosity .
`` They had been seized . ''
`` But why should it be ?
If , indeed , this battle , this slaughter and stress is life , why have we this craving for pleasure and beauty ?
If there is no refuge , if there is no place of peace , and if all our dreams of quiet places are a folly and a snare , why have we such dreams ?
Surely it was no ignoble cravings , no base intentions , had brought us to this ; it was Love had isolated us .
Love had come to me with her eyes and robed in her beauty , more glorious than all else in life , in the very shape and colour of life , and summoned me away .
I had silenced all the voices , I had answered all the questions -- I had come to her .
And suddenly there was nothing but War and Death ! ''
`` Even the mutter of guns far away in the south-east seemed to us to signify nothing .
`` 'No , ' said I . '
Even now , I do not repent .
I will not repent ; I made my choice , and I will hold on to the end . '
`` Overhead in the sky flashed something and burst , and all about us I heard the bullets making a noise like a handful of peas suddenly thrown .
They chipped the stones about us , and whirled fragments from the bricks and passed .
He put his hand to his mouth , and then moistened his lips .
`` At the flash I had turned about .
`` I seem to remember that the aeroplanes came up out of the south , and that the battle went away to the west .
One aeroplane was struck , and overset and fell .
I remember that -- though it did n't interest me in the least .
It did n't seem to signify .
It was like a wounded gull , you know -- flapping for a time in the water .
I could see it down the aisle of the temple -- a black thing in the bright blue water .
`` And I do n't remember waking up .
I do n't remember dressing that day .
I know I found myself in my office , with my letters all slit open in front of me , and how I was struck by the absurdity of being there , seeing that in reality I was sitting , stunned , in that Paestum Temple with a dead woman in my arms .
I read my letters like a machine .
I have forgotten what they were about . ''
He stopped , and there was a long silence .
He seemed to force himself to finish .
His voice was very low .
`` Presently he was so close I could see his face clearly .
It was a narrow face , with dull gray eyes , and a black moustache .
He had a scar on his upper lip , and he was dirty and unshaven .
He kept shouting unintelligible things , questions , perhaps , at me .
`` I saw his face change at my grip .
`` 'You fool , ' I cried .
'Do n't you know ?
She is dead ! '
I became aware of a change in the rhythm of the train .
The brakes lifted their voices and the carriage jarred and jerked .
This present world insisted upon itself , became clamourous .
I saw through the steamy window huge electric fights glaring down from tall masts upon a fog , saw rows of stationary empty carriages passing by , and then a signal-box hoisting its constellation of green and red into the murky London twilight , marched after them .
I looked again at his drawn features .
The carriage door opened admitting a flood of sound , and a porter stood regarding us .
The sounds of doors slamming , and the hoof-clatter of cab-horses , and behind these things the featureless remote roar of the London cobble-stones , came to my ears .
A truckload of lighted lamps blazed along the platform .
`` Any luggage , sir ? ''
`` Yes , '' I insisted .
`` Nightmares , '' he cried ; `` nightmares indeed !
Great birds that fought and tore . ''
`` None of these men of iron have , '' he said sententiously .
`` They have no hearts . ''
Raut glanced at him and away again .
`` At present your moonlight effect is hardly ripe , '' he continued , looking upward .
`` The moon is still smothered by the vestiges of daylight . ''
Horrocks stared at him with the expression of a man who has suddenly awakened .
`` Vestiges of daylight ?
Of course , of course . ''
He too looked up at the moon , pale still in the midsummer sky .
`` Come along , '' he said suddenly , and , gripping Raut 's arm in his hand , made a move towards the path that dropped from them to the railway .
`` I say , '' he said now , laughing nervously , but with an undernote of snarl in his voice , `` why on earth are you nipping my arm off , Horrocks , and dragging me along like this ? ''
`` You have n't learnt the refinements of it yet then , '' said Raut , laughing artificially again .
I 'm black and blue . ''
Horrocks offered no apology .
They stood now near the bottom of the hill , close to the fence that bordered the railway .
The ironworks had grown larger and spread out with their approach .
They looked up to the blast furnaces now instead of down ; the further view of Etruria and Hanley had dropped out of sight with their descent .
Before them , by the stile rose a notice-board , bearing still dimly visible , the words , `` BEWARE OF THE TRAINS , '' half hidden by splashes of coaly mud .
`` Cones , my man , cones .
I 'll show you one nearer .
The flames used to flare out of the open throats , great -- what is it ?
-- pillars of cloud by day , red and black smoke , and pillars of fire by night .
Now we run it off in pipes , and burn it to heat the blast , and the top is shut by a cone .
You 'll be interested in that cone . ''
`` Out of the way , '' said Horrocks , with a gasp , as the train came rattling by , and they stood panting by the gate into the ironworks .
`` I did n't , '' said Raut .
Suppose this slouching , scowling monster _did_ know anything ?
For a minute or two then Raut was really afraid for his life , but the mood passed as he reasoned with himself .
After all , Horrocks might have heard nothing .
At any rate , he had pulled him out of the way in time .
His odd manner might be due to the mere vague jealousy he had shown once before .
He was talking now of the ash-heaps and the canal .
They went and stood behind the puddlers for a little while , and then through the rolling-mills , where amidst an incessant din the deliberate steam-hammer beat the juice out of the succulent iron , and black , half-naked Titans rushed the plastic bars , like hot sealing-wax , between the wheels .
`` Come on , '' said Horrocks in Raut 's ear , and they went and peeped through the little glass hole behind the tuyeres , and saw the tumbled fire writhing in the pit of the blast-furnace .
It left one eye blinded for a while .
Then , with green and blue patches dancing across the dark , they went to the lift by which the trucks of ore and fuel and lime were raised to the top of the big cylinder .
`` In the middle , '' bawled Horrocks , `` temperature near a thousand degrees .
If _you_ were dropped into it .
flash into flame like a pinch of gunpowder in a candle .
Put your hand out and feel the heat of his breath .
Why , even up here I 've seen the rain-water boiling off the trucks .
And that cone there .
It 's a damned sight too hot for roasting cakes .
The top side of it's three hundred degrees . ''
There was once a little man whose mother made him a beautiful suit of clothes .
It was green and gold and woven so that I can not describe how delicate and fine it was , and there was a tie of orange fluffiness that tied up under his chin .
And the buttons in their newness shone like stars .
He was proud and pleased by his suit beyond measure , and stood before the long looking-glass when first he put it on , so astonished and delighted with it that he could hardly turn himself away .
One night when he was dreaming of it , after his habit , he dreamed he took the tissue paper from one of the buttons and found its brightness a little faded , and that distressed him mightily in his dream .
He polished the poor faded button and polished it , and if anything it grew duller .
He woke up and lay awake thinking of the brightness a little dulled and wondering how he would feel if perhaps when the great occasion ( whatever it might be ) should arrive , one button should chance to be ever so little short of its first glittering freshness , and for days and days that thought remained with him , distressingly .
And when next his mother let him wear his suit , he was tempted and nearly gave way to the temptation just to fumble off one little bit of tissue paper and see if indeed the buttons were keeping as bright as ever .
The little man did not shout nor sing for all his infinite gladness .
He stood for a time like one awe-stricken , and then , with a queer small cry and holding out his arms , he ran out as if he would embrace at once the whole warm round immensity of the world .
He did not follow the neat set paths that cut the garden squarely , but thrust across the beds and through the wet , tall , scented herbs , through the night stock and the nicotine and the clusters of phantom white mallow flowers and through the thickets of southern-wood and lavender , and knee-deep across a wide space of mignonette .
He came to the great hedge and he thrust his way through it , and though the thorns of the brambles scored him deeply and tore threads from his wonderful suit , and though burs and goosegrass and havers caught and clung to him , he did not care .
He did not care , for he knew it was all part of the wearing for which he had longed .
`` I am glad I put on my suit , '' he said ; `` I am glad I wore my suit . ''
`` A warm night , '' said a voice at my side .
I turned my head , and saw the profile of a man who was leaning over the parapet beside me .
It was a refined face , not unhandsome , though pinched and pale enough , and the coat collar turned up and pinned round the throat marked his status in life as sharply as a uniform .
I felt I was committed to the price of a bed and breakfast if I answered him .
I looked at him curiously .
Would he have anything to tell me worth the money , or was he the common incapable -- incapable even of telling his own story ?
There was a quality of intelligence in his forehead and eyes , and a certain tremulousness in his nether lip that decided me .
`` I had , '' he proceeded , `` about a thousand pounds when I was twenty-one , and this , I thought , eked out by a little teaching , would keep my researches going .
A year or two was spent in study , at Berlin chiefly , and then I continued on my own account .
The trouble was the secrecy .
You see , if once I had let out what I was doing , other men might have been spurred on by my belief in the practicability of the idea ; and I do not pretend to be such a genius as to have been sure of coming in first , in the case of a race for the discovery .
And you see it was important that if I really meant to make a pile , people should not know it was an artificial process and capable of turning out diamonds by the ton .
So I had to work all alone .
At first I had a little laboratory , but as my resources began to run out I had to conduct my experiments in a wretched unfurnished room in Kentish Town , where I slept at last on a straw mattress on the floor among all my apparatus .
The money simply flowed away .
I grudged myself everything except scientific appliances .
I tried to keep things going by a little teaching , but I am not a very good teacher , and I have no university degree , nor very much education except in chemistry , and I found I had to give a lot of time and labour for precious little money .
But I got nearer and nearer the thing .
Three years ago I settled the problem of the composition of the flux , and got near the pressure by putting this flux of mine and a certain carbon composition into a closed-up gun-barrel , filling up with water , sealing tightly , and heating . ''
`` If I go in to respectable jewellers they ask me to wait , and go and whisper to a clerk to fetch a policeman , and then I say I can not wait .
And I found out a receiver of stolen goods , and he simply stuck to the one I gave him and told me to prosecute if I wanted it back .
I am going about now with several hundred thousand pounds-worth of diamonds round my neck , and without either food or shelter .
You are the first person I have taken into my confidence .
But I like your face and I am hard-driven . ''
He took the card , and an earnest of my good-will .
At last his dim feelings grew more distinct , and took shape in thoughts and at last in acts .
When he came into the roaring shed one morning he salaamed to the Lord of the Dynamos , and then when Holroyd was away , he went and whispered to the thundering machine that he was its servant , and prayed it to have pity on him and save him from Holroyd .
As he did so a rare gleam of light came in through the open archway of the throbbing machine-shed , and the Lord of the Dynamos , as he whirled and roared , was radiant with pale gold .
Then Azuma-zi knew that his service was acceptable to his Lord .
After that he did not feel so lonely as he had done , and he had indeed been very much alone in London .
And even when his work time was over , which was rare , he loitered about the shed .
It is hard to say exactly what madness is .
I fancy Azuma-zi was mad .
The incessant din and whirl of the dynamo shed may have churned up his little store of knowledge and his big store of superstitious fancy , at last , into something akin to frenzy .
At any rate , when the idea of making Holroyd a sacrifice to the Dynamo Fetich was thus suggested to him , it filled him with a strange tumult of exultant emotion .
Then he saw the set expression of Azuma-zi 's eyes as the Asiatic came out of the shadow towards him .
The distorted remains of Holroyd , which the electrician removed from the machine , were hastily covered by the porter with a coffee-stained tablecloth .
Somebody , by a happy inspiration , fetched a medical man .
The expert was chiefly anxious to get the machine at work again , for seven or eight trains had stopped midway in the stuffy tunnels of the electric railway .
Azuma-zi , answering or misunderstanding the questions of the people who had by authority or impudence come into the shed , was presently sent back to the stoke-hole by the scientific manager .
Of course a crowd collected outside the gates of the yard -- a crowd , for no known reason , always hovers for a day or two near the scene of a sudden death in London ; two or three reporters percolated somehow into the engine-shed , and one even got to Azuma-zi ; but the scientific expert cleared them out again , being himself an amateur journalist .
Azuma-zi made a stealthy step forward ; then stopped .
The scientific manager suddenly stopped writing , and walked down the shed to the endmost of the dynamos , and began to examine the brushes .
Azuma-zi hesitated , and then slipped across noiselessly into shadow by the switch .
Presently the manager's footsteps could be heard returning .
He stopped in his old position , unconscious of the stoker crouching ten feet away from him .
Then the big dynamo suddenly fizzled , and in another moment Azuma-zi had sprung out of the darkness upon him .
`` It 's not a nice death to die , apparently -- but it is quick . ''
They were very strange to his eyes , and indeed the whole aspect of that valley became , as he regarded it , queerer and more unfamiliar .
The greater part of its surface was lush green meadow , starred with many beautiful flowers , irrigated with extraordinary care , and bearing evidence of systematic cropping piece by piece .
High up and ringing the valley about was a wall , and what appeared to be a circumferential water channel , from which the little trickles of water that fed the meadow plants came , and on the higher slopes above this flocks of llamas cropped the scanty herbage .
Sheds , apparently shelters or feeding-places for the llamas , stood against the boundary wall here and there .
The irrigation streams ran together into a main channel down the centre of the valley , and this was enclosed on either side by a wall breast high .
This gave a singularly urban quality to this secluded place , a quality that was greatly enhanced by the fact that a number of paths paved with black and white stones , and each with a curious little kerb at the side , ran hither and thither in an orderly manner .
The houses of the central village were quite unlike the casual and higgledy-piggledy agglomeration of the mountain villages he knew ; they stood in a continuous row on either side of a central street of astonishing cleanness , here and there their parti-coloured facade was pierced by a door , and not a solitary window broke their even frontage .
They were parti-coloured with extraordinary irregularity , smeared with a sort of plaster that was sometimes grey , sometimes drab , sometimes slate-coloured or dark brown ; and it was the sight of this wild plastering first brought the word `` blind '' into the thoughts of the explorer .
`` The good man who did that , '' he thought , `` must have been as blind as a bat . ''
`` In the Country of the Blind the One-Eyed Man is King . ''
`` Over the mountains I come , '' said Nunez , `` out of the country beyond there -- where men can see .
From near Bogota -- where there are a hundred thousands of people , and where the city passes out of sight . ''
He drew his hand away .
`` I can see , '' he said .
A little boy nipped his hand .
A city to your village .
I come from the great world -- where men have eyes and see . ''
He went on to tell Nunez how this time had been divided into the warm and the cold , which are the blind equivalents of day and night , and how it was good to sleep in the warm and work during the cold , so that now , but for his advent , the whole town of the blind would have been asleep .
He said Nunez must have been specially created to learn and serve the wisdom they had acquired , and that for all his mental incoherency and stumbling behaviour he must have courage and do his best to learn , and at that all the people in the door-way murmured encouragingly .
He said the night -- for the blind call their day night -- was now far gone , and it behooved everyone to go back to sleep .
He asked Nunez if he knew how to sleep , and Nunez said he did , but that before sleep he wanted food .
They brought him food , llama 's milk in a bowl and rough salted bread , and led him into a lonely place to eat out of their hearing , and afterwards to slumber until the chill of the mountain evening roused them to begin their day again .
But Nunez slumbered not at all .
`` Unformed mind ! ''
`` Got no senses yet !
They little know they 've been insulting their Heaven-sent King and master .
`` There is no such word as _see_ , '' said the blind man , after a pause .
`` Cease this folly and follow the sound of my feet . ''
Nunez followed , a little annoyed .
He rebelled only after he had tried persuasion .
For five minutes he watched the slow extension of the cordon , and then his vague disposition to do something forthwith became frantic .
He stood up , went a pace or so towards the circumferential wall , turned , and went back a little way .
There they all stood in a crescent , still and listening .
He looked back at the high and unclimbable wall behind -- unclimbable because of its smooth plastering , but withal pierced with many little doors and at the approaching line of seekers .
Behind these others were now coming out of the street of houses .
He tried also to find food among the pine trees , to be comfortable under pine boughs while the frost fell at night , and -- with less confidence -- to catch a llama by artifice in order to try to kill it -- perhaps by hammering it with a stone -- and so finally , perhaps , to eat some of it .
But the llamas had a doubt of him and regarded him with distrustful brown eyes and spat when he drew near .
Fear came on him the second day and fits of shivering .
Finally he crawled down to the wall of the Country of the Blind and tried to make his terms .
He crawled along by the stream , shouting , until two blind men came out to the gate and talked to him .
They asked him if he still thought he could `` _see_ . ''
So Nunez became a citizen of the Country of the Blind , and these people ceased to be a generalised people and became individualities to him , and familiar to him , while the world beyond the mountains became more and more remote and unreal .
There was Yacob , his master , a kindly man when not annoyed ; there was Pedro , Yacob 's nephew ; and there was Medina-sarote , who was the youngest daughter of Yacob .
She was little esteemed in the world of the blind , because she had a clear-cut face and lacked that satisfying , glossy smoothness that is the blind man 's ideal of feminine beauty , but Nunez thought her beautiful at first , and presently the most beautiful thing in the whole creation .
Her closed eyelids were not sunken and red after the common way of the valley , but lay as though they might open again at any moment ; and she had long eyelashes , which were considered a grave disfigurement .
And her voice was weak and did not satisfy the acute hearing of the valley swains .
So that she had no lover .
He sought to speak to her .
`` You see , my dear , he 's an idiot .
He has delusions ; he can't do anything right . ''
`` Now , _what_ affects it ? ''
`` And then he will be sane ? ''
`` Then he will be perfectly sane , and a quite admirable citizen . ''
`` I wish sometimes -- you would not talk like that . ''
She flung her arms about him , weeping wildly .
`` Oh , if you would , '' she sobbed , `` if only you would ! ''
`` They will hurt you but little , '' she said ; `` and you are going through this pain , you are going through it , dear lover , for _me_ .
Dear , if a woman 's heart and life can do it , I will repay you .
My dearest one , my dearest with the tender voice , I will repay . ''
He thought of Medina-sarote , and she had become small and remote .
THE STORY OF THE LATE MR. ELVESHAM
THE DOOR IN THE WALL
`` Not engaged , ma'am ; but he is saving money to buy a ring -- hammyfist . ''
`` I do n't see anything in that , '' I said , though later my eyes were to be opened .
That was the culmination of Jane 's happiness .
When she returned , `` Mr. Maynard has been talking to William , ma'am , '' she said , `` and he is to serve customers , just like the young shop gentlemen , during the next sale .
And if he gets on , he is to be made an assistant , ma'am , at the first opportunity .
He has got to be as gentlemanly as he can , ma'am ; and if he ai n't , ma'am , he says it wo n't be for want of trying .
Mr. Maynard has took a great fancy to him . ''
That next Sunday as I drank my tea I interrogated my wife .
`` How is this Sunday different from all other Sundays , little woman ?
Have you altered the curtains , or re-arranged the furniture , or where is the indefinable difference of it ?
Are you wearing your hair in a new way without warning me ?
I perceive a change clearly , and I can not for the life of me say what it is . ''
`` Not for no parties , ma'am . ''
`` I wish , '' said Jane , `` I could play the piano , ma'am .
But anyhow , I don't mean to let _her_ get him away from me .
She 's older than him , and her hair ai n't gold to the roots , ma'am . ''
It was on the August Bank Holiday that the crisis came .
We do not clearly know the details of the fray , but only such fragments as poor Jane let fall .
She came home dusty , excited , and with her heart hot within her .
`` Yes , ma'am .
But it hit _him_ .
Yes , ma'am , hard .
Gev him a black eye , I should think .
I only threw that one .
I had n't the heart to try again .
All the little boys cheered when it hit him . ''
`` I do n't care , '' she said .
`` I do n't care a rap .
He will find out his mistake yet .
It serves me right .
I was stuck up about him .
I ought not to have looked so high .
And I am glad things are as things are . ''
Indeed , something passed the other day with the butcher-boy -- but that scarcely belongs to this story .
However , Jane is young still , and time and change are at work with her .
We all have our sorrows , but I do not believe very much in the existence of sorrows that never heal .
`` Not he , '' she said peevishly , as though that too irritated her .
`` He thinks of nothing but the works and the prices of fuel .
He has no imagination , no poetry . ''
`` _He_ has not , '' she said .
She turned her discontented face towards the window .
The distant sound of a roaring and rushing drew nearer and grew in volume ; the house quivered ; one heard the metallic rattle of the tender .
As the train passed , there was a glare of light above the cutting and a driving tumult of smoke ; one , two , three , four , five , six , seven , eight black oblongs -- eight trucks -- passed across the dim grey of the embankment , and were suddenly extinguished one by one in the throat of the tunnel , which , with the last , seemed to swallow down train , smoke , and sound in one abrupt gulp .
It was the husband 's voice that broke the silence at last .
`` That 's my work-basket , '' said Mrs. Horrocks with a gust of hysterical laughter .
Their hands came together on the back of the chair .
`` Here it is ! ''
She had an impulse to warn him in an undertone , but she could not frame a word .
`` Do n't go ! ''
and `` Beware of him ! ''
struggled in her mind , and the swift moment passed .
Raut stepped towards him .
`` Better say goodbye to Mrs. Horrocks , '' said the ironmaster , even more grimly quiet in his tone than before .
Their eyes met and saw a thousand things in a moment that their lips came near to say .
Horrocks 's hand tightened and then relaxed .
He let go , and before Raut was aware of it , they were arm in arm , and walking , one unwillingly enough , down the path .
`` Come along , '' said Horrocks abruptly , gripping his shoulder again , and moving him suddenly towards the railway crossing .
And then came one of those swift incidents , vivid , but so rapid that they leave one doubtful and reeling .
Half-way across , Horrocks 's hand suddenly clenched upon him like a vice , and swung him backward and through a half-turn , so that he looked up the line .
And there a chain of lamp-lit carriage windows telescoped swiftly as it came towards them , and the red and yellow lights of an engine grew larger and larger , rushing down upon them .
As he grasped what this meant , he turned his face to Horrocks , and pushed with all his strength against the arm that held him back between the rails .
The struggle did not last a moment .
Just as certain as it was that Horrocks held him there , so certain was it that he had been violently lugged out of danger .
Horrocks stood for half a minute , then turned abruptly towards the ironworks again .
`` See how fine these great mounds of mine , these clinker-heaps , look in the night !
That truck yonder , up above there !
Up it goes , and out-tilts the slag .
See the palpitating red stuff go sliding down the slope .
As we get nearer , the heap rises up and cuts the blast furnaces .
See the quiver up above the big one .
This way , between the heaps .
That goes to the puddling furnaces , but I want to show you the canal first . ''
He came and took Raut by the elbow , and so they went along side by side .
Raut answered Horrocks vaguely .
What , he asked himself , had really happened on the line ?
Was he deluding himself with his own fancies , or had Horrocks actually held him back in the way of the train ?
Had he just been within an ace of being murdered ?
Suppose this slouching , scowling monster _did_ know anything ?
For a minute or two then Raut was really afraid for his life , but the mood passed as he reasoned with himself .
After all , Horrocks might have heard nothing .
At any rate , he had pulled him out of the way in time .
His odd manner might be due to the mere vague jealousy he had shown once before .
He was talking now of the ash-heaps and the canal .
And out upon the narrow rail that overhung the furnace Raut 's doubts came upon him again .
Was it wise to be here ?
If Horrocks did know -- everything !
Do what he would , he could not resist a violent trembling .
Right under foot was a sheer depth of seventy feet .
It was a dangerous place .
They pushed by a truck of fuel to get to the railing that crowned the thing .
The reek of the furnace , a sulphurous vapour streaked with pungent bitterness , seemed to make the distant hillside of Hanley quiver .
The moon was riding out now from among a drift of clouds , half-way up the sky above the undulating wooded outlines of Newcastle .
The steaming canal ran away from below them under an indistinct bridge , and vanished into the dim haze of the flat fields towards Burslem .
`` Boil the blood out of you in ... No , you do n't ! ''
His human likeness departed from him .
When the momentary red had passed , Horrocks saw a charred , blackened figure , its head streaked with blood , still clutching and fumbling with the chain , and writhing in agony -- a cindery animal , an inhuman , monstrous creature that began a sobbing , intermittent shriek .
`` This again , '' said the Bacteriologist , slipping a glass slide under the microscope , `` is well , -- a preparation of the Bacillus of cholera -- the cholera germ . ''
A slight gleam of satisfaction appeared momentarily in the face of the pale man .
`` It 's a deadly thing to have in your possession , '' he said , devouring the little tube with his eyes .
The Bacteriologist watched the morbid pleasure in his visitor 's expression .
This man , who had visited him that afternoon with a note of introduction from an old friend , interested him from the very contrast of their dispositions .
The lank black hair and deep grey eyes , the haggard expression and nervous manner , the fitful yet keen interest of his visitor were a novel change from the phlegmatic deliberations of the ordinary scientific worker with whom the Bacteriologist chiefly associated .
It was perhaps natural , with a hearer evidently so impressionable to the lethal nature of ; his topic , to take the most effective aspect of the matter .
`` Velveteen coat , ma'am , and no 'at .
Very good , ma'am . ''
And the cabman whipped up at once in the most matter-of-fact way , as if he drove to this address every day in his life .
The Bacteriologist from his cab beamed curiously at him through his spectacles .
`` You have drunk it !
I see now . ''
He was about to say something more , and then checked himself .
A smile hung in the corner of his mouth .
He opened the apron of his cab as if to descend , at which the Anarchist waved him a dramatic farewell and strode off towards Waterloo Bridge , carefully jostling his infected body against as many people as possible .
The Bacteriologist was so preoccupied with the vision of him that he scarcely manifested the slightest surprise at the appearance of Minnie upon the pavement with his hat and shoes and overcoat .
`` Very good of you to bring my things , '' he said , and remained lost in contemplation of the receding figure of the Anarchist .
THE FLOWERING OF THE STRANGE ORCHID .
He passed his cup for his second cupful of coffee .
`` I do n't like those things that stick out , '' said his housekeeper .
`` I do n't suppose it was comfortable , but some men seem to enjoy that kind of thing , '' said Wedderburn .
`` Anyhow , the natives of his party were sufficiently civilised to take care of all his collection until his colleague , who was an ornithologist , came back again from the interior ; though they could not tell the species of the orchid , and had let it wither .
And it makes these things more interesting . ''
The next few days he was indeed singularly busy in his steamy little hothouse , fussing about with charcoal , lumps of teak , moss , and all the other mysteries of the orchid cultivator .
He considered he was having a wonderfully eventful time .
In the evening he would talk about these new orchids to his friends , and over and over again he reverted to his expectation of something strange .
Several of the Vandas and the Dendrobium died under his care , but presently the strange orchid began to show signs of life .
He was delighted , and took his housekeeper right away from jam-making to see it at once , directly he made the discovery .
`` They look to me like little white fingers poking out of the brown , '' said his housekeeper .
`` I do n't like them . ''
`` But how do they form new plants ? ''
Directly he noticed this he hurried down to the strange orchid .
the trailing green spikes bore now three great splashes of blossom , from which this overpowering sweetness proceeded .
He stopped before them in an ecstasy of admiration .
She went straight to the hothouse , and , opening the door , called his name .
There was no reply .
She noticed that the air was very close , and loaded with an intense perfume .
Then she saw something lying on the bricks between the hot-water pipes .
`` I will see to that , '' she said .
The next morning the strange orchid still lay there , black now and putrescent .
The door banged intermittently in the morning breeze , and all the array of Wedderburn 's orchids was shrivelled and prostrate .
But Wedderburn himself was bright and garrulous upstairs in the glory of his strange adventure .
Thaddy , the chief observer , was down with a slight fever .
His assistant , Woodhouse , paused for a moment in silent contemplation of the tropical night before commencing his solitary vigil .
The night was very still .
Now and then voices and laughter came from the native huts , or the cry of some strange animal was heard from the midst of the mystery of the forest .
Nocturnal insects appeared in ghostly fashion out of the darkness , and fluttered round his light .
He thought , perhaps , of all the possibilities of discovery that still lay in the black tangle beneath him ; for to the naturalist the virgin forests of Borneo are still a wonderland full of strange questions and half-suspected discoveries .
Woodhouse carried a small lantern in his hand , and its yellow glow contrasted vividly with the infinite series of tints between lavender-blue and black in which the landscape was painted .
His hands and face were smeared with ointment against the attacks of the mosquitoes .
The reader is probably familiar with the structure of an ordinary astronomical observatory .
The building is usually cylindrical in shape , with a very light hemispherical roof capable of being turned round from the interior .
The telescope is supported upon a stone pillar in the centre , and a clockwork arrangement compensates for the earth 's rotation , and allows a star once found to be continuously observed .
Besides this , there is a compact tracery of wheels and screws about its point of support , by which the astronomer adjusts it .
There is , of course , a slit in the movable roof which follows the eye of the telescope in its survey of the heavens .
The observer sits or lies on a sloping wooden arrangement , which he can wheel to any part of the observatory as the position of the telescope may require .
Within it is advisable to have things as dark as possible , in order to enhance the brilliance of the stars observed .
He felt a burning sensation in his throat , and then he perceived it was broad daylight , and that one of the Dyak servants was looking at him with a curious expression .
Then there was the top of Thaddy 's face upside down .
Funny fellow , Thaddy , to go about like that !
Then he grasped the situation better , and perceived that his head was on Thaddy 's knee , and Thaddy was giving him brandy .
And then he saw the eyepiece of the telescope with a lot of red smears on it .
He began to remember .
Thaddy , however , was curious enough , and it was a hard struggle between duty and inclination to keep Woodhouse quiet until he was decently put away in bed , and had slept upon the copious dose of meat extract Thaddy considered advisable .
They then talked it over together .
`` The Dyak chaps talk about a Big Colugo , a Klang-utang -- whatever that may be .
It does not often attack man , but I suppose you made it nervous .
They say there is a Big Colugo and a Little Colugo , and a something else that sounds like gobble .
They all fly about at night .
For my own part , I know there are flying foxes and flying lemurs about here , but they are none of them very big beasts . ''
The man with the scarred face leant over the table and looked at my bundle .
`` I know a few explorers by name , '' I said , anticipating a yarn .
`` Whom did you collect for ? ''
`` I do n't .
I fancy Andrews said something about a swamp . ''
`` I daresay you find it hard to believe .
_I_ did , with the thing before me .
There the egg had been , sunk in that cold black mud , perhaps three hundred years .
But there was no mistaking it .
There was the -- what is it ?
-- embryo , with its big head and curved back , and its heart beating under its throat , and the yolk shrivelled up and great membranes spreading inside of the shell and all over the yolk .
Here was I hatching out the eggs of the biggest of all extinct birds , in a little canoe in the midst of the Indian Ocean .
If old Dawson had known that !
It was worth four years ' salary .
What do _you_ think ?
`` However , I had to eat that precious thing up , every bit of it , before I sighted the reef , and some of the mouthfuls were beastly unpleasant .
I left the third one alone .
I held it up to the light , but the shell was too thick for me to get any notion of what might be happening inside ; and though I fancied I heard blood pulsing , it might have been the rustle in my own ears , like what you listen to in a seashell .
`` I was sleeping under the canoe , and the egg was luckily among the sand higher up the beach , and the first thing I remember was a sound like a hundred pebbles hitting the boat at once , and a rush of water over my body .
I 'd been dreaming of Antananarivo , and I sat up and holloaed to Intoshi to ask her what the devil was up , and clawed out at the chair where the matches used to be .
Then I remembered where I was .
There were phosphorescent waves rolling up as if they meant to eat me , and all the rest of the night as black as pitch .
The air was simply yelling .
The clouds seemed down on your head almost , and the rain fell as if heaven was sinking and they were baling out the waters above the firmament .
One great roller came writhing at me , like a fiery serpent , and I bolted .
Then I thought of the canoe , and ran down to it as the water went hissing back again ; but the thing had gone .
I wondered about the egg then , and felt my way to it .
It was all right and well out of reach of the maddest waves , so I sat down beside it and cuddled it for company .
what a night that was !
THE REMARKABLE CASE OF DAVIDSON 'S EYES .
When I say that I was the immediate witness of his seizure , I mean that I was the first on the scene .
The thing happened at the Harlow Technical College , just beyond the Highgate Archway .
He was alone in the larger laboratory when the thing happened .
I was in a smaller room , where the balances are , writing up some notes .
The thunderstorm had completely upset my work , of course .
It was just after one of the louder peals that I thought I heard some glass smash in the other room .
I stopped writing , and turned round to listen .
For a moment I heard nothing ; the hail was playing the devil 's tattoo on the corrugated zinc of the roof .
Then came another sound , a smash -- no doubt of it this time .
Something heavy had been knocked off the bench .
I jumped up at once and went and opened the door leading into the big laboratory .
`` What 's the matter with you ? ''
He turned round in my direction and looked about for me .
He looked over me and at me and on either side of me , without the slightest sign of seeing me .
`` Waves , '' he said ; `` and a remarkably neat schooner .
I 'd swear that was Bellow 's voice .
He shouted suddenly at the top of his voice .
He jumped when I answered him and stared -- how can I express it ?
-- right through me .
He began talking , not to me , but to himself .
`` Here in broad daylight on a clear beach .
Not a place to hide in . ''
He looked about him wildly .
I 'm _off_ . ''
He suddenly turned and ran headlong into the big electro-magnet -- so violently that , as we found afterwards , he bruised his shoulder and jawbone cruelly .
At that he stepped back a pace , and cried out with almost a whimper , `` What , in Heaven 's name , has come over me ? ''
He stood , blanched with terror and trembling violently , with his right arm clutching his left , where that had collided with the magnet .
`` The laboratory ! ''
he answered in a puzzled tone , and put his hand to his forehead .
`` I _was_ in the laboratory -- till that flash came , but I'm hanged if I 'm there now .
What ship is that ? ''
`` No ship ! ''
he repeated , and seemed to forget my denial forthwith .
`` I suppose , '' said he slowly , `` we 're both dead .
But the rummy part is I feel just as though I still had a body .
Do n't get used to it all at once , I suppose .
The old shop was struck by lightning , I suppose .
Jolly quick thing , Bellows -- eigh ? ''
He stared away from me towards the diagrams of cryohydrates .
`` I must be deaf , '' said he .
`` They 've fired a gun , for there goes the puff of smoke , and I never heard a sound . ''
`` Never mind the ship , '' said Wade .
`` Listen to me , Davidson .
Do you know what hallucination means ? ''
`` That 's all .
Do n't let it perplex you .
Bellows here and I will take you home in a cab . ''
`` Wait a bit . ''
`` Help me to sit down , '' said he presently ; `` and now -- I 'm sorry to trouble you -- but will you tell me all that over again ? ''
Then he opened his eyes .
`` And there , '' said he , `` is the sun just rising , and the yards of the ship , and a tumbled sea , and a couple of birds flying .
I never saw anything so real .
And I 'm sitting up to my neck in a bank of sand . ''
But the queerest part of his vision came when Wade sent him out in a Bath-chair to get fresh air .
The Davidsons hired a chair , and got that deaf and obstinate dependant of theirs , Widgery , to attend to it .
Widgery 's ideas of healthy expeditions were peculiar .
My sister , who had been to the Dogs ' Home , met them in Camden Town , towards King 's Cross , Widgery trotting along complacently , and Davidson , evidently most distressed , trying in his feeble , blind way to attract Widgery's attention .
`` That I had seen that ship before . ''
And then , bit by bit , it came out that on the very day Davidson was seized , H.M.S .
_Fulmar_ had actually been off a little rock to the south of Antipodes Island .
A boat had landed overnight to get penguins' eggs , had been delayed , and a thunderstorm drifting up , the boat 's crew had waited until the morning before rejoining the ship .
Atkins had been one of them , and he corroborated , word for word , the descriptions Davidson had given of the island and the boat .
There is not the slightest doubt in any of our minds that Davidson has really seen the place .
In some unaccountable way , while he moved hither and thither in London , his sight moved hither and thither in a manner that corresponded , about this distant island .
_How_ is absolutely a mystery .
Then , the next time Holroyd maltreated him , Azuma-zi went presently to the Lord of the Dynamos and whispered , `` Thou seest , O my Lord ! ''
and the angry whirr of the machinery seemed to answer him .
Thereafter it appeared to him that whenever Holroyd came into the shed a different note came into the sounds of the dynamo .
`` My Lord bides his time , '' said Azuma-zi to himself .
`` The iniquity of the fool is not yet ripe . ''
And he waited and watched for the day of reckoning .
One day there was evidence of short circuiting , and Holroyd , making an unwary examination -- it was in the afternoon -- got a rather severe shock .
Azuma-zi from behind the engine saw him jump off and curse at the peccant coil .
That night the two men and their black shadows were alone in the shed together .
The shed was lit with one big arc light that winked and flickered purple .
The shadows lay black behind the dynamos , the ball governors of the engines whirled from light to darkness , and their pistons beat loud and steady .
The world outside seen through the open end of the shed seemed incredibly dim and remote .
It seemed absolutely silent , too , since the riot of the machinery drowned every external sound .
Far away was the black fence of the yard with grey shadowy houses behind , and above was the deep blue sky and the pale little stars .
Azuma-zi suddenly walked across the centre of the shed above which the leather bands were running , and went into the shadow by the big dynamo .
Holroyd heard a click , and the spin of the armature changed .
First , the scientific manager was gripped round the body and swung towards the big dynamo , then , kicking with his knee and forcing his antagonist's head down with his hands , he loosened the grip on his waist and swung round away from the machine .
Then the black grasped him again , putting a curly head against his chest , and they swayed and panted as it seemed for an age or so .
Then the scientific manager was impelled to catch a black ear in his teeth and bite furiously .
The black yelled hideously .
`` I 'm jolly glad you came in when you did , '' said the scientific manager , still sitting on the floor .
So ended prematurely the worship of the Dynamo Deity , perhaps the most short-lived of all religions .
Yet withal it could at least boast a Martyrdom and a Human Sacrifice .
[ Footnote A : `` Remarks on a Recent Revision of Microlepidoptera . ''
Entomological Soc._ , 1863 . ]
`` Confound Pawkins ! ''
`` But I must catch this . ''
And looking round him for some means of capturing the moth , he rose slowly out of his chair .
Suddenly the insect rose , struck the edge of the lampshade -- Hapley heard the `` ping '' -- and vanished into the shadow .
There was a timid rapping at the door .
He looked at it .
It was not at all dreamlike , but perfectly clear and solid-looking in the candle-light .
He saw the hairy body , and the short feathery antennae , the jointed legs , even a place where the down was rubbed from the wing .
He suddenly felt angry with himself for being afraid of a little insect .
The doctor was a blockhead , a just-qualified general practitioner , and quite ignorant of mental science .
He simply said there was no moth .
Had he possessed the wit , he might still , perhaps , have saved Hapley from his fate by entering into his delusion , and covering his face with gauze , as he prayed might be done .
But , as I say , the doctor was a blockhead , and until the leg was healed Hapley was kept tied to his bed , and with the imaginary moth crawling over him .
It never left him while he was awake and it grew to a monster in his dreams .
While he was awake he longed for sleep , and from sleep he awoke screaming .
THE TREASURE IN THE FOREST .
The man with the carved paddle stopped .
`` It should be somewhere here , '' he said .
He shipped the paddle and held his arms out straight before him .
The man called Evans came swaying along the canoe until he could look over his companion 's shoulder .
They were in the mouth of the lagoon .
They could see now where the mouth of the stream opened out .
At the sight of it Evans revived .
`` Hurry up , man , '' he said , `` or by heaven I shall have to drink sea water ! ''
He gnawed his hand and stared at the gleam of silver among the rocks and green tangle .
`` Curse this ! ''
`` It 's too slow . ''
And , leaning dangerously over the fore part of the canoe , he began to suck up the water with his lips .
They advanced slowly , looking curiously about them .
`` What the devil 's that ? ''
`` Only gold or lead could weigh like this , '' he said exultantly .
`` He stole a march on his friends , '' he said at last .
`` He came here alone , and some poisonous snake has killed him ...
I wonder how he found the place . ''
He took his jacket off and spread it on the ground , and flung two or three ingots into it .
Presently he found that another little thorn had punctured his skin .
`` This is as much as we can carry , '' said he .
Then suddenly , with a queer rush of irritation , `` What are you staring at ? ''
`` It 's queer , '' said Evans , when they had advanced only a few steps , `` but my arms ache still with that paddling . ''
`` Do n't come near me , '' he said , and went and leant against a tree .
Then in a steadier voice , `` I 'll be better in a minute . ''
Then Hooker began to suck furiously at the little pink spot on the ball of his thumb -- sucking for dear life .
Presently he felt a strange aching pain in his arms and shoulders , and his fingers seemed difficult to bend .
Then he knew that sucking was no good .
`` I must tell you , then , that I am an old man , a very old man . ''
`` And it happens that I have money that I must presently be leaving , and never a child have I to leave it to . ''
I thought of the confidence trick , and resolved I would be on the alert for the vestiges of my five hundred pounds .
He proceeded to enlarge on his loneliness , and the trouble he had to find a proper disposition of his money .
`` I have weighed this plan and that plan , charities , institutions , and scholarships , and libraries , and I have come to this conclusion at last , '' -- he fixed his eyes on my face , -- '' that I will find some young fellow , ambitious , pure-minded , and poor , healthy in body and healthy in mind , and , in short , make him my heir , give him all that I have . ''
He repeated , `` Give him all that I have .
So that he will suddenly be lifted out of all the trouble and struggle in which his sympathies have been educated , to freedom and influence . ''
This modified my secret congratulations a little .
`` Not that , '' I said hastily .
`` Not that . ''
Do they still show children dissolving views ?
In those I remember one view would begin like a faint ghost , and grow and oust another .
In just that way it seemed to me that a ghostly set of new sensations was struggling with those of my ordinary self .
I turned my eyes to the room again .
Now the blind was up , faint spectres of its furnishing came out of the darkness .
There was a huge curtained bed , and the fireplace at its foot had a large white mantel with something of the shimmer of marble .
I leant against the toilet-table , shut my eyes and opened them again , and tried to think .
The whole thing was far too real for dreaming .
I was inclined to imagine there was still some hiatus in my memory , as a consequence of my draught of that strange liqueur ; that I had come into my inheritance perhaps , and suddenly lost my recollection of everything since my good fortune had been announced .
Perhaps if I waited a little , things would be clearer to me again .
Yet my dinner with old Elvesham was now singularly vivid and recent .
The champagne , the observant waiters , the powder , and the liqueurs -- I could have staked my soul it all happened a few hours ago .
`` This way lies insanity ! ''
I cried in my piping voice .
I staggered to my feet , dragged my feeble , heavy limbs to the washhand-stand , and plunged my grey head into a basin of cold water .
Then , towelling myself , I tried again .
It was no good .
I felt beyond all question that I was indeed Eden , not Elvesham .
But Eden in Elvesham 's body !
Was this dulness of feeling in itself an anticipation ?
It was curious that I could reason and follow out a network of suggestion as clearly as ever : so , at least , it seemed to me .
It was calmness rather than dulness that was coming upon me .
Was there any ground for the relief in the presentiment of death ?
Did a man near to death begin instinctively to withdraw himself from the meshes of matter and sense , even before the cold hand was laid upon his ?
I felt strangely isolated -- isolated without regret -- from the life and existence about me .
The children playing in the sun and gathering strength and experience for the business of life , the park-keeper gossiping with a nursemaid , the nursing mother , the young couple intent upon each other as they passed me , the trees by the wayside spreading new pleading leaves to the sunlight , the stir in their branches -- I had been part of it all , but I had nearly done with it now .
Some way down the Broad Walk I perceived that I was tired , and that my feet were heavy .
It was hot that afternoon , and I turned aside and sat down on one of the green chairs that line the way .
In a minute I had dozed into a dream , and the tide of my thoughts washed up a vision of the resurrection .
I was still sitting in the chair , but I thought myself actually dead , withered , tattered , dried , one eye ( I saw ) pecked out by birds .
cried a voice ; and incontinently the dust of the path and the mould under the grass became insurgent .
I had never before thought of Regent 's Park as a cemetery , but now , through the trees , stretching as far as eye could see , I beheld a flat plain of writhing graves and heeling tombstones .
There seemed to be some trouble : the rising dead appeared to stifle as they struggled upward , they bled in their struggles , the red flesh was torn away from the white bones .
cried a voice ; but I determined I would not rise to such horrors .
They would not let me alone .
`` Wake up ! ''
said an angry voice .
The man who sells the tickets was shaking me , demanding my penny .
There must have been an interval of absolute unconsciousness , seconds or minutes .
Then with a chilly , unemotional clearness , I perceived that I was not yet dead .
I was still in my body ; but all the multitudinous sensations that come sweeping from it to make up the background of consciousness had gone , leaving me free of it all .
No , not free of it all ; for as yet something still held me to the poor stark flesh upon the bed -- held me , yet not so closely that I did not feel myself external to it , independent of it , straining away from it .
I do not think I saw , I do not think I heard ; but I perceived all that was going on , and it was as if I both heard and saw .
Haddon was bending over me , Mowbray behind me ; the scalpel -- it was a large scalpel -- was cutting my flesh at the side under the flying ribs .
It was interesting to see myself cut like cheese , without a pang , without even a qualm .
The interest was much of a quality with that one might feel in a game of chess between strangers .
Haddon 's face was firm and his hand steady ; but I was surprised to perceive ( _how_ I know not ) that he was feeling the gravest doubt as to his own wisdom in the conduct of the operation .
Although I did not think that I was dead , I still perceived quite clearly that I was soon to die .
This brought me back to the consideration of Haddon 's proceedings .
I looked into his mind , and saw that he was afraid of cutting a branch of the portal vein .
My attention was distracted from details by the curious changes going on in his mind .
His consciousness was like the quivering little spot of light which is thrown by the mirror of a galvanometer .
His thoughts ran under it like a stream , some through the focus bright and distinct , some shadowy in the half-light of the edge .
Just now the little glow was steady ; but the least movement on Mowbray's part , the slightest sound from outside , even a faint difference in the slow movement of the living flesh he was cutting , set the light-spot shivering and spinning .
A new sense-impression came rushing up through the flow of thoughts ; and lo !
the light-spot jerked away towards it , swifter than a frightened fish .
It was wonderful to think that upon that unstable , fitful thing depended all the complex motions of the man ; that for the next five minutes , therefore , my life hung upon its movements .
And he was growing more and more nervous in his work .
It was as if a little picture of a cut vein grew brighter , and struggled to oust from his brain another picture of a cut falling short of the mark .
He was afraid : his dread of cutting too little was battling with his dread of cutting too far .
Every moment the circle of scenery beneath me grew wider and wider , and the details of town and field , of hill and valley , got more and more hazy and pale and indistinct , a luminous grey was mingled more and more with the blue of the hills and the green of the open meadows ; and a little patch of cloud , low and far to the west , shone ever more dazzlingly white .
Above , as the veil of atmosphere between myself and outer space grew thinner , the sky , which had been a fair springtime blue at first , grew deeper and richer in colour , passing steadily through the intervening shades , until presently it was as dark as the blue sky of midnight , and presently as black as the blackness of a frosty starlight , and at last as black as no blackness I had ever beheld .
And first one star , and then many , and at last an innumerable host broke out upon the sky : more stars than anyone has ever seen from the face of the earth .
For the blueness of the sky in the light of the sun and stars sifted and spread abroad blindingly : there is diffused light even in the darkest skies of winter , and we do not see the stars by day only because of the dazzling irradiation of the sun .
But now I saw things -- I know not how ; assuredly with no mortal eyes -- and that defect of bedazzlement blinded me no longer .
The sun was incredibly strange and wonderful .
The body of it was a disc of blinding white light : not yellowish , as it seems to those who live upon the earth , but livid white , all streaked with scarlet streaks and rimmed about with a fringe of writhing tongues of red fire .
And shooting half-way across the heavens from either side of it and brighter than the Milky Way , were two pinions of silver white , making it look more like those winged globes I have seen in Egyptian sculpture than anything else I can remember upon earth .
These I knew for the solar corona , though I had never seen anything of it but a picture during the days of my earthly life .
Suddenly feeling came back to me -- feeling in the shape of overwhelming terror ; such a dread of those dark vastitudes as no words can describe , a passionate resurgence of sympathy and social desire .
Were there other souls , invisible to me as I to them , about me in the blackness ?
or was I indeed , even as I felt , alone ?
Had I passed out of being into something that was neither being nor not-being ?
The covering of the body , the covering of matter , had been torn from me , and the hallucinations of companionship and security .
Everything was black and silent .
I had ceased to be .
There was nothing , save only that infinitesimal dot of light that dwindled in the gulf .
I strained myself to hear and see , and for a while there was naught but infinite silence , intolerable darkness , horror , and despair .
The cloud 's shape was grotesque .
It seemed to be looped along its lower side into four projecting masses , and , above , it ended in a straight line .
What phantom was it ?
I felt assured I had seen that figure before ; but I could not think what , nor where , nor when it was .
Then the realisation rushed upon me .
_It was a clenched Hand._ I was alone in space , alone with this huge , shadowy Hand , upon which the whole Universe of Matter lay like an unconsidered speck of dust .
It seemed as though I watched it through vast periods of time .
On the forefinger glittered a ring ; and the universe from which I had come was but a spot of light upon the ring's curvature .
And the thing that the hand gripped had the likeness of a black rod .
Through a long eternity I watched this Hand , with the ring and the rod , marvelling and fearing and waiting helplessly on what might follow .
It seemed as though nothing could follow : that I should watch for ever , seeing only the Hand and the thing it held , and understanding nothing of its import .
Was the whole universe but a refracting speck upon some greater Being ?
Were our worlds but the atoms of another universe , and those again of another , and so on through an endless progression ?
And what was I ?
Was I indeed immaterial ?
A vague persuasion of a body gathering about me came into my suspense .
The abysmal darkness about the Hand filled with impalpable suggestions , with uncertain , fluctuating shapes .
The operation had not killed me .
And I perceived , suddenly , that the dull melancholy of half a year was lifted from my mind .
In no department of zoological science , indeed , are we quite so much in the dark as with regard to the deep-sea cephalopods .
A mere accident , for instance , it was that led to the Prince of Monaco 's discovery of nearly a dozen new forms in the summer of 1895 , a discovery in which the before-mentioned tentacle was included .
It chanced that a cachalot was killed off Terceira by some sperm whalers , and in its last struggles charged almost to the Prince 's yacht , missed it , rolled under , and died within twenty yards of his rudder .
And in its agony it threw up a number of large objects , which the Prince , dimly perceiving they were strange and important , was , by a happy expedient , able to secure before they sank .
He set his screws in motion , and kept them circling in the vortices thus created until a boat could be lowered .
And these specimens were whole cephalopods and fragments of cephalopods , some of gigantic proportions , and almost all of them unknown to science !
He approached his mark with all the assurance which the absolute security of this country against all forms of animal life gives its inhabitants .
The round bodies moved to and fro , but it was only when he surmounted the skerry of boulders I have mentioned that he realised the horrible nature of the discovery .
It came upon him with some suddenness .
They chased him to the very foot of the cliffs , and desisted only when he had been joined by the workmen at the foot of the ladder-way up the cliff .
All three of the men pelted them with stones for a time , and then hurried to the cliff top and along the path towards Sidmouth , to secure assistance and a boat , and to rescue the desecrated body from the clutches of these abominable creatures .
And , as if he had not already been in sufficient peril that day , Mr. Fison went with the boat to point out the exact spot of his adventure .
At that all four men , greatly excited , began beating the water with oars and shouting , and immediately they saw a tumultuous movement among the weeds .
They desisted to see more clearly , and as soon as the water was smooth , they saw , as it seemed to them , the whole sea bottom among the weeds set with eyes .
Then Hill , who was a burly , powerful man , made a strenuous effort , and rose almost to a standing position .
He lifted his arm , indeed , clean out of the water .
Hanging to it was a complicated tangle of brown ropes , and the eyes of one of the brutes that had hold of him , glaring straight and resolute , showed momentarily above the surface .
The boat heeled more and more , and the green-brown water came pouring in a cascade over the side .
Then Hill slipped and fell with his ribs across the side , and his arm and the mass of tentacles about it splashed back into the water .
He rolled over ; his boot kicked Mr. Fison 's knee as that gentleman rushed forward to seize him , and in another moment fresh tentacles had whipped about his waist and neck , and after a brief , convulsive struggle , in which the boat was nearly capsized , Hill was lugged overboard .
The boat righted with a violent jerk that all but sent Mr. Fison over the other side , and hid the struggle in the water from his eyes .
He stood staggering to recover his balance for a moment , and as he did so he became aware that the struggle and the inflowing tide had carried them close upon the weedy rocks again .
Not four yards off a table of rock still rose in rhythmic movements above the in-wash of the tide .
In a moment Mr. Fison seized the oar from Ewan , gave one vigorous stroke , then dropping it , ran to the bows and leapt .
He felt his feet slide over the rock , and , by a frantic effort , leapt again towards a further mass .
He stumbled over this , came to his knees , and rose again .
He looked over his shoulder at last , and seeing that he was not pursued , faced about .
From the moment of the rising of the cephalopods out of the water he had been acting too swiftly to fully comprehend his actions .
Now it seemed to him as if he had suddenly jumped out of an evil dream .
These people told their story in gesticulated fragments , as first one boat drew alongside and then another .
At last there was a little fleet of eight or nine boats collected together , and from them a tumult , like the chatter of a market-place , rose into the stillness of the night .
There was little or no disposition to pursue the shoal , the people had neither weapons nor experience for such a dubious chase , and presently -- even with a certain relief , it may be -- the boats turned shoreward .
I was -- in those days -- rather a nice fellow , rather shy -- taste for grey in my clothes , weedy little moustache , face `` interesting , '' slight stutter which I had caught in my early life from a schoolfellow .
Engaged to a very nice girl , named Delia .
Fairly new , she was -- cigarettes -- liked me because I was human and original .
Considered I was like Lamb -- on the strength of the stutter , I believe .
Father , an eminent authority on postage stamps .
She read a great deal in the British Museum .
( A perfect pairing ground for literary people , that British Museum -- you should read George Egerton and Justin Huntly M'Carthy and Gissing and the rest of them . )
We loved in our intellectual way , and shared the brightest hopes .
( All gone now . )
And her father liked me because I seemed honestly eager to hear about stamps .
She had no mother .
Indeed , I had the happiest prospects a young man could have .
I never went to theatres in those days .
My Aunt Charlotte before she died had told me not to .
`` Did you call me a fool ? ''
I decided that I would take his hint and become ( to my own destruction ) a Dramatic Critic .
I walked slowly down the passage to Wembly .
That Barnaby has a remarkable persuasive way .
He has made few suggestions during our very pleasant intercourse of four years that he has not ultimately won me round to adopting .
It may be , of course , that I am of a yielding disposition ; certainly I am too apt to take my colour from my circumstances .
It is , indeed , to my unfortunate susceptibility to vivid impressions that all my misfortunes are due .
I have already alluded to the slight stammer I had acquired from a schoolfellow in my youth .
However , this is a digression ...
I went home in a cab to dress .
After shaving , my mind reverted to the acting I had seen , and I entertained myself before the cheval glass with some imitations of Jafferay 's more exaggerated gestures .
`` Really , one might think it a disease , '' I said -- '' Stage-Walkitis ! ''
( There 's many a truth spoken in jest . )
Then , if I remember rightly , I went off to see Wembly , and afterwards lunched at the British Museum with Delia .
We actually spoke about our prospects , in the light of my new appointment .
But that appointment was the beginning of my downfall .
From that day I necessarily became a persistent theatre-goer , and almost insensibly I began to change .
The next thing I noticed after the gesture about the razor was to catch myself bowing ineffably when I met Delia , and stooping in an old-fashioned , courtly way over her hand .
Directly I caught myself , I straightened myself up and became very uncomfortable .
I remember she looked at me curiously .
Then , in the office , I found myself doing `` nervous business , '' fingers on teeth , when Barnaby asked me a question I could not very well answer .
Then , in some trifling difference with Delia , I clasped my hand to my brow .
And I pranced through my social transactions at times singularly like an actor !
I tried not to -- no one could be more keenly alive to the arrant absurdity of the histrionic bearing .
I said , with more sprightliness and emotion in my voice than had ever been in all my life before I became ( to my own undoing ) a Dramatic Critic .
I felt what was coming .
I tried to be the old Egbert Craddock Cummins of shambling gait and stammering sincerity , whom she loved , but I felt even as I did so that I was a new thing , a thing of surging emotions and mysterious fixity -- like no human being that ever lived , except upon the stage .
`` Egbert , '' she said , `` you are not yourself . ''
She eyed me critically .
`` _Why_ you keep playing the fool like this I do n't know , '' she said .
`` Anyhow , I really can not go about with a man who behaves as you do .
You made us both ridiculous on Wednesday .
Frankly , I dislike you , as you are now .
I met you here to tell you so -- as it 's about the only place where we can be sure of being alone together -- -- ''
`` I do , '' said Delia .
`` A woman 's lot is sad enough at the best of times .
But with you -- -- ''
`` So , good-bye , '' said Delia , without emotion .
I said at last , watching her retreating figure .
How I hated myself for doing it !
After she had vanished , I repeated in a dreamy way , `` Good-baye ! ''
looking hopelessly round me .
Then , with a kind of heart-broken cry , I shook my clenched fists in the air , staggered to the pedestal of a winged figure , buried my face in my arms , and made my shoulders heave .
Something within me said `` Ass ! ''
as I did so .
( I had the greatest difficulty in persuading the Museum policeman , who was attracted by my cry of agony , that I was not intoxicated , but merely suffering from a transient indisposition . )
But even this great sorrow has not availed to save me from my fate .
I see it ; everyone sees it : I grow more `` theatrical '' every day .
And no one could be more painfully aware of the pungent silliness of theatrical ways .
The quiet , nervous , but pleasing E.C .
I can not save him .
I am driven like a dead leaf before the winds of March .
My tailor even enters into the spirit of my disorder .
He has a peculiar sense of what is fitting .
I tried to get a dull grey suit from him this spring , and he foisted a brilliant blue upon me , and I see he has put braid down the sides of my new dress trousers .
My hairdresser insists upon giving me a `` wave . ''
Whether the story of Gottfried Plattner is to be credited or not is a pretty question in the value of evidence .
On the one hand , we have seven witnesses -- to be perfectly exact , we have six and a half pairs of eyes , and one undeniable fact ; and on the other we have -- what is it ?
-- prejudice , common-sense , the inertia of opinion .
Never were there seven more honest-seeming witnesses ; never was there a more undeniable fact than the inversion of Gottfried Plattner 's anatomical structure , and -- never was there a more preposterous story than the one they have to tell !
The most preposterous part of the story is the worthy Gottfried 's contribution ( for I count him as one of the seven ) .
Heaven forbid that I should be led into giving countenance to superstition by a passion for impartiality , and so come to share the fate of Eusapia 's patrons !
Frankly , I believe there is something crooked about this business of Gottfried Plattner ; but what that crooked factor is , I will admit as frankly , I do not know .
I have been surprised at the credit accorded to the story in the most unexpected and authoritative quarters .
The fairest way to the reader , however , will be for me to tell it without further comment .
Gottfried Plattner is , in spite of his name , a freeborn Englishman .
His father was an Alsatian who came to England in the 'sixties , married a respectable English girl of unexceptionable antecedents , and died , after a wholesome and uneventful life ( devoted , I understand , chiefly to the laying of parquet flooring ) , in 1887 .
Gottfried 's age is seven-and-twenty .
He is , by virtue of his heritage of three languages , Modern Languages Master in a small private school in the south of England .
To the casual observer he is singularly like any other Modern Languages Master in any other small private school .
His costume is neither very costly nor very fashionable , but , on the other hand , it is not markedly cheap or shabby ; his complexion , like his height and his bearing , is inconspicuous .
You would notice , perhaps , that , like the majority of people , his face was not absolutely symmetrical , his right eye a little larger than the left , and his jaw a trifle heavier on the right side .
If you , as an ordinary careless person , were to bare his chest and feel his heart beating , you would probably find it quite like the heart of anyone else .
But here you and the trained observer would part company .
If you found his heart quite ordinary , the trained observer would find it quite otherwise .
And once the thing was pointed out to you , you too would perceive the peculiarity easily enough .
It is that Gottfried 's heart beats on the right side of his body .
In one way , of course , these facts might be explicable on the supposition that Plattner has undertaken an elaborate mystification , on the strength of his heart 's displacement .
Photographs may be faked , and left-handedness imitated .
But the character of the man does not lend itself to any such theory .
He is quiet , practical , unobtrusive , and thoroughly sane , from the Nordau standpoint .
He likes beer , and smokes moderately , takes walking exercise daily , and has a healthily high estimate of the value of his teaching .
He has a good but untrained tenor voice , and takes a pleasure in singing airs of a popular and cheerful character .
He is fond , but not morbidly fond , of reading , -- chiefly fiction pervaded with a vaguely pious optimism , -- sleeps well , and rarely dreams .
He is , in fact , the very last person to evolve a fantastic fable .
Indeed , so far from forcing this story upon the world , he has been singularly reticent on the matter .
He meets enquirers with a certain engaging -- bashfulness is almost the word , that disarms the most suspicious .
He seems genuinely ashamed that anything so unusual has occurred to him .
The five boys , seeing the flash and being prepared for catastrophes , ducked below their desks , and were none of them seriously hurt .
The window was blown out into the playground , and the blackboard on its easel was upset .
The slate was smashed to atoms .
Some plaster fell from the ceiling .
No other damage was done to the school edifice or appliances , and the boys at first , seeing nothing of Plattner , fancied he was knocked down and lying out of their sight below the desks .
They jumped out of their places to go to his assistance , and were amazed to find the space empty .
Being still confused by the sudden violence of the report , they hurried to the open door , under the impression that he must have been hurt , and have rushed out of the room .
But Carson , the foremost , nearly collided in the doorway with the principal , Mr. Lidgett .
This scarcely idyllic scene completes what I may call the exterior version of the Plattner story -- its exoteric aspect .
It is quite unnecessary to enter here into all the details of his dismissal by Mr. Lidgett .
Such details , with the full names and dates and references , will be found in the larger report of these occurrences that was laid before the Society for the Investigation of Abnormal Phenomena .
The singular transposition of Plattner 's right and left sides was scarcely observed for the first day or so , and then first in connection with his disposition to write from right to left across the blackboard .
He concealed rather than ostended this curious confirmatory circumstance , as he considered it would unfavourably affect his prospects in a new situation .
The displacement of his heart was discovered some months after , when he was having a tooth extracted under anaesthetics .
He then , very unwillingly , allowed a cursory surgical examination to be made of himself , with a view to a brief account in the _Journal of Anatomy_ .
That exhausts the statement of the material facts ; and we may now go on to consider Plattner 's account of the matter .
Plattner 's first thought after that was that he was dead .
Having been brought up with thoroughly sound views in these matters , however , he was a little surprised to find his body still about him .
His second conclusion was that he was not dead , but that the others were : that the explosion had destroyed the Sussexville Proprietary School and every soul in it except himself .
But that , too , was scarcely satisfactory .
He was thrown back upon astonished observation .
There the story of Plattner 's experiences ends .
I have resisted , I believe successfully , the natural disposition of a writer of fiction to dress up incidents of this sort .
I have told the thing as far as possible in the order in which Plattner told it to me .
I have carefully avoided any attempt at style , effect , or construction .
It would have been easy , for instance , to have worked the scene of the death-bed into a kind of plot in which Plattner might have been involved .
But , quite apart from the objectionableness of falsifying a most extraordinary true story , any such trite devices would spoil , to my mind , the peculiar effect of this dark world , with its livid green illumination and its drifting Watchers of the Living , which , unseen and unapproachable to us , is yet lying all about us .
One other thing , even at the risk of an irksome repetition , I must insist upon , lest I seem to favour the credulous , superstitious view .
Plattner's absence from the world for nine days is , I think , proved .
But that does not prove his story .
It is quite conceivable that even outside space hallucinations may be possible .
That , at least , the reader must bear distinctly in mind .
`` It 's your own choosing , '' said the man with the withered arm once more .
The man with the shade became aware of my presence for the first time , and threw his head back for a moment and sideways , to see me .
I caught a momentary glimpse of his eyes , small and bright and inflamed .
Then he began to cough and splutter again .
`` Why do n't you drink ? ''
said the man with the withered arm , pushing the beer towards him .
The man with the shade poured out a glassful with a shaky hand that splashed half as much again on the deal table .
A monstrous shadow of him crouched upon the wall and mocked his action as he poured and drank .
I must confess I had scarce expected these grotesque custodians .
There is to my mind something inhuman in senility , something crouching and atavistic ; the human qualities seem to drop from old people insensibly day by day .
The three of them made me feel uncomfortable , with their gaunt silences , their bent carriage , their evident unfriendliness to me and to one another .
`` If , '' I said a little louder , `` if you will show me to this haunted room of yours , I will relieve you from the task of entertaining me . ''
( `` This night of all nights ! ''
said the old woman . )
`` You go alone . ''
`` Did I do that myself in a flash of absent-mindedness ? ''
`` Yes , '' said I ; `` the room is haunted . ''
`` No , '' said I ; `` it is not . ''
`` What 's wrong with my playing now ? ''
said Jennie , stopping and twirling round on the music-stool with a monstrous rustle of flounces .
`` Never you mind about weights , '' said Jennie , incensed .
`` What was you saying behind my back about my playing ? ''
`` I do , '' said Mr. Coombes , addressing the new guest .
`` I wonder , '' said Jennie , and turned back to the piano .
`` You 've altered all round since we were married .
The odour was certainly strong -- acrid , but by no means disgusting .
He broke off a piece , and the fresh surface was a creamy white , that changed like magic in the space of ten seconds to a yellowish-green colour .
It was even an inviting-looking change .
He broke off two other pieces to see it repeated .
They were wonderful things these fungi , thought Mr. Coombes , and all of them the deadliest poisons , as his father had often told him .
`` Tea , '' said Mr. Coombes .
`` Jol ' thing , tea .
Mr. Coombes held out a handful of scarlet agaric to Mr. Clarence .
`` Jo' stuff , '' said he ; `` ta ' some . ''
Presently , faint through the closed windows came the sound of the Oratory clock striking the hour of eleven .
The clicking of the microtome ceased , and the demonstrator looked at his watch , rose , thrust his hands into his pockets , and walked slowly down the laboratory towards the lecture theatre door .
He stood listening for a moment , and then his eye fell on the little volume by William Morris .
He picked it up , glanced at the title , smiled , opened it , looked at the name on the fly-leaf , ran the leaves through with his hand , and put it down .
Almost immediately the even murmur of the lecturer ceased , there was a sudden burst of pencils rattling on the desks in the lecture theatre , a stirring , a scraping of feet , and a number of voices speaking together .
Then a firm footfall approached the door , which began to open , and stood ajar , as some indistinctly heard question arrested the new-comer .
The demonstrator turned , walked slowly back past the microtome , and left the laboratory by the preparation-room door .
As he did so , first one , and then several students carrying notebooks entered the laboratory from the lecture theatre , and distributed themselves among the little tables , or stood in a group about the doorway .
They were an exceptionally heterogeneous assembly , for while Oxford and Cambridge still recoil from the blushing prospect of mixed classes , the College of Science anticipated America in the matter years ago -- mixed socially , too , for the prestige of the College is high , and its scholarships , free of any age limit , dredge deeper even than do those of the Scotch universities .
The class numbered one-and-twenty , but some remained in the theatre questioning the professor , copying the black-board diagrams before they were washed off , or examining the special specimens he had produced to illustrate the day's teaching .
Of the nine who had come into the laboratory three were girls , one of whom , a little fair woman , wearing spectacles and dressed in greyish-green , was peering out of the window at the fog , while the other two , both wholesome-looking , plain-faced schoolgirls , unrolled and put on the brown holland aprons they wore while dissecting .
Of the men , two went down the laboratory to their places , one a pallid , dark-bearded man , who had once been a tailor ; the other a pleasant-featured , ruddy young man of twenty , dressed in a well-fitting brown suit ; young Wedderburn , the son of Wedderburn , the eye specialist .
The others formed a little knot near the theatre door .
One of these , a dwarfed , spectacled figure , with a hunchback , sat on a bent wood stool ; two others , one a short , dark youngster , and the other a flaxen-haired , reddish-complexioned young man , stood leaning side by side against the slate sink , while the fourth stood facing them , and maintained the larger share of the conversation .
`` Science , '' said Hill confidently , `` is systematic knowledge .
Ideas that do n't come into the system -- must anyhow -- be loose ideas . ''
He was not quite sure whether that was a clever saying or a fatuity until his hearers took it seriously .
`` The thing I can not understand , '' said the hunchback , at large , `` is whether Hill is a materialist or not . ''
`` There is one thing above matter , '' said Hill promptly , feeling he had a better thing this time ; aware , too , of someone in the doorway behind him , and raising his voice a trifle for her benefit , `` and that is , the delusion that there is something above matter . ''
`` _My_ father is a cobbler , '' said Hill , quite irrelevantly , and perceived the want of dignity even as he said it .
But the gleam of jealousy did not offend her .
She conceived herself the fundamental source of it .
He suffered bitterly from a sense of Wedderburn 's unfairness , and a realisation of his own handicap .
Here was this Wedderburn had picked up a prominent man for a father , and instead of his losing so many marks on the score of that advantage , it was counted to him for righteousness !
And while Hill had to introduce himself and talk to Miss Haysman clumsily over mangled guinea-pigs in the laboratory , this Wedderburn , in some backstairs way , had access to her social altitudes , and could converse in a polished argot that Hill understood perhaps , but felt incapable of speaking .
Not , of course , that he wanted to .
Then it seemed to Hill that for Wedderburn to come there day after day with cuffs unfrayed , neatly tailored , precisely barbered , quietly perfect , was in itself an ill-bred , sneering sort of proceeding .
Moreover , it was a stealthy thing for Wedderburn to behave insignificantly for a space , to mock modesty , to lead Hill to fancy that he himself was beyond dispute the man of the year , and then suddenly to dart in front of him , and incontinently to swell up in this fashion .
In addition to these things , Wedderburn displayed an increasing disposition to join in any conversational grouping that included Miss Haysman , and would venture , and indeed seek occasion , to pass opinions derogatory to socialism and atheism .
He goaded Hill to incivilities by neat , shallow , and exceedingly effective personalities about the socialist leaders , until Hill hated Bernard Shaw 's graceful egotisms , William Morris's limited editions and luxurious wall-papers , and Walter Crane 's charmingly absurd ideal working men , about as much as he hated Wedderburn .
The dissertations in the laboratory , that had been his glory in the previous term , became a danger , degenerated into inglorious tussels with Wedderburn , and Hill kept to them only out of an obscure perception that his honour was involved .
In the debating society Hill knew quite clearly that , to a thunderous accompaniment of banged desks , he could have pulverised Wedderburn .
Only Wedderburn never attended the debating society to be pulverised , because -- nauseous affectation !
-- he `` dined late . ''
`` Either you cheated or you did not cheat . ''
`` I suppose so , sir . ''
`` You should have thought of that before . ''
`` That is as you think proper . ''
Bindon 's voice softened a little ; he perceived he had been unjust , and , provided he did not contradict himself , he was disposed to amelioration .
`` As a private person , '' he said , `` I think this confession of yours goes far to mitigate your offence .
But you have set the machinery in motion , and now it must take its course .
I -- I am really sorry you gave way . ''
`` I hope , '' said Bindon , `` that it will be a lesson to you . ''
The next day Hill 's place was vacant .
The spectacled girl in green was , as usual , first with the news .
Wedderburn and Miss Haysman were talking of a performance of _The Meistersingers_ when she came up to them .
said Wedderburn , with his face suddenly hot .
`` It was Mr .
It 's dreadful , is n't it ?
But , you know , what can you expect ?
His father is a cobbler . ''
The clergyman , without any ceremony , asked the price of the crystal egg .
Mr. Cave glanced nervously towards the door leading into the parlour , and said five pounds .
The clergyman protested that the price was high , to his companion as well as to Mr. Cave -- it was , indeed , very much more than Mr. Cave had intended to ask when he had stocked the article -- and an attempt at bargaining ensued .
Mr. Cave stepped to the shop door , and held it open .
`` Five pounds is my price , '' he said , as though he wished to save himself the trouble of unprofitable discussion .
As he did so , the upper portion of a woman 's face appeared above the blind in the glass upper panel of the door leading into the parlour , and stared curiously at the two customers .
`` Five pounds is my price , '' said Mr. Cave , with a quiver in his voice .
Mr. Cave , greatly perturbed by the irruption , looked angrily at her over the rims of his spectacles , and , without excessive assurance , asserted his right to manage his business in his own way .
The two customers watched the scene with interest and some amusement , occasionally assisting Mrs. Cave with suggestions .
Mr. Cave , hard driven , persisted in a confused and impossible story of an inquiry for the crystal that morning , and his agitation became painful .
But he stuck to his point with extraordinary persistence .
It was the young Oriental who ended this curious controversy .
He proposed that they should call again in the course of two days -- so as to give the alleged inquirer a fair chance .
`` And then we must insist , '' said the clergyman .
`` Five pounds . ''
Mrs. Cave took it on herself to apologise for her husband , explaining that he was sometimes `` a little odd , '' and as the two customers left , the couple prepared for a free discussion of the incident in all its bearings .
The next day Mr. Cave had to deliver a consignment of dog-fish at one of the hospital schools , where they were needed for dissection .
In his absence Mrs. Cave 's mind reverted to the topic of the crystal , and the methods of expenditure suitable to a windfall of five pounds .
She had already devised some very agreeable expedients , among others a dress of green silk for herself and a trip to Richmond , when a jangling of the front door bell summoned her into the shop .
The customer was an examination coach who came to complain of the non-delivery of certain frogs asked for the previous day .
Mrs. Cave did not approve of this particular branch of Mr. Cave 's business , and the gentleman , who had called in a somewhat aggressive mood , retired after a brief exchange of words -- entirely civil , so far as he was concerned .
Mrs. Cave 's eye then naturally turned to the window ; for the sight of the crystal was an assurance of the five pounds and of her dreams .
What was her surprise to find it gone !
So far , at least , Mr. Wace was able to verify the remarkable story of Mr. Cave .
He has himself repeatedly held this crystal in a ray of light ( which had to be of a less diameter than one millimetre ) .
And in a perfect darkness , such as could be produced by velvet wrapping , the crystal did undoubtedly appear very faintly phosphorescent .
It would seem , however , that the luminousness was of some exceptional sort , and not equally visible to all eyes ; for Mr. Harbinger -- whose name will be familiar to the scientific reader in connection with the Pasteur Institute -- was quite unable to see any light whatever .
And Mr. Wace 's own capacity for its appreciation was out of comparison inferior to that of Mr. Cave 's .
Even with Mr. Cave the power varied very considerably : his vision was most vivid during states of extreme weakness and fatigue .
The view , as Mr. Cave described it , was invariably of an extensive plain , and he seemed always to be looking at it from a considerable height , as if from a tower or a mast .
To the east and to the west the plain was bounded at a remote distance by vast reddish cliffs , which reminded him of those he had seen in some picture ; but what the picture was Mr. Wace was unable to ascertain .
These cliffs passed north and south -- he could tell the points of the compass by the stars that were visible of a night -- receding in an almost illimitable perspective and fading into the mists of the distance before they met .
He was nearer the eastern set of cliffs ; on the occasion of his first vision the sun was rising over them , and black against the sunlight and pale against their shadow appeared a multitude of soaring forms that Mr. Cave regarded as birds .
A vast range of buildings spread below him ; he seemed to be looking down upon them ; and as they approached the blurred and refracted edge of the picture they became indistinct .
There were also trees curious in shape , and in colouring a deep mossy green and an exquisite grey , beside a wide and shining canal .
And something great and brilliantly coloured flew across the picture .
But the first time Mr. Cave saw these pictures he saw only in flashes , his hands shook , his head moved , the vision came and went , and grew foggy and indistinct .
And at first he had the greatest difficulty in finding the picture again once the direction of it was lost .
He rapped and the door was opened by the step-son in black .
He at once called Mrs. Cave , who was , Mr. Wace could not but observe , in cheap but ample widow 's weeds of the most imposing pattern .
Without any very great surprise Mr. Wace learnt that Cave was dead and already buried .
She was in tears , and her voice was a little thick .
She had just returned from Highgate .
Her mind seemed occupied with her own prospects and the honourable details of the obsequies , but Mr. Wace was at last able to learn the particulars of Cave 's death .
He had been found dead in his shop in the early morning , the day after his last visit to Mr. Wace , and the crystal had been clasped in his stone-cold hands .
His face was smiling , said Mrs. Cave , and the velvet cloth from the minerals lay on the floor at his feet .
He must have been dead five or six hours when he was found .
His annoyance and disappointment were naturally very great .
He made a second call ( equally ineffectual ) upon the Great Portland Street dealer , and he resorted to advertisements in such periodicals as were lively to come into the hands of a _bric-a-brac_ collector .
He also wrote letters to _The Daily Chronicle_ and _Nature_ , but both those periodicals , suspecting a hoax , asked him to reconsider his action before they printed , and he was advised that such a strange story , unfortunately so bare of supporting evidence , might imperil his reputation as an investigator .
Moreover , the calls of his proper work were urgent .
So that after a month or so , save for an occasional reminder to certain dealers , he had reluctantly to abandon the quest for the crystal egg , and from that day to this it remains undiscovered .
Occasionally , however , he tells me , and I can quite believe him , he has bursts of zeal , in which he abandons his more urgent occupation and resumes the search .
Until it was dawn in London and Pollux setting and the stars overhead grown pale .
The Winter 's dawn it was , a sickly filtering accumulation of daylight , and the light of gas and candles shone yellow in the windows to show where people were astir .
But the yawning policeman saw the thing , the busy crowds in the markets stopped agape , workmen going to their work betimes , milkmen , the drivers of news-carts , dissipation going home jaded and pale , homeless wanderers , sentinels on their beats , and , in the country , labourers trudging afield , poachers slinking home , all over the dusky quickening country it could be seen -- and out at sea by seamen watching for the day -- a great white star , come suddenly into the westward sky !
Brighter it was than any star in our skies ; brighter than the evening star at its brightest .
It still glowed out white and large , no mere twinkling spot of light , but a small , round , clear shining disc , an hour after the day had come .
And where science has not reached , men stared and feared , telling one another of the wars and pestilences that are foreshadowed by these fiery signs in the Heavens .
Sturdy Boers , dusky Hottentots , Gold Coast negroes , Frenchmen , Spaniards , Portuguese , stood in the warmth of the sunrise watching the setting of this strange new star .
And voice after voice repeated , `` It is nearer , '' and the clicking telegraph took that up , and it trembled along telephone wires , and in a thousand cities grimy compositors fingered the type .
`` It is nearer . ''
Men writing in offices , struck with a strange realisation , flung down their pens , men talking in a thousand places suddenly came upon a grotesque possibility in those words , `` It is nearer . ''
It hurried along awakening streets , it was shouted down the frost-stilled ways of quiet villages , men who had read these things from the throbbing tape stood in yellow-lit doorways shouting the news to the passers-by .
`` It is nearer , '' Pretty women , flushed and glittering , heard the news told jestingly between the dances , and feigned an intelligent interest they did not feel .
How very , very clever people must be to find out things like that ! ''
The schoolboy , rising early for his examination work , puzzled it out for himself -- with the great white star shining broad and bright through the frost-flowers of his window .
`` Centrifugal , centripetal , '' he said , with his chin on his fist .
`` Stop a planet in its flight , rob it of its centrifugal force , what then ?
Centripetal has it , and down it falls into the sun !
The light of that day went the way of its brethren , and with the later watches of the frosty darkness rose the strange star again .
And it was now so bright that the waxing moon seemed but a pale yellow ghost of itself , hanging huge in the sunset .
In a South African city a great man had married , and the streets were alight to welcome his return with his bride .
`` Even the skies have illuminated , '' said the flatterer .
Under Capricorn , two negro lovers , daring the wild beasts and evil spirits for love of one another , crouched together in a cane brake where the fire-flies hovered .
`` That is our star , '' they whispered , and felt strangely comforted by the sweet brilliance of its light .
The master mathematician sat in his private room and pushed the papers from him .
His calculations were already finished .
In a small white phial there still remained a little of the drug that had kept him awake and active for four long nights .
Each day , serene , explicit , patient as ever , he had given his lecture to his students , and then had come back at once to this momentous calculation .
His face was grave , a little drawn and hectic from his drugged activity .
For some time he seemed lost in thought .
Then he went to the window , and the blind went up with a click .
Half-way up the sky , over the clustering roofs , chimneys , and steeples of the city , hung the star .
And presently they began to understand .
So it was that presently to the European watchers star and sun rose close upon each other , drove headlong for a space and then slower , and at last came to rest , star and sun merged into one glare of flame at the zenith of the sky .
The moon no longer eclipsed the star but was lost to sight in the brilliance of the sky .
And though those who were still alive regarded it for the most part with that dull stupidity that hunger , fatigue , heat and despair engender , there were still men who could perceive the meaning of these signs .
Star and earth had been at their nearest , had swung about one another , and the star had passed .
Already it was receding , swifter and swifter , in the last stage of its headlong journey downward into the sun .
THE MAN WHO COULD WORK MIRACLES .
He had removed his coat and boots , and was sitting on the bed with his hands in his pockets repeating the text of his defence for the seventeenth time , `` I did n't want the confounded thing to upset , '' when it occurred to him that at the precise moment he had said the commanding words he had inadvertently willed the thing he said , and that when he had seen the lamp in the air he had felt that it depended on him to maintain it there without being clear how this was to be done .
He had not a particularly complex mind , or he might have stuck for a time at that `` inadvertently willed , '' embracing , as it does , the abstrusest problems of voluntary action ; but as it was , the idea came to him with a quite acceptable haziness .
And from that , following , as I must admit , no clear logical path , he came to the test of experiment .
The subsequent meditations of Mr. Fotheringay were of a severe but confused description .
So far , he could see it was a case of pure willing with him .
The nature of his experiences so far disinclined him for any further experiments , at least until he had reconsidered them .
But he lifted a sheet of paper , and turned a glass of water pink and then green , and he created a snail , which he miraculously annihilated , and got himself a miraculous new tooth-brush .
Somewhere in the small hours he had reached the fact that his will-power must be of a particularly rare and pungent quality , a fact of which he had indeed had inklings before , but no certain assurance .
The scare and perplexity of his first discovery was now qualified by pride in this evidence of singularity and by vague intimations of advantage .
He became aware that the church clock was striking one , and as it did not occur to him that his daily duties at Gomshott 's might be miraculously dispensed with , he resumed undressing , in order to get to bed without further delay .
As he struggled to get his shirt over his head , he was struck with a brilliant idea .
`` Let me be in bed , '' he said , and found himself so .
`` Undressed , '' he stipulated ; and , finding the sheets cold , added hastily , `` and in my nightshirt -- ho , in a nice soft woollen nightshirt .
he said with immense enjoyment .
`` And now let me be comfortably asleep ... ''
As the day wore on his state of mind passed from wonder to elation , albeit the circumstances of his dismissal from the Long Dragon were still disagreeable to recall , and a garbled account of the matter that had reached his colleagues led to some badinage .
It was evident he must be careful how he lifted frangible articles , but in other ways his gift promised more and more as he turned it over in his mind .
He intended among other things to increase his personal property by unostentatious acts of creation .
He called into existence a pair of very splendid diamond studs , and hastily annihilated them again as young Gomshott came across the counting-house to his desk .
He was afraid young Gomshott might wonder how he had come by them .
He saw quite clearly the gift required caution and watchfulness in its exercise , but so far as he could judge the difficulties attending its mastery would be no greater than those he had already faced in the study of cycling .
It was that analogy , perhaps , quite as much as the feeling that he would be unwelcome in the Long Dragon , that drove him out after supper into the lane beyond the gasworks , to rehearse a few miracles in private .
`` I do n't mean anything by it , '' said Mr. Fotheringay .
`` Nothing at all . ''
On Sunday evening he went to chapel , and oddly enough , Mr. Maydig , who took a certain interest in occult matters , preached about `` things that are not lawful . ''
Mr. Fotheringay was not a regular chapelgoer , but the system of assertive scepticism , to which I have already alluded , was now very much shaken .
The tenor of the sermon threw an entirely new light on these novel gifts , and he suddenly decided to consult Mr. Maydig immediately after the service .
So soon as that was determined , he found himself wondering why he had not done so before .
`` Lord , yes ! ''
`` Just anything . ''
He thought , and suddenly recalled a conjuring entertainment he had seen .
he pointed , `` change into a bowl of fish -- no , not that -- change into a glass bowl full of water with goldfish swimming in it .
You see that , Mr .
`` It is possible , '' he said .
`` It is credible .
It is amazing , of course , but it reconciles a number of amazing difficulties .
The power to work miracles is a gift -- a peculiar quality like genius or second sight ; hitherto it has come very rarely and to exceptional people .
But in this case ...
I have always wondered at the miracles of Mahomet , and at Yogi 's miracles , and the miracles of Madame Blavatsky .
But , of course -- Yes , it is simply a gift !
It carries out so beautifully the arguments of that great thinker '' -- Mr. Maydig 's voice sank -- '' his Grace the Duke of Argyll .
Here we plumb some profounder law -- deeper than the ordinary laws of nature .
Mr. Maydig looked serious .
`` I see you are in a tangle .
Yes , it 's a difficult position .
How you are to end it ... '' He became diffuse and inconclusive .
`` She 's -- -- She strongly objects to interference , you know , Mr. Fotheringay .
And -- as a matter of fact -- it 's well past eleven and she's probably in bed and asleep .
Do you think , on the whole -- -- ''
In a minute or so the minister returned , his step light , his face radiant .
he said , `` and touching !
`` H 'm ! ''
`` Well , '' he sighed , `` I 'll try .
He buttoned up his jacket and addressed himself to the habitable globe , with as good an assumption of confidence as lay in his power .
`` Jest stop rotating , will you ? ''
He willed it only just in time , for his clothes , heated by his rapid flight through the air , were already beginning to singe .
He came down with a forcible , but by no means injurious , bump in what appeared to be a mound of fresh-turned earth .
A large mass of metal and masonry , extraordinarily like the clock-tower in the middle of the market square , hit the earth near him , ricochetted over him , and flew into stonework , bricks , and cement , like a bursting bomb .
A hurtling cow hit one of the larger blocks and smashed like an egg .
There was a crash that made all the most violent crashes of his past life seem like the sound of falling dust , and this was followed by a descending series of lesser crashes .
A vast wind roared throughout earth and heaven , so that he could scarcely lift his head to look .
For a while he was too breathless and astonished even to see where he was or what had happened .
And his first movement was to feel his head and reassure himself that his streaming hair was still his own .
`` What a confounded mess everything 's in ! ''
Far and wide nothing was visible in the white glare through the haze of dust that drove before a screaming gale but tumbled masses of earth and heaps of inchoate ruins , no trees , no houses , no familiar shapes , only a wilderness of disorder , vanishing at last into the darkness beneath the whirling columns and streamers , the lightnings and thunderings of a swiftly rising storm .
Near him in the livid glare was something that might once have been an elm-tree , a smashed mass of splinters , shivered from boughs to base , and further a twisted mass of iron girders -- only too evidently the viaduct -- rose out of the piled confusion .
But I did not heed him , because I was looking at the Lord God .
We were privileged to hear the reply , and indeed the acoustic properties of the place were marvellous .
`` I caused myself to be worshipped in your stead .
No evil was there but I practised it ; no cruelty wherewith I did not stain my soul .
And at last you smote me , O God ! ''
God raised his eyebrows slightly .
`` Most of that is from the Obelisk , '' said the Recording Angel , finger on page .
`` And then , '' read the Recording Angel , with a smile that set us all agog , `` one day , when he was a little irascible from over-eating , he -- ''
`` Oh , not _that_ , '' cried the Wicked Man , `` nobody knew of _that_ .
The Wicked Man on God 's hand began to dance and weep .
Suddenly shame overcame him .
He made a wild rush to jump off the ball of God 's little finger , but God stopped him by a dexterous turn of the wrist .
Then he made a rush for the gap between hand and thumb , but the thumb closed .
And all the while the angel went on reading -- reading .
The Wicked Man rushed to and fro across God 's palm , and then suddenly turned about and fled up the sleeve of God .
`` And at last I went , I in my rags and sores , smelling of my holy discomforts -- -- ''
It seemed not ten seconds before the Saint also was rushing to and fro over the great palm of God .
And at last he also shrieked beneath that pitiless and cynical exposition , and fled also , even as the Wicked Man had fled , into the shadow of the sleeve .
And it was permitted us to see into the shadow of the sleeve .
And the two sat side by side , stark of all delusions , in the shadow of the robe of God 's charity , like brothers .
`` I was one of those men who were saved from the _Ocean Pioneer_ .
It 's twenty years ago .
I doubt if you 'll remember anything of the _Ocean Pioneer_ ? ''
The name was familiar , and I tried to recall when and where I had read it .
`` Something about gold dust , '' I said vaguely , `` but the precise -- ''
`` I can tell you we was a happy lot aboard that brig , jokes and drink and bright hopes all the time .
It all seemed so neat and clean and straightforward , and what rough chaps call a 'cert . '
And we used to speculate how the other blessed lot , the proper salvagers , who 'd started two days before us , were getting on , until our sides fairly ached .
We all messed together in the Sanderses ' cabin -- it was a curious crew , all officers and no men -- and there stood the diving-dress waiting its turn .
Young Sanders was a humorous sort of chap , and there certainly was something funny in the confounded thing 's great fat head and its stare , and he made us see it too .
'Jimmy Goggles , ' he used to call it , and talk to it like a Christian .
Asked if he was married , and how Mrs. Goggles was , and all the little Goggleses .
Fit to make you split .
And every blessed day all of us used to drink the health of Jimmy Goggles in rum , and unscrew his eye and pour a glass of rum in him , until , instead of that nasty mackintosheriness , he smelt as nice in his inside as a cask of rum .
It was jolly times we had in those days , I can tell you -- little suspecting , poor chaps !
`` Not a human being in sight , '' he repeated , and paused .
`` But they did n't come on very much .
I began to suspect why .
'Jimmy Goggles , ' I says , 'it 's your beauty does it . '
I was inclined to be a little lightheaded , I think , with all these dangers about and the change in the pressure of the blessed air .
'Who 're ye staring at ? '
I said , as if the savages could hear me .
'What d 'ye take me for ?
I 'm hanged if I don't give you something to stare at , ' I said , and with that I screwed up the escape valve and turned on the compressed air from the belt , until I was swelled out like a blown frog .
Regular imposing it must have been .
I'm blessed if they 'd come on a step ; and presently one and then another went down on their hands and knees .
They did n't know what to make of me , and they was doing the extra polite , which was very wise and reasonable of them .
I had half a mind to edge back seaward and cut and run , but it seemed too hopeless .
A step back and they 'd have been after me .
And out of sheer desperation I began to march towards them up the beach , with slow , heavy steps , and waving my blown-out arms about , in a dignified manner .
And inside of me I was singing as small as a tomtit .
`` Now , I do n't want to crack myself up as a god beyond my merits , but I must confess that while I was god to these people they was extraordinary successful .
I do n't say there 's anything in it , mind you .
They won a battle with another tribe -- I got a lot of offerings I did n't want through it -- they had wonderful fishing , and their crop of pourra was exceptional fine .
And they counted the capture of the brig among the benefits I brought 'em .
I must say I do n't think that was a poor record for a perfectly new hand .
And , though perhaps you 'd scarcely credit it , I was the tribal god of those beastly savages for pretty nearly four months ...
`` What else could I do , man ?
But I did n't wear that diving-dress all the time .
I made 'em rig me up a sort of holy of holies , and a deuce of a time I had too , making them understand what it was I wanted them to do .
That indeed was the great difficulty -- making them understand my wishes .
I could n't let myself down by talking their lingo badly , even if I 'd been able to speak at all , and I could n't go flapping a lot of gestures at them .
So I drew pictures in sand and sat down beside them and hooted like one o'clock .
Sometimes they did the things I wanted all right , and sometimes they did them all wrong .
They was always very willing , certainly .
All the while I was puzzling how I was to get the confounded business settled .
Every night before the dawn I used to march out in full rig and go off to a place where I could see the channel in which the _Ocean Pioneer_ lay sunk , and once even , one moonlight night , I tried to walk out to her , but the weeds and rocks and dark clean beat me .
I did n't get back till full day , and then I found all those silly niggers out on the beach praying their sea-god to return to them .
I was that vexed and tired , messing and tumbling about , and coming up and going down again , I could have punched their silly heads all round when they started rejoicing .
Hanged if I like so much ceremony .
The sunburnt man 's story degenerated again .
`` Think of it , '' he said , when he emerged to linguistic purity once more .
`` Forty thousand pounds ' worth of gold . ''
Miss Winchelsea was going to Rome .
The matter had filled her mind for a month or more , and had overflowed so abundantly into her conversation that quite a number of people who were not going to Rome , and who were not likely to go to Rome , had made it a personal grievance against her .
Some indeed had attempted quite unavailingly to convince her that Rome was not nearly such a desirable place as it was reported to be , and others had gone so far as to suggest behind her back that she was dreadfully `` stuck up '' about `` that Rome of hers . ''
And little Lily Hardhurst had told her friend Mr. Binns that so far as she was concerned Miss Winchelsea might `` go to her old Rome and stop there ; _she_ ( Miss Lily Hardhurst ) would n't grieve . ''
And the way in which Miss Winchelsea put herself upon terms of personal tenderness with Horace and Benvenuto Cellini and Raphael and Shelley and Keats -- if she had been Shelley 's widow she could not have professed a keener interest in his grave -- was a matter of universal astonishment .
Her dress was a triumph of tactful discretion , sensible , but not too `` touristy '' ' -- Miss Winchelsea had a great dread of being `` touristy '' -- and her Baedeker was carried in a cover of grey to hide its glaring red .
She made a prim and pleasant little figure on the Charing Cross platform , in spite of her swelling pride , when at last the great day dawned , and she could start for Rome .
The day was bright , the Channel passage would be pleasant , and all the omens promised well .
There was the gayest sense of adventure in this unprecedented departure .
Presently the conductor discovered Helen 's attempt at a corner in carriages .
`` Room for five , '' he bawled with a parallel translation on his fingers .
A party of four together -- mother , father , and two daughters -- blundered in , all greatly excited .
`` It 's all right , Ma -- you let me , '' said one of the daughters , hitting her mother 's bonnet with a handbag she struggled to put in the rack .
Miss Winchelsea detested people who banged about and called their mother `` Ma . ''
A young man travelling alone followed .
He was not at all `` touristy '' in his costume , Miss Winchelsea observed ; his Gladstone bag was of good pleasant leather with labels reminiscent of Luxembourg and Ostend , and his boots , though brown , were not vulgar .
He carried an overcoat on his arm .
Before these people had properly settled in their places , came an inspection of tickets and a slamming of doors , and behold !
they were gliding out of Charing Cross Station on their way to Rome .
cried Fanny , `` we are going to Rome , my dear !
I do n't seem to believe it , even now . ''
For the rest of the journey Miss Winchelsea talked little , and what she said was as agreeable and as stamped with refinement as she could make it .
Her voice was always low and clear and pleasant , and she took care that on this occasion it was particularly low and clear and pleasant .
As they came under the white cliffs the young man put his book of poetry away , and when at last the train stopped beside the boat , he displayed a graceful alacrity with the impedimenta of Miss Winchelsea and her friends .
Miss Winchelsea `` hated nonsense , '' but she was pleased to see the young man perceived at once that they were ladies , and helped them without any violent geniality ; and how nicely he showed that his civilities were to be no excuse for further intrusions .
None of her little party had been out of England before , and they were all excited and a little nervous at the Channel passage .
They stood in a little group in a good place near the middle of the boat -- the young man had taken Miss Winchelsea 's carry-all there and had told her it was a good place -- and they watched the white shores of Albion recede and quoted Shakespeare and made quiet fun of their fellow-travellers in the English way .
The stoppage for the night was brightened by the appearance of the young man , and his manners were all that could be desired and his French quite serviceable .
At Rome the young man was with them intermittently .
A rather `` touristy '' friend of his took him away at times .
He complained comically to Miss Winchelsea .
`` I have only two short weeks in Rome , '' he said , `` and my friend Leonard wants to spend a whole day at Tivoli looking at a waterfall . ''
The intellectual and aesthetic fellowship of Miss Winchelsea and the scholarly young man passed insensibly towards a deeper feeling .
The exuberant Fanny did her best to keep pace with their recondite admiration by playing her `` beautiful '' with vigour , and saying `` Oh !
_let's_ go , '' with enormous appetite whenever a new place of interest was mentioned .
But Helen developed a certain want of sympathy towards the end that disappointed Miss Winchelsea a little .
She refused to see `` anything '' in the face of Beatrice Cenci -- Shelley 's Beatrice Cenci !
-- in the Barberini Gallery ; and one day , when they were deploring the electric trams , she said rather snappishly that `` people must get about somehow , and it's better than torturing horses up these horrid little hills . ''
She spoke of the Seven Hills of Rome as `` horrid little hills `` !
And the day they went on the Palatine -- though Miss Winchelsea did not know of this -- she remarked suddenly to Fanny , `` Do n't hurry like that , my dear ; _they_ do n't want us to overtake them .
And we do n't say the right things for them when we _do_ get near . ''
`` I was n't trying to overtake them , '' said Fanny , slackening her excessive pace ; `` I was n't indeed . ''
And for a minute she was short of breath .
He became nervous , thrusting at his glasses with trembling fingers as though he fancied his emotions made them unstable .
`` I should of course , '' he said , `` tell you things about myself .
I know it is rather unusual my speaking to you like this .
Only our meeting has been so accidental -- or providential -- and I am snatching at things .
I came to Rome expecting a lonely tour ... and I have been so very happy , so very happy .
Quite recently I have found myself in a position -- I have dared to think -- -- , And -- -- ''
Things were worse than she had dreaded ; he asked her to explain .
How _could_ she explain ?
Those last two days in Rome were dreadful .
She was haunted by his air of astonished perplexity .
She knew she had given him intimate hopes , she had not the courage to examine her mind thoroughly for the extent of her encouragement .
She knew he must think her the most changeable of beings .
Now that she was in full retreat , she would not even perceive his hints of a possible correspondence .
But in that matter he did a thing that seemed to her at once delicate and romantic .
He made a go-between of Fanny .
Fanny could not keep the secret , and came and told her that night under a transparent pretext of needed advice .
`` Mr. Snooks , '' said Fanny , `` wants to write to me .
I had no idea .
But should I let him ? ''
They talked it over long and earnestly , and Miss Winchelsea was careful to keep the veil over her heart .
She was already repenting his disregarded hints .
Why should she not hear of him sometimes -- painful though his name must be to her ?
Miss Winchelsea decided it might be permitted , and Fanny kissed her good-night with unusual emotion .
After she had gone Miss Winchelsea sat for a long time at the window of her little room .
It was moonlight , and down the street a man sang `` Santa Lucia '' with almost heart-dissolving tenderness ... She sat very still .
One may be extremely refined and still capable of a very sore heart .
Certainly Miss Winchelsea 's heart was very sore .
She had moods of sexual hostility , in which she generalised uncharitably about mankind .
`` He forgot himself with me , '' she said .
`` But Fanny is pink and pretty and soft and a fool -- a very excellent match for a Man . ''
And by way of a wedding present she sent Fanny a gracefully bound volume of poetry by George Meredith , and Fanny wrote back a grossly happy letter to say that it was `` _all_ beautiful . ''
Miss Winchelsea hoped that some day Mr. Senoks might take up that slim book and think for a moment of the donor .
Fanny wrote several times before and about her marriage , pursuing that fond legend of their `` ancient friendship , '' and giving her happiness in the fullest detail .
And Miss Winchelsea wrote to Helen for the first time after the Roman journey , saying nothing about the marriage , but expressing very cordial feelings .
They had been in Rome at Easter , and Fanny was married in the August vacation .
She wrote a garrulous letter to Miss Winchelsea , describing her home-coming and the astonishing arrangements of their `` teeny , weeny '' little house .
Se'noks was now beginning to assume a refinement in Miss Winchelsea 's memory out of all proportion to the facts of the case , and she tried in vain to imagine his cultured greatness in a `` teeny weeny '' little house .
`` Am busy enamelling a cosy corner , '' said Fanny , sprawling to the end of her third sheet , `` so excuse more . ''
Miss Winchelsea answered in her best style , gently poking fun at Fanny 's arrangements , and hoping intensely that Mr .
Se'noks might see the letter .
Only this hope enabled her to write at all , answering not only that letter but one in November and one at Christmas .
It was a sadly disappointing week , and Miss Winchelsea was glad when it came to an end .
Under various excuses she avoided visiting them again .
After a time the visitor 's room was occupied by their two little boys , and Fanny 's invitations ceased .
The intimacy of her letters had long since faded away .
I feigned to read .
I feared I had unwittingly embarrassed him , and in a moment I was surprised to find him speaking .
`` If you call them dreams .
-- so vivid ... this -- '' ( he indicated the landscape that went streaming by the window ) `` seems unreal in comparison !
I can scarcely remember who I am , what business I am on ... ''
`` No , '' he said .
that was the end of the dream ... ''
It was clear I was in for this dream .
And , after all , I had an hour before me , the light was fading fast , and Fortnum-Roscoe has a dreary way with him .
`` Living in a different time , '' I said : `` do you mean in some different age ? ''
`` I have lived three-and-fifty years in this world .
I have had mother , sisters , friends , wife and daughters -- all their faces , the play of their faces , I know .
But the face of this girl -- it is much more real to me .
I can bring it back into memory so that I see it again -- I could draw it or paint it .
And after all -- ''
`` But it is impossible for one man to tell another just these things .
It's emotion , it 's a tint , a light that comes and goes .
Only while it 's there , everything changes , everything .
The thing is I came away and left them in their crisis to do what they could . ''
`` 'Come and see , ' she cried -- I can hear her now -- come and see the sunrise upon Monte Solaro . '
`` 'No , ' I said .
'I have no secrets from this lady .
What do you want to tell me ? '
`` He said it was a trivial matter , or at least a dry matter , for a lady to hear .
`` 'I have taken no heed of any news for many days , ' I said .
'What has Gresham been saying ? '
`` Now , I was an older mind than hers , and I could sway her to this belief or that .
`` I sat down beside her .
I put an arm behind her and took her hand in mine .
I set myself to drive that doubt away -- I set myself to fill her mind with pleasant things again .
I lied to her , and in lying to her I lied also to myself .
And she was only too ready to believe me , only too ready to forget .
`` Only for a time I could not believe that all these vivid moments had been no more than the substance of a dream .
`` I found myself awake and walking .
We had come out above the Pleasure City , we were near the summit of Monte Solaro and looking towards the bay .
It was the late afternoon and very clear .
Far away to the left Ischia hung in a golden haze between sea and sky , and Naples was coldly white against the hills , and before us was Vesuvius with a tall and slender streamer feathering at last towards the south , and the ruins of Torre dell' Annunziata and Castellammare glittering and near . ''
The man seemed hesitating on the verge of a description .
`` Little guns , firing high explosive shells .
They fired the guns backwards , out of the base of the leaf , so to speak , and rammed with the beak .
That was the theory , you know , but they had never been fought .
No one could tell exactly what was going to happen .
And meanwhile I suppose it was very fine to go whirling through the air like a flight of young swallows , swift and easy .
I guess the captains tried not to think too clearly what the real thing would be like .
And these flying war machines , you know , were only one sort of the endless war contrivances that had been invented and had fallen into abeyance during the long peace .
There were all sorts of these things that people were routing out and furbishing up ; infernal things , silly things ; things that had never been tried ; big engines , terrible explosives , great guns .
You know the silly way of these ingenious sort of men who make these things ; they turn 'em out as beavers build dams , and with no more sense of the rivers they 're going to divert and the lands they 're going to flood !
`` As we went down the winding stepway to our hotel again in the twilight I foresaw it all : I saw how clearly and inevitably things were driving for war in Gresham 's silly , violent hands , and I had some inkling of what war was bound to be under these new conditions .
And even then , though I knew it was drawing near the limit of my opportunity , I could find no will to go back . ''
`` She began to weep , saying between her sobs , and clinging to my arm as she said it , 'Go back -- go back . '
she asked , in surprise , and I think a little fearful at the answer to her thought .
`` No one living , you know , knew what war was ; no one could imagine , with all these new inventions , what horror war might bring .
I believe most people still believed it would be a matter of bright uniforms and shouting charges and triumphs and flags and bands -- in a time when half the world drew its food-supply from regions ten thousand miles away -- -- ''
`` One touch of unreality , '' he said , in the low tone of a man who speaks to himself , `` and they would have been nightmares .
But they were not nightmares -- they were not nightmares .
`` And all the rest was Flight -- all the rest was Flight . ''
His face was white and drawn and his hands were clenched .
He took no heed of my curiosity .
`` A dream ! ''
he cried , flaming upon me , `` a dream -- when , even now -- ''
`` Even when from our boat we saw the fair face of that great rock Capri -- already scarred and gashed by the gun emplacements and hiding-places that were to make it a fastness -- we reckoned nothing of the imminent slaughter , though the fury of preparation hung about in puffs and clouds of dust at a hundred points amidst the grey ; but , indeed , I made a text of that and talked .
There , you know , was the rock , still beautiful for all its scars , with its countless windows and arches and ways , tier upon tier , for a thousand feet , a vast carving of grey , broken by vine-clad terraces , and lemon and orange groves , and masses of agave and prickly pear , and puffs of almond blossom .
And out under the archway that is built over the Piccola Marina other boats were coming ; and as we came round the cape and within sight of the mainland , another little string of boats came into view , driving before the wind towards the south-west .
In a little while a multitude had come out , the remoter just little specks of ultramarine in the shadow of the eastward cliff .
`` Each day , each dream after that , we were still exalted , still seeking that refuge where we might live and love .
Fatigue had come upon us , pain and many distresses .
For though we were dusty and stained by our toilsome tramping , and half starved , and with the horror of the dead men we had seen and the flight of the peasants -- for very soon a gust of fighting swept up the peninsula -- with these things haunting our minds it still resulted only in a deepening resolution to escape .
Oh , but she was brave and patient !
She who had never faced hardship and exposure had courage for herself -- and me .
We went to and fro seeking an outlet , over a country all commandeered and ransacked by the gathering hosts of war .
Always we went on foot .
At first there were other fugitives , but we did not mingle with them .
Some escaped northward , some were caught in the torrent of peasantry that swept along the main roads ; many gave themselves into the hands of the soldiery and were sent northward .
Many of the men were impressed .
But we kept away from these things ; we had brought no money to bribe a passage north , and I feared for my lady at the hands of these conscript crowds .
We had landed at Salerno , and we had been turned back from Cava , and we had tried to cross towards Taranto by a pass over Mount Alburno , but we had been driven back for want of food , and so we had come down among the marshes by Paestum , where those great temples stand alone .
I had some vague idea that by Paestum it might be possible to find a boat or something , and take once more to sea .
And there it was the battle overtook us .
`` And she had been shot through the heart . ''
`` She must have died almost instantly .
Only -- I talked to her -- all the way . ''
`` I have seen those temples , '' I said abruptly , and indeed he had brought those still , sunlit arcades of worn sandstone very vividly before me .
`` I know now that he was afraid of me , but at the time that did not occur to me .
As I tried to explain to him he interrupted me in imperious tones , bidding me , I suppose , stand aside .
`` 'You fool , ' I cried .
'Do n't you know ?
She is dead ! '
`` He ran me through the heart .
It was with a sort of astonishment -- no fear , no pain -- but just amazement , that I felt it pierce me , felt the sword drive home into my body .
It did n't hurt , you know .
It did n't hurt at all . ''
`` Do you mean -- ? ''
`` There was no pain , no sting or smart .
Amazement and then darkness sweeping over everything .
The hot , brutal face before me , the face of the man who had killed me , seemed to recede .
It swept out of existence -- ''
clamoured the voices outside ; `` Euston ! ''
`` And that was the end ? ''
`` They do n't know we are after them , '' said the little man on the white horse .
He glanced at the white horse and paused .
`` Come up ! ''
said the man who owned the silver bridle , suddenly .
The little man started and jerked his rein , and the horse hoofs of the three made a multitudinous faint pattering upon the withered grass as they turned back towards the trail ...
An instinctive feeling , such as lines out a herd of deer at the approach of some ambiguous thing , prompted them to turn their horses to the wind , ride forward for a few paces , and stare at that advancing multitude of floating masses .
They came on before the wind with a sort of smooth swiftness , rising and falling noiselessly , sinking to earth , rebounding high , soaring -- all with a perfect unanimity , with a still , deliberate assurance .
He shouted aloud with rage .
`` I will follow that trail , I tell you , '' he cried .
`` Where is the trail ? ''
`` Ride for it ! ''
the little man was shouting .
`` Ride for it down the valley . ''
What happened then was like the confusion of a battle .
The man with the silver bridle saw the little man go past him , slashing furiously at imaginary cobwebs , saw him cannon into the horse of the gaunt man and hurl it and its rider to earth .
His own horse went a dozen paces before he could rein it in .
Then he looked up to avoid imaginary dangers , and then back again to see a horse rolling on the ground , the gaunt man standing and slashing over it at a rent and fluttering mass of grey that streamed and wrapped about them both .
And thick and fast as thistle-down on waste land on a windy day in July the cobweb masses were coming on .
The master set his teeth , gripped his bridle , lowered his head , and spurred his horse forward .
The horse on the ground rolled over , there was blood and moving shapes upon the flanks , and the gaunt man suddenly leaving it , ran forward towards his master , perhaps ten paces .
His legs were swathed and encumbered with grey ; he made ineffectual movements with his sword .
Grey streamers waved from him ; there was a thin veil of grey across his face .
With his left hand he beat at something on his body , and suddenly he stumbled and fell .
He struggled to rise , and fell again , and suddenly , horribly , began to howl , `` Oh -- ohoo , ohooh ! ''
`` I say my horse bolted , '' said the man who once had a silver-studded bridle .
He paused and smiled at me deeply , and tapped slowly on the edge of his desk with the green phial .
`` I think I know the stuff ...
Already I 've got something coming . ''
The nervous smile upon his face betrayed the gravity of his revelation .
He rarely talked of his actual experimental work unless things were very near the end .
`` And it may be , it may be -- I should n't be surprised -- it may even do the thing at a greater rate than twice . ''
My own interest in the coming drug certainly did not wane in the time .
I have always had a queer little twist towards metaphysics in my mind .
I have always been given to paradoxes about space and time , and it seemed to me that Gibberne was really preparing no less than the absolute acceleration of life .
Suppose a man repeatedly dosed with such a preparation : he would live an active and record life indeed , but he would be an adult at eleven , middle-aged at twenty-five , and by thirty well on the road to senile decay .
It seemed to me that so far Gibberne was only going to do for any one who took his drug exactly what Nature has done for the Jews and Orientals , who are men in their teens and aged by fifty , and quicker in thought and act than we are all the time .
The marvel of drugs has always been great to my mind ; you can madden a man , calm a man , make him incredibly strong and alert or a helpless log , quicken this passion and allay that , all by means of drugs , and here was a new miracle to be added to this strange armoury of phials the doctors use !
But Gibberne was far too eager upon his technical points to enter very keenly into my aspect of the question .
`` No , '' he said .
`` At the utmost a drop of water that stood in a beaker from which I had washed out the last traces of the stuff .
I took some last night , you know .
But that is ancient history now . ''
`` Try the stuff ? ''
I said , as we went along the passage .
`` With water , '' said Gibberne , whacking down a carafe .
`` I must warn you , in the first place , as soon as you 've got it down to shut your eyes , and open them very cautiously in a minute or so 's time .
The sense of vision is a question of length of vibration , and not of multitude of impacts ; but there 's a kind of shock to the retina , a nasty giddy confusion just at the time if the eyes are open .
Keep 'em shut . ''
You know that blank non-existence into which one drops when one has taken `` gas . ''
For an indefinite interval it was like that .
Then I heard Gibberne telling me to wake up , and I stirred and opened my eyes .
There he stood as he had been standing , glass still in hand .
It was empty , that was all the difference .
`` No , '' said I ; `` that 's odd . ''
`` Heaven knows ! ''
`` Last time I took it I went to bed and slept it off .
I tell you , I was frightened .
It must have lasted some minutes , I think -- it seemed like hours .
But after a bit it slows down rather suddenly , I believe . ''
I was proud to observe that I did not feel frightened -- I suppose because there were two of us .
`` Why should n't we go out ? ''
Why , we shall be going a thousand times faster than the quickest conjuring trick that was ever done .
Which way shall we go ?
Window , or door ? ''
He clapped his hand on his thigh and stood hesitating on the verge .
`` Gibberne , '' I cried , coming up , `` put it down .
This heat is too much !
It's our running so !
Two or three miles a second !
Friction of the air ! ''
`` Friction of the air , '' I shouted .
`` Friction of the air .
Like meteorites and things .
I 'm all over pricking and a sort of perspiration .
You can see people stirring slightly .
I believe the stuff 's working off !
Put that dog down . ''
`` It 's working off , '' I repeated .
`` We 're too hot and the stuff 's working off !
I 'm wet through . ''
That was the saving of us .
Unless it was for one corpulent old gentleman in a bath-chair , who certainly did start at the sight of us , and afterwards regarded us at intervals with a darkly suspicious eye , and , finally , I believe , said something to his nurse about us , I doubt if a solitary person remarked our sudden appearance among them .
We must have appeared abruptly .
We ceased to smoulder almost at once , though the turf beneath me was uncomfortably hot .
The attention of every one -- including even the Amusements ' Association band , which on this occasion , for the only time in its history , got out of tune -- was arrested by the amazing fact , and the still more amazing yapping and uproar caused by the fact , that a respectable , over-fed lapdog sleeping quietly to the east of the bandstand should suddenly fall through the parasol of a lady on the west -- in a slightly singed condition due to the extreme velocity of its movements through the air .
In these absurd days , too , when we are all trying to be as psychic , and silly , and superstitious as possible !
People got up and trod on other people , chairs were overturned , the Leas policeman ran .
How the matter settled itself I do not know -- we were much too anxious to disentangle ourselves from the affair and get out of range of the eye of the old gentleman in the bath-chair to make minute inquiries .
As soon as we were sufficiently cool and sufficiently recovered from our giddiness and nausea and confusion of mind to do so we stood up , and skirting the crowd , directed our steps back along the road below the Metropole towards Gibberne 's house .
But amidst the din I heard very distinctly the gentleman who had been sitting beside the lady of the ruptured sunshade using quite unjustifiable threats and language to one of those chair-attendants who have `` Inspector '' written on their caps : `` If you did n't throw the dog , '' he said , `` who _did_ ? ''
He sits not a dozen yards away .
If I glance over my shoulder I can see him .
And if I catch his eye -- and usually I catch his eye -- it meets me with an expression -- --
It is mainly an imploring look -- and yet with suspicion in it .
I made the acquaintance of Pyecraft in this very smoking-room .
I was a young , nervous new member , and he saw it .
I was sitting all alone , wishing I knew more of the members , and suddenly he came , a great rolling front of chins and abdomina , towards me , and grunted and sat down in a chair close by me and wheezed for a space , and scraped for a space with a match and lit a cigar , and then addressed me .
I forget what he said -- something about the matches not lighting properly , and afterwards as he talked he kept stopping the waiters one by one as they went by , and telling them about the matches in that thin , fluty voice he has .
But , anyhow , it was in some such way we began our talking .
One stands that sort of thing once in a way at a club , but a time came when I fancied I was standing too much .
He took to me altogether too conspicuously .
I could never go into the smoking-room but he would come wallowing towards me , and sometimes he came and gormandised round and about me while I had my lunch .
He seemed at times almost to be clinging to me .
He was a bore , but not so fearful a bore as to be limited to me and from the first there was something in his manner -- almost as though he knew , almost as though he penetrated to the fact that I _might_ -- that there was a remote , exceptional chance in me that no one else presented .
`` Look here , '' said I to Pyecraft next day , and snatched the slip away from his eager grasp .
`` No matter , '' he said , and took it .
I did my best .
After that we did n't speak for a fortnight .
Whenever he approached me I frowned and motioned him away , and he respected our compact , but at the end of the fortnight he was as fat as ever .
And then he got a word in .
Ought it to have been ? ''
They believed he was ill ; he had n't been out for two days .
`` He expects me , '' said I , and they sent me up .
`` 'E said you was to come in if you came , '' she said , and regarded me , making no motion to show me anywhere .
And then , confidentially , `` 'E's locked in , sir . ''
`` Locked 'imself in yesterday morning and 'as n't let any one in since , sir .
And ever and again _swearing_ .
Oh , my ! ''
She shook her head sadly .
`` 'E keeps on calling for vittles , sir .
'_Eavy_ vittles 'e wants .
I get 'im what I can .
Pork 'e 's had , sooit puddin ' , sossiges , noo bread .
Left outside , if you please , and me go away .
'E 's eatin ' , sir , somethink _awful_ . ''
I pointed out to him that this was a trouble he had brought upon himself , and that it had almost an air of poetical justice .
He had eaten too much .
This he disputed , and for a time we argued the point .
He became noisy and violent , so I desisted from this aspect of his lesson .
`` And then , '' said I , `` you committed the sin of euphuism .
You called it , not Fat , which is just and inglorious , but Weight .
As we got on with the thing I found myself almost keenly interested .
It was I who called in the housekeeper and broke matters to her , and it was I chiefly who fixed up the inverted bed .
In fact , I spent two whole days at his flat .
I am a handy , interfering sort of man with a screw-driver , and I made all sorts of ingenious adaptations for him -- ran a wire to bring his bells within reach , turned all his electric lights up instead of down , and so on .
The whole affair was extremely curious and interesting to me , and it was delightful to think of Pyecraft like some great , fat blow-fly , crawling about on his ceiling and clambering round the lintel of his doors from one room to another , and never , never , never coming to the club any more ...
Gip made no answer , but his grip tightened on my finger , and so we came into the shop .
At any rate , there he was behind the counter -- a curious , sallow , dark man , with one ear larger than the other and a chin like the toe-cap of a boot .
`` What can we have the pleasure ? ''
he said , spreading his long magic fingers on the glass case ; and so with a start we were aware of him .
`` I want , '' I said , `` to buy my little boy a few simple tricks . ''
And , as if by way of illustration , there came a rattling at the door , and a squeaking little voice could be faintly heard .
I _warn_ 'a go in there , dadda , I WARN 'a go in there .
and then the accents of a downtrodden parent , urging consolations and propitiations .
`` It 's locked , Edward , '' he said .
Gip , after a gallant effort , said `` Yes . ''
His voice stopped -- exactly like when you hit a neighbour 's gramophone with a well-aimed brick , the same instant silence -- and the rustle of the paper stopped , and everything was still ...
I stared at Gip , and Gip stared at me , and there were our distortions in the magic mirrors , looking very rum , and grave , and quiet ...
`` I say , '' I said , on a rather louder note , `` I want the bill ; and my hat , please . ''
said Gip , in a guilty whisper .
`` A Magic Toy Sword .
It neither bends , breaks , nor cuts the fingers .
It renders the bearer invincible in battle against any one under eighteen .
Half a crown to seven and sixpence , according to size .
These panoplies on cards are for juvenile knights-errant and very useful -- shield of safety , sandals of swiftness , helmet of invisibility . ''
I saw what was up directly .
`` Take that off , '' I cried , `` this instant !
You 'll frighten the boy .
Take it off ! ''
And he was carrying four parcels in his arm !
He secured immediate possession of my finger .
I helped him in , recalled my address with an effort , and got in also .
Something unusual proclaimed itself in my tail-coat pocket , and I felt and discovered a glass ball .
With a petulant expression I flung it into the street .
But I went so far as this one day .
I said , `` How would you like your soldiers to come alive , Gip , and march about by themselves ? ''
`` Oh , _quite_ , dadda .
I should n't like them if they did n't do that . ''
He was a Creole , his conceptions of etiquette and discipline were pure-blooded Portuguese , and it was only to Holroyd , the Lancashire engineer who had come over with the boat , and as an exercise in the use of English -- his `` th '' sounds were very uncertain -- that he opened his heart .
`` That Sambo chap , '' said Holroyd , `` says these are a different sort of ant . ''
`` It is ridiculous , '' he said .
But in the afternoon he put on his full uniform and went ashore , and jars and boxes came back to the ship and subsequently he did .
And Holroyd sat on deck in the evening coolness and smoked profoundly and marvelled at Brazil .
They were six days up the Amazon , some hundreds of miles from the ocean , and east and west of him there was a horizon like the sea , and to the south nothing but a sand-bank island with some tufts of scrub .
The water was always running like a sluice , thick with dirt , animated with crocodiles and hovering birds , and fed by some inexhaustible source of tree trunks ; and the waste of it , the headlong waste of it , filled his soul .
The town of Alemquer , with its meagre church , its thatched sheds for houses , its discoloured ruins of ampler days , seemed a little thing lost in this wilderness of Nature , a sixpence dropped on Sahara .
He was a young man , this was his first sight of the tropics , he came straight from England , where Nature is hedged , ditched , and drained , into the perfection of submission , and he had suddenly discovered the insignificance of man .
For six days they had been steaming up from the sea by unfrequented channels ; and man had been as rare as a rare butterfly .
One saw one day a canoe , another day a distant station , the next no men at all .
He began to perceive that man is indeed a rare animal , having but a precarious hold upon this land .
Dere is poison in the sting . ''
`` I do not see what men can do against ants .
Dey come and go . ''
`` I believe these men were killed by the ants , '' said Holroyd abruptly in English .
They came to a long silence .
`` We will sink that canoe -- burn it . ''
Heaven knows what the ants thought of it , but he did .
He fired it twice with great sternness and ceremony .
All the crew had wadding in their ears , and there was an effect of going into action about the whole affair , and first they hit and wrecked the old sugar-mill , and then they smashed the abandoned store behind the jetty .
And then Gerilleau experienced the inevitable reaction .
In the afternoon the monitor started down stream again , and in the evening a landing party took the body of the lieutenant and buried it on the bank upon which the new ants have so far not appeared ...
I heard this story in a fragmentary state from Holroyd not three weeks ago .
THE DOOR IN THE WALL .
Afterwards as I sat up in bed and sipped my morning tea , I found myself trying to account for the flavour of reality that perplexed me in his impossible reminiscences , by supposing they did in some way suggest , present , convey -- I hardly know which word to use -- experiences it was otherwise impossible to tell .
And it came into his life quite early , when he was a little fellow between five and six .
I remember how , as he sat making his confession to me with a slow gravity , he reasoned and reckoned the date of it .
`` There was , '' he said , `` a crimson Virginia creeper in it -- all one bright uniform crimson , in a clear amber sunshine against a white wall .
That came into the impression somehow , though I do n't clearly remember how , and there were horse-chestnut leaves upon the clean pavement outside the green door .
They were blotched yellow and green , you know , not brown nor dirty , so that they must have been new fallen .
I take it that means October .
I look out for horse-chestnut leaves every year and I ought to know .
He was , he said , rather a precocious little boy -- he learnt to talk at an abnormally early age , and he was so sane and `` old-fashioned , '' as people say , that he was permitted an amount of initiative that most children scarcely attain by seven or eight .
His mother died when he was two , and he was under the less vigilant and authoritative care of a nursery governess .
His father was a stern , preoccupied lawyer , who gave him little attention , and expected great things of him .
For all his brightness he found life a little grey and dull , I think .
And one day he wandered .
There was something in the very air of it that exhilarated , that gave one a sense of lightness and good happening and well-being ; there was something in the sight of it that made all its colour clean and perfect and subtly luminous .
In the instant of coming into it one was exquisitely glad -- as only in rare moments , and when one is young and joyful one can be glad in this world .
And everything was beautiful there ...
He looked up with a sudden smile .
`` The thing whacked upon me suddenly .
Then , after all , that garden , that wonderful garden , was n't a dream ! ''
What was his name ?
-- a ferrety-looking youngster we used to call Squiff . ''
`` We never found the white wall and the green door ... ''
`` I mean I could n't find it .
I would have found it if I could .
`` We clattered by -- I too taken by surprise to stop my cab until we were well past and round a corner .
Then I had a queer moment , a double and divergent movement of my will : I tapped the little door in the roof of the cab , and brought my arm down to pull out my watch .
'Yes , sir ! '
said the cabman , smartly .
'Er -- well -- it 's nothing , ' I cried .
We have n't much time !
And he went on ...
`` I got my scholarship .
And the night after I was told of that I sat over my fire in my little upper room , my study , in my father 's house , with his praise -- his rare praise -- and his sound counsels ringing in my ears , and I smoked my favourite pipe -- the formidable bulldog of adolescence -- and thought of that door in the long white wall .
'If I had stopped , ' I thought , 'I should have missed my scholarship , I should have missed Oxford -- muddled all the fine career before me !
I begin to see things better ! '
I fell musing deeply , but I did not doubt then this career of mine was a thing that merited sacrifice .
`` No -- -the door !
And I have n't gone in ! ''
He leant over the table to me , with an enormous sorrow in his voice as he spoke .
`` Thrice I have had my chance -- _thrice_ !
If ever that door offers itself to me again , I swore , I will go in , out of this dust and heat , out of this dry glitter of vanity , out of these toilsome futilities .
I will go and never return .
This time I will stay ...
I swore it , and when the time came -- _I did n't go_ .
`` The first time was on the night of the snatch division on the Tenants' Redemption Bill , on which the Government was saved by a majority of three .
No one on our side -- perhaps very few on the opposite side -- expected the end that night .
Then the debate collapsed like eggshells .
I and Hotchkiss were dining with his cousin at Brentford ; we were both unpaired , and we were called up by telephone , and set off at once in his cousin 's motor .
We got in barely in time , and on the way we passed my wall and door -- livid in the moonlight , blotched with hot yellow as the glare of our lamps lit it , but unmistakable .
I answered , and the moment passed .
`` I do not see how I could have done otherwise then .
And the next occasion was as I rushed to my father 's bedside to bid that stern old man farewell .
Then , too , the claims of life were imperative .
But the third time was different ; it happened a week ago .
It fills me with hot remorse to recall it .
I was with Gurker and Ralphs -- it 's no secret now , you know , that I've had my talk with Gurker .
We had been dining at Frobisher 's , and the talk had become intimate between us .
The question of my place in the reconstructed Ministry lay always just over the boundary of the discussion .
That 's all settled .
It need n't be talked about yet , but there 's no reason to keep a secret from you ...
But let me tell you my story .
`` Here I am ! ''
he repeated , `` and my chance has gone from me .
Three times in one year the door has been offered me -- the door that goes into peace , into delight , into a beauty beyond dreaming , a kindness no man on earth can know .
And I have rejected it , Redmond , and it has gone -- -- ''
I can see now his rather pallid face , and the unfamiliar sombre fire that had come into his eyes .
I see him very vividly to-night .
I sit recalling his words , his tones , and last evening 's _Westminster Gazette_ still lies on my sofa , containing the notice of his death .
At lunch to-day the club was busy with his death .
We talked of nothing else .
But did he see like that ?
About midday he came at last out of the throat of the gorge into the plain and the sunlight .
He was stiff and weary ; he sat down in the shadow of a rock , filled up his flask with water from a spring and drank it down , and remained for a time resting before he went on to the houses .
They were very strange to his eyes , and indeed the whole aspect of that valley became , as he regarded it , queerer and more unfamiliar .
The greater part of its surface was lush green meadow , starred with many beautiful flowers , irrigated with extraordinary care , and bearing evidence of systematic cropping piece by piece .
High up and ringing the valley about was a wall , and what appeared to be a circumferential water-channel , from which the little trickles of water that fed the meadow plants came , and on the higher slopes above this flocks of llamas cropped the scanty herbage .
Sheds , apparently shelters or feeding-places for the llamas , stood against the boundary wall here and there .
The irrigation streams ran together into a main channel down the centre of the valley , and this was enclosed on either side by a wall breast high .
This gave a singularly urban quality to this secluded place , a quality that was greatly enhanced by the fact that a number of paths paved with black and white stones , and each with a curious little kerb at the side , ran hither and thither in an orderly manner .
The houses of the central village were quite unlike the casual and higgledy-piggledy agglomeration of the mountain villages he knew ; they stood in a continuous row on either side of a central street of astonishing cleanness ; here and there their particoloured facade was pierced by a door , and not a solitary window broke their even frontage .
They were particoloured with extraordinary irregularity , smeared with a sort of plaster that was sometimes grey , sometimes drab , sometimes slate-coloured or dark brown ; and it was the sight of this wild plastering first brought the word `` blind '' into the thoughts of the explorer .
`` The good man who did that , '' he thought , `` must have been as blind as a bat . ''
`` A man , '' one said , in hardly recognisable Spanish -- '' a man it is -- a man or a spirit -- coming down from the rocks . ''
`` Where does he come from , brother Pedro ? ''
`` Over the mountains I come , '' said Nunez , `` out of the country beyond there -- where men can see .
From near Bogota , where there are a hundred thousands of people , and where the city passes out of sight . ''
`` Carefully , '' he cried , with a finger in his eye , and found they thought that organ , with its fluttering lids , a queer thing in him .
They went over it again .
`` Rough he is as the rocks that begot him , '' said Correa , investigating Nunez 's unshaven chin with a soft and slightly moist hand .
`` Perhaps he will grow finer . ''
Nunez struggled a little under their examination , but they gripped him firm .
said Pedro , at the roughness of his coat .
`` _Out_ of the world .
Over mountains and glaciers ; right over above there , half-way to the sun .
Out of the great big world that goes down , twelve days ' journey to the sea . ''
So they shouted , and Pedro went first and took Nunez by the hand to lead him to the houses .
He found it tax his nerve and patience more than he had anticipated , that first encounter with the population of the Country of the Blind .
The place seemed larger as he drew near to it , and the smeared plasterings queerer , and a crowd of children and men and women ( the women and girls , he was pleased to note , had some of them quite sweet faces , for all that their eyes were shut and sunken ) came about him , holding on to him , touching him with soft , sensitive hands , smelling at him , and listening at every word he spoke .
Some of the maidens and children , however , kept aloof as if afraid , and indeed his voice seemed coarse and rude beside their softer notes .
His three guides kept close to him with an effect of proprietorship , and said again and again , `` A wild man out of the rock . ''
A city to your village .
I come from the great world -- where men have eyes and see . ''
And they thrust him suddenly through a doorway into a room as black as pitch , save at the end there faintly glowed a fire .
The crowd closed in behind him and shut out all but the faintest glimmer of day , and before he could arrest himself he had fallen headlong over the feet of a seated man .
His arm , outflung , struck the face of someone else as he went down ; he felt the soft impact of features and heard a cry of anger , and for a moment he struggled against a number of hands that clutched him .
It was a one-sided fight .
An inkling of the situation came to him , and he lay quiet .
He heard a voice calling to him from out of the village .
`` Ya ho there , Bogota !
He went athwart one of their meadows , leaving a track of trampled grass behind his feet , and presently sat down by the side of one of their ways .
He felt something of the buoyancy that comes to all men in the beginning of a fight , but more perplexity .
He began to realise that you can not even fight happily with creatures who stand upon a different mental basis to yourself .
Far away he saw a number of men carrying spades and sticks come out of the street of houses , and advance in a spreading line along the several paths towards him .
They advanced slowly , speaking frequently to one another , and ever and again the whole cordon would halt and sniff the air and listen .
Put down that spade , and come off the grass ! ''
He ran furiously to and fro , dodging when there was no need to dodge , and in his anxiety to see on every side of him at once , stumbling .
For a moment he was down and they heard his fall .
Far away in the circumferential wall a little doorway looked like heaven , and he set off in a wild rush for it .
He did not even look round at his pursuers until it was gained , and he had stumbled across the bridge , clambered a little way among the rocks , to the surprise and dismay of a young llama , who went leaping out of sight , and lay down sobbing for breath .
`` I was mad , '' he said .
`` But I was only newly made . ''
Then he wept without intention , for he was very weak and ill now , and they took that as a favourable sign .
`` About ten times ten the height of a man there is a roof above the world -- of rock -- and very , very smooth . ''
He burst again into hysterical tears .
`` Before you ask me any more , give me some food or I shall die . ''
He expected dire punishments , but these blind people were capable of toleration .
They regarded his rebellion as but one more proof of his general idiocy and inferiority ; and after they had whipped him they appointed him to do the simplest and heaviest work they had for anyone to do , and he , seeing no other way of living , did submissively what he was told .
`` His brain is affected , '' said the blind doctor .
`` _You_ do not want me , '' he said , `` to lose my gift of sight ? ''
He was realising things very swiftly .
He felt anger , indeed , anger at the dull course of fate , but also sympathy for her lack of understanding -- a sympathy near akin to pity .
`` If I were to consent to this ? ''
he said at last , in a voice that was very gentle .
His eyes scrutinised the great curtain of the mountains with a keener inquiry .
Then very circumspectly he began to climb .
Beyond the hedge he came to the duck-pond , or at least to what was the duck-pond by day .
But by night it was a great bowl of silver moonshine all noisy with singing frogs , of wonderful silver moonshine twisted and clotted with strange patternings , and the little man ran down into its waters between the thin black rushes , knee-deep and waist-deep and to his shoulders , smiting the water to black and shining wavelets with either hand , swaying and shivering wavelets , amidst which the stars were netted in the tangled reflections of the brooding trees upon the bank .
He waded until he swam , and so he crossed the pond and came out upon the other side , trailing , as it seemed to him , not duckweed , but very silver in long , clinging , dripping masses .
And up he went through the transfigured tangles of the willow-herb and the uncut seeding grasses of the farther bank .
He came glad and breathless into the high-road .
`` I am glad , '' he said , `` beyond measure , that I had clothes that fitted this occasion . ''
THE RED ROOM By H. G. Wells `` It 's your own choosing , '' said the man with the withered arm once more .
I heard the faint sound of a stick and a shambling step on the flags in the passage outside .
The door creaked on its hinges as a second old man entered , more bent , more wrinkled , more aged even than the first .
He supported himself by the help of a crutch , his eyes were covered by a shade , and his lower lip , half averted , hung pale and pink from his decaying yellow teeth .
He made straight for an armchair on the opposite side of the table , sat down clumsily , and began to cough .
The man with the withered hand gave the newcomer a short glance of positive dislike ; the old woman took no notice of his arrival , but remained with her eyes fixed steadily on the fire .
`` I said -- it 's your own choosing , '' said the man with the withered hand , when the coughing had ceased for a while .
`` It 's my own choosing , '' I answered .
The man with the shade became aware of my presence for the first time , and threw his head back for a moment , and sidewise , to see me .
I caught a momentary glimpse of his eyes , small and bright and inflamed .
Then he began to cough and splutter again .
`` Why do n't you drink ? ''
said the man with the withered arm , pushing the beer toward him .
The man with the shade poured out a glassful with a shaking hand , that splashed half as much again on the deal table .
A monstrous shadow of him crouched upon the wall , and mocked his action as he poured and drank .
I must confess I had scarcely expected these grotesque custodians .
There is , to my mind , something inhuman in senility , something crouching and atavistic ; the human qualities seem to drop from old people insensibly day by day .
The three of them made me feel uncomfortable with their gaunt silences , their bent carriage , their evident unfriendliness to me and to one another .
And that night , perhaps , I was in the mood for uncomfortable impressions .
I resolved to get away from their vague fore-shadowings of the evil things upstairs .
`` If , '' said I , `` you will show me to this haunted room of yours , I will make myself comfortable there . ''
The old man with the cough jerked his head back so suddenly that it startled me , and shot another glance of his red eyes at me from out of the darkness under the shade , but no one answered me .
I waited a minute , glancing from one to the other .
The old woman stared like a dead body , glaring into the fire with lack-lustre eyes .
`` If , '' I said , a little louder , `` if you will show me to this haunted room of yours , I will relieve v you from the task of entertaining me . ''
`` There 's a candle on the slab outside the door , '' said the man with the withered hand , looking at my feet as he addressed me .
`` But if you go to the Red Room to-night -- '' `` This night of all nights ! ''
said the old woman , softly.
`` -- You go alone . ''
`` Very well , '' I answered , shortly , `` and which way do I go ? ''
`` You go along the passage for a bit , '' said he , nodding his head on his shoulder at the door , `` until you come to a spiral staircase ; and on the second landing is a door covered with green baize .
Go through that , and down the long corridor to the end , and the Red Room is on your left up the steps . ''
`` Have I got that right ? ''
I said , and repeated his directions .
He corrected me in one particular .
`` And you are really going ? ''
said the man with the shade , looking at me again for the third time with that queer , unnatural tilting of the face .
`` This night of all nights ! ''
whispered the old woman .
`` It is what I came for , '' I said , and moved toward the door .
As I did so , the old man with the shade rose and staggered round the table , so as to be closer to the others and to the fire .
At the door I turned and looked at them , and saw they were all close together , dark against the firelight , staring at me over their shoulders , with an intent expression on their ancient faces .
`` Good-night , '' I said , setting the door open.. `` It 's your own choosing , '' said the man with the withered arm .
I left the door wide open until the candle was well alight , and then I shut them in , and walked down the chilly , echoing passage .
I must confess that the oddness of these three old pensioners in whose charge her ladyship had left the castle , and the deep-toned , old-fashioned furniture of the housekeeper 's room , in which they foregathered , had affected me curiously in spite of my effort to keep myself at a matter-of-fact phase .
They seemed to belong to another age , an older age , an age when things spiritual were indeed to be feared , when common sense was uncommon , an age when omens and witches were credible , and ghosts beyond denying .
Their very existence , thought I , is spectral ; the cut of their clothing , fashions born in dead brains ; the ornaments and conveniences in the room about them even are ghostly -- the thoughts of vanished men , which still haunt rather than participate in the world of to-day .
And the passage I was in , long and shadowy , with a film of moisture glistening on the wall , was as gaunt and cold as a thing that is dead and rigid .
But with an effort I sent such thoughts to the right-about .
The long , drafty subterranean passage was chilly and dusty , and my candle flared and made the shadows cower and quiver .
The echoes rang up and down the spiral staircase , and a shadow came sweeping up after me , and another fled before me into the darkness overhead .
I came to the wide landing and stopped there for a moment listening to a rustling that I fancied I heard creeping behind me , and then , satisfied of the absolute silence , pushed open the unwilling baize-covered door and stood in the silent corridor .
The effect was scarcely what I expected , for the moonlight , coming in by the great window on the grand staircase , picked out everything in vivid black shadow or reticulated silvery illumination .
Everything seemed in its proper position ; the house might have been deserted on the yesterday instead of twelve months ago .
There were candles in the sockets of the sconces , and whatever dust had gathered on the carpets or upon the polished flooring was distributed so evenly as to be invisible in my candlelight .
A waiting stillness was over everything .
I was about to advance , and stopped abruptly .
A bronze group stood upon the landing hidden from me by a corner of the wall ; but its shadow fell with marvelous distinctness upon the white paneling , and gave me the impression of some one crouching to waylay me .
The thing jumped upon my attention suddenly .
I stood rigid for half a moment , perhaps .
Then , with my hand in the pocket that held the revolver , I advanced , only to discover a Ganymede and Eagle , glistening in the moonlight .
That incident for a time restored my nerve , and a dim porcelain Chinaman on a buhl table , whose head rocked as I passed , scarcely startled me .
The door of the Red Room and the steps up to it were in a shadowy corner .
I moved my candle from side to side in order to see clearly the nature of the recess in which I stood , before opening the door .
Here it was , thought I , that my predecessor was found , and the memory of that story gave me a sudden twinge of apprehension .
I glanced over my shoulder at the black Ganymede in the moonlight , and opened the door of the Red Room rather hastily , with my face half turned to the pallid silence of the corridor .
I entered , closed the door behind me at once , turned the key I found in the lock within , and stood with the candle held aloft surveying the scene of my vigil , the great Red Room of Lorraine Castle , in which the young Duke had died ; or rather in which he had begun his dying , for he had opened the door and fallen headlong down the steps I had just ascended .
That had been the end of his vigil , of his gallant attempt to conquer the ghostly tradition of the place , and never , I thought , had apoplexy better served the ends of superstition .
There were other and older stories that clung to the room , back to the half-incredible beginning of it all , the tale of a timid wife and the tragic end that came to her husband 's jest of frightening her .
And looking round that huge shadowy room with its black window bays , its recesses and alcoves , its dusty brown-red hangings and dark gigantic furniture , one could well understand the legends that had sprouted in its black corners , its germinating darknesses .
My candle was a little tongue of light in the vastness of the chamber ; its rays failed to pierce to the opposite end of the room , and left an ocean of dull red mystery and suggestion , sentinel shadows and watching darknesses beyond its island of light .
And the stillness of desolation brooded over it all .
I must confess some impalpable quality of that ancient room disturbed me .
I tried to fight the feeling down .
I resolved to make a systematic examination of the place , and so , by leaving nothing to the imagination , dispel the fanciful suggestions of the obscurity before they obtained a hold upon me .
After satisfying myself of the fastening of the door , I began to walk round the room , peering round each article of furniture , tucking up the valances of the bed and opening its curtains wide .
In one place there was a distinct echo to my footsteps , the noises I made seemed so little that they enhanced rather than broke the silence of the place .
I pulled up the blinds and examined the fastenings of the several windows .
Attracted by the fall of a particle of dust , I leaned forward and looked up the blackness of the wide chimney .
Then , trying to preserve my scientific attitude of mind , I walked round and began tapping the oak paneling for any secret opening , but I desisted before reaching the alcove .
I saw my face in a mirror -- white .
There were two big mirrors in the room , each with a pair of sconces bearing candles , and on the mantelshelf , too , were candles in china candle-sticks .
All these I lit one after the other .
The fire was laid -- an unexpected consideration from the old housekeeper -- and I lit it , to keep down any disposition to shiver , and when it was burning well I stood round with my back to it and regarded the room again .
I had pulled up a chintz-covered armchair and a table to form a kind of barricade before me .
On this lay my revolver , ready to hand .
My precise examination had done me a little good , but J still found the remoter darkness of the place and its perfect stillness too stimulating for the imagination .
The echoing of the stir and crackling of the fire was * no sort of comfort to me .
The shadow in the alcove at the end of the room began to display that undefinable quality of a presence , that odd suggestion of a lurking living thing that comes so easily in silence and solitude .
And to reassure myself , I walked with a candle into it and satisfied myself that there was nothing tangible there .
I stood that candle upon the floor of the alcove and left it in that position .
By this time I was in a state of considerable nervous tension , although to my reason there was no adequate cause for my condition .
My mind , however , was perfectly clear .
I postulated quite unreservedly that nothing supernatural could happen , and to pass the time I began stringing some rhymes together , Ingoldsby fashion , concerning the original legend of the place .
A few I spoke aloud , but the echoes were not pleasant* For the same reason I also abandoned , after a time , a conversation with myself upon the impossibility of ghosts and haunting .
My mind reverted to the three old and distorted people downstairs , and I tried to keep it upon that topic .
Then something happened in the alcove .
I did not see the candle go out , I simply turned and saw that the darkness was there , as one might start # and see the unexpected presence of a stranger .
The black shadow had sprung back to its place .
`` By Jove , '' said I aloud , recovering from my surprise , `` that draft 's a strong one ; '' and taking the matchbox from^he table , I walked across the room in a leisurely manner to relight the corner again .
My first match would not strike , and as I succeeded with the second , something seemed to blink on the wall before me .
I turned my head involuntarily and saw that the two candles on the little table by the fireplace were extinguished .
I rose at once to my feet .
`` What 's up ? ''
I cried , with a queer high note getting into my voice somehow .
At that the candle on the corner of the wardrobe went out , and the one I had relit in the alcove followed .
`` Steady on ! ''
I said , `` those candles are wanted , '' speaking with a half-hysterical facetiousness , and scratching away at a match the while , `` for the mantel candlesticks . ''
My hands trembled so much that twice I missed the rough paper of the matchbox .
As the mantel emerged from darkness again , two candles in the remoter end of the room were eclipsed .
But with the same match I also relit the larger mirror candles , and those on the floor near the doorway , so that for the moment I seemed to gain on the extinctions .
But then in a noiseless volley there vanished four lights at once in different corners of the room , and I struck another match in quivering haste , and stood hesitating whither to take it .
`` I told you so , '' said the old lady , with the glass in her hand .
`` It is his poor young countess who was frightened -- ''
THE MAYFAIR SET III CONVERSATIONS WITH AN UNCLE [ Illustration : Title page ] SELECT CONVERSATIONS WITH AN UNCLE ( now extinct ) and two other reminiscences by H. G. WELLS LONDON : JOHN LANE NEW YORK THE MERRIAM COMPANY 1895 _Copyrighted in the United States._ _All rights reserved._ _Second Edition_ TO MY DEAREST AND BEST FRIEND R. A. C. PREFATORY He was , I remember , short , but by no means conspicuously short , and of a bright , almost juvenile , complexion , very active in his movements and garrulous -- or at least very talkative .
His judgments were copious and frequent in the old days , and some at least I found entertaining .
At times his fluency was really remarkable .
He had a low opinion of eminent people -- a thing I have been careful to suppress , and his dissertations had ever an irresponsible gaiety of manner that may have blinded me to their true want of merit .
That , I say , was in the old days , before his abrupt extinction , before the cares of this world suddenly sprang upon , and choked him .
I would listen to him , cheerfully , and afterwards I would go away and make articles out of him for the _Pall Mall Gazette_ , so adding a certain material advantage to my mental and moral benefit .
But all that has gone now , to my infinite regret ; and sorrowing , I have arranged this unworthy little tribute to his memory , this poor dozen of casual monologues that were so preserved .
The merits of the monument are his entirely ; its faults entirely my own .
CONTENTS SELECT CONVERSATIONS -- OF CONVERSATION AND THE ANATOMY OF FASHION THE THEORY OF THE PERPETUAL DISCOMFORT OF HUMANITY THE USE OF IDEALS THE ART OF BEING PHOTOGRAPHED BAGSHOT 'S MURAL DECORATIONS ON SOCIAL MUSIC THE JOYS OF BEING ENGAGED LA BELLE DAME SANS MERCI ON A TRICYCLE AN UNSUSPECTED MASTERPIECE THE GREAT CHANGE THE PAINS OF MARRIAGE A MISUNDERSTOOD ARTIST THE MAN WITH A NOSE OF CONVERSATION AND THE ANATOMY OF FASHION This uncle of mine , you must understand , having attained -- by the purest accident -- some trifles of distinction and a certain affluence in South Africa , came over at the earliest opportunity to London to be photographed and lionised .
He took to fame easily , as one who had long prepared in secret .
He lurked in my chambers for a week while the new dress suit was a-making -- his old one I really had to remonstrate against -- and then we went out to be admired .
During the week's retirement he secreted quite a wealth of things to say -- appropriate remarks on edibles , on music , on popular books , on conversation , off-hand little things , jotting them down in a note-book as they came into his mind , for he had a high conception of social intercourse , and the public expectation .
He was ever a methodical little gentleman , and all these accumulations that he could not get into his talk , he proposed to put away for the big volume of `` Reminiscences '' that was to round off his life .
At last he was a mere conversational firework , crammed with latent wit and jollity , and ready to blaze and sparkle in fizzing style as soon as the light of social intercourse should touch him .
But after we had circulated for a week or so , my uncle began to manifest symptoms of distress .
He had not had a chance .
People did not seem to talk at all in his style .
`` Where do the literary people meet together , George ?
I am afraid you have chosen your friends ill .
Surely those long-haired serious people who sat round my joke like old cats round a beetle -- what is it ?
-- were not the modern representatives of a _salon_ .
Those abominable wig-makers ' eccentricities who talked journalistic 'shop , ' and posed all over that preposterous room with the draperies !
Those hectic young men who have done nothing except run down everybody !
Do n't tell me that is the literary society of London , George .
Where do they let off wit now , George ?
Where do they sparkle ?
I want to sparkle .
I shall burst , George , if I do n't . ''
Now really , you know , there are no salons now -- I suppose we turn all our conversation into `` copy '' -- or the higher education has eliminated the witty woman -- and my uncle became more and more distressed .
He said a lot of his good things to me , which was sheer waste .
I got him all the introductions I could , pushed him into every lion 's den I had access to .
But there was no relief .
`` I see what it is , George , '' said my uncle , `` these literary people write themselves out .
They say nothing for private use .
Their brains are weary when they come into company .
They get up in the morning fresh and bright , and write , write , write .
Then , when they are jaded , they condescend to social intercourse .
It is their way of resting .
But why do n't they go to bed ?
No more clever people for me , George .
Let us try the smart .
Perhaps among them we shall find smart talking still surviving .
_Allons_ , George ! ''
That is how my uncle came into collision with fashion , how I came to take him to the Fitz-Brilliants .
Of course you have heard of the Fitz-Brilliants ?
If you have not , it is not their fault .
They are the smartest people in London .
Always hard at work , keeping up to date , are the Fitz-Brilliants .
But my uncle did not appreciate them .
They did not appreciate my uncle .
He came to me again , more pent up than ever , and the thing I had feared happened .
He began to discourse to me .
It was about Fashion , with a decided reference to the Fitz-Brilliants , and some reflections upon the alleys of literary ability and genius I had taken him through .
`` Yes , but there is a lot of truth in it ; and do you know there flashed upon me all at once a great theory , the Theory of the Perpetual Discomfort of Humanity .
Just let me explain it to you , George , '' he said , bringing himself round so that his legs hung over the arm of his chair .
`` I think you will see I have made a very great discovery , gone to the root of the whole of this bother of reform movement , advancement of humanity , and the rest of it . ''
He sucked his cigar for a moment .
`` Each age , '' he said , `` has its own ideals of what constitutes human happiness . ''
`` It always appears to me , '' said my uncle , `` that the comparison of ideals to furniture is particularly appropriate .
They are the draperies of the mind , and they hide the nakedness of truth .
Your fireplace is ugly , your mere necessary shelves and seats but planks and crudity , all your surroundings so much office furniture , until the skilful hand and the draperies come in .
Then a few cunning loopings and foldings , and behold softness and delicacy , crudity gone , and life well worth the living .
So that you can not value ideals too highly .
`` Note , for instance , the folly of bringing ideals too much into the daily life ; it is childish , like a baby insisting on its new toy at meal times , and taking it to bed .
Never use an ideal as a standard , and avoid any that reflect upon your conduct .
The extremest decorative people refrain from enamelling their kettles , and my cook though a 'born lady ' does not wear her silk dress in the kitchen .
Ideals are the full dress of the soul .
A business man , for instance , who let visions of reverend Venetian and Genoese seigniors interfere with his agile City movements -- who , to carry out our comparison , draped his mind with these things -- would be uncommonly like a bowler in a dressing-gown .
`` An album , '' said my uncle , as he sat and turned over my collection of physiognomy , `` is , I think , the best reading in the world .
You get such sidelights on the owner 's heredity , George ; distant cousins caricature his features and point the moral of his nose , and ancestral faces prophesy his fate .
His friends , moreover , figure the secret of his soul .
But what a lot we have to learn yet in the art of being photographed , what grotesque and awkward blunders your common sitters make !
Why , for instance , do men brush their hair so excessively when they go before the lens ?
Your cousin here looks like a cheap chess pawn about the head , whereas as I know him his head is a thing like a worn-out paint-brush .
Where but in a photograph would you see a parting so straight as this ?
You flatten down all a man 's character ; for nothing shows that more than the feathers and drakes ' tails , the artful artlessness , or revolutionary tumult of his hair .
Mind you , I am not one of those who would prohibit a man wearing what he conceives to be his best clothes to the photographer 's .
I like to see the little vanity peeping out -- the last moment 's folly of a foolish tie , nailed up for a lifetime .
Yet all the same , people should understand that the camera takes no note of newness , but much of the cut and fit .
And a man should certainly not go and alter his outline into a feminine softness , by pouring oil on his troubled mane and plastering it down with a brush and comb .
It is not tidiness , but hypocrisy .
`` I want to , '' said my uncle .
`` But why do you try and hide your taste under these mere formalities in frames ?
Why do you always say 'I pass' in the game of decoration ?
Better a mess of green amateurs and love therewith , than the richest autotypes and dull complacency .
Have what you like .
There is no such thing as absolute beauty .
That is the Magna Charta of the world of art .
What is beautiful to me is not beautiful to another man , in art as in women .
But take care to get the art that fits you .
Frankly , that 'Love and Death ' suits you , Bagshot , about as much as a purple toga would .
Orchardson is in your style .
I tell you that the greengrocer who buys an original oil painting for sixteen shillings with frame complete is far nearer artistic salvation than the patron of the popular autotype .
Surely you will wake up presently , Bagshot , and wonder what you have been about .
He turned to nerve himself with whisky .
`` You can scarcely imagine , George , '' he proceeded , `` how I have longed to be engaged .
All my life it has been my hope and goal .
It is , I think , the ideal state of man .
There was a chap with me when I was at Kimberley who first put the idea into my head .
His ways were animated and cheerful even for a diamond field , where you know animation and cheerfulness are , so to speak , _de rigueur_ .
Whisky he affected , and jesting of the kind that paints cities scarlet .
And he used every night , before festivities began , to write a long letter to some girl in England , and say , within limits , how bad he had been and how he longed to reform and be with her , and never , never do anything wrong any more .
He poured all the higher and better parts of his nature into the letter , and folded it up and sealed it very carefully .
And then he came to us in a singularly relieved frame of mind , and would be the life and soul of as merry a game of follow-your-leader as one can well imagine . ''
`` No , George : engagements for me .
It is the state we were made for .
I have delayed this matter all too long .
But , thank heaven , I am engaged at last -- I hope for all the rest of my life .
Now , will you not congratulate me ? ''
`` I must have my walk , George .
I can not bear to hear that old-familiar music so evilly entreated .
But , all the same , the memory it has touched will vibrate and smart ; to-day and to-morrow , and I know not for how many days , it will re-echo in my brain .
All the old cloudy remorse that has subsided will be set astir again .
I shall hear again a light touch upon the keys , see again the shadowy face against the sunset , try to recall the sound of a voice ... .
What evil spirit has put this mockery into the head of La Belle Dame ?
Surely without this -- -- ''
I turned , and saw my uncle .
He was disguised in a costume of reddish-brown cloth .
`` Golf here ? ''
said I , and then I noticed the tricycle .
`` A vagrom man on wheels ! ''
My uncle did his best to be calm and judicial .
He paused impressively , placed the egg respectfully upon his bureau , and presently went off at a tangent to something else .
She stared at me with a certain attempt at confidence .
She is a callous , impertinent kind of girl , and I fear inclined to be bold .
`` It _do_ smell , sir , '' she said to him .
`` That 's the merit of it .
Go and put it on the fourth shelf near the window .
There are some yellow-covered books there , and Swift , some comedies by a gentleman named Ibsen , and a couple of novels by two gentlemen named George -- -- -- .
you do n't know one book from another !
The fourth shelf from the top on the right-hand side . ''
Is it such a headlong wreck of one 's ideals as they say ? ''
`` Is that dreamland furniture really so unstable in use ? ''
`` A marriage invalidates all promises , '' I explained .
`` The law recognises this in the case of wills . ''
`` It would perhaps be as well .
Before marriage Edwin vows to devote his life to Angelina , and Angelina vows she will devote her life to Edwin .
After marriage this leads to confusion if they continue to believe such promises .
Marriage certainly has that odd effect on the memory .
You remember Angelina 's promises and forget your own , and _vice versa_ . ''
We passed through the elephant house in silence .
`` Not now , '' I said .
`` It 's no good , George .
You did the same thing at the cake shop .
Do you think I never saw the cake shop ?
Since this affair was settled I think every shop I pass reminds me of it -- even the gunsmith 's .
I never suspected before how entirely retail trade turned on marriage -- except , perhaps , the second-hand book shops .
The whole world seems a-marrying .
We went on past a display of electroplate with a card about presents in the window , past a window full of white flowers , past a carriage-builder 's and a glove shop .
`` It 's like death , '' said my uncle ; `` it turns up everywhere and is just the same for everybody .
In that cake shop there were piles and piles of cakes , from little cakes ten inches across up to cakes of three hundredweight or so ; all just the same rich , uneatable , greasy stuff , and with just the same white sugar on the top of them .
I suppose every day they pack off scores .
It makes one think of marrying in swarms , like the gnats .
I catch myself wondering sometimes if the run of people really are separate individuals , or only a kind of replicas , without any tastes of their own .
There are people who would rather not marry than marry without one of those cakes , George .
To me it seems to be almost the most asinine position a couple of adults can be in , to have to buy a stone or so of that concentrated biliousness and cut it up , or procure other people to cut it up , and send it round to other adults who would almost as soon eat arsenic .
And why cake -- infantile cake ?
Why not biscuits , or cigarettes , or chocolate ?
It seems to me to be playing the fool with a solemn occasion . ''
`` Other women tell them to .
They would despise any one dreadfully who did not have a really big cake -- from that shop . ''
`` It must be these tradesmen , '' he began bitterly after an interval .
`` Some one must be responsible , and it 's just their way .
Do you know , George , I sometimes fancy that they have hypnotised womankind into the belief that all these uncomfortable things are absolutely necessary to a valid marriage -- just as they have persuaded the landlady class that no house is complete without a big mirror over the fireplace and a bulgy sideboard .
There is a very strong flavour of mesmeric suggestion about a woman 's attitude towards these matters , considered in the light of her customary common sense .
Do you know , George , I really believe there is a secret society of tradesmen , a kind of priesthood , who get hold of our womenkind and muddle them up with all these fancies .
It's a sort of white magic .
Have you ever been in a draper 's shop , George ? ''
`` That 's exactly what makes me think the tradesmen have hypnotised the sex .
It may be they do it in those drapers ' dens .
A man spots that kind of thing at once and drops the paper .
Women go on year after year , simply worshipping a paper hoarding of that kind , and doing patiently everything they are told to do therein .
Anyhow , it is only in this way that I can account for all these expensive miseries of matrimony .
I ca n't understand a woman in full possession of her faculties deliberately exasperating the man she has to live with -- I suppose all men submit to it under protest -- for these stale and stereotyped antics .
She _must_ be magnetised . ''
`` And putting aside the details , '' said my uncle , with a transient dash of cheerfulness at my mistake ; `` I object to the publicity of the whole thing .
It 's not nice .
To bring the street arab into the affair , to subject yourself to the impertinent congratulations and presents of every aspirant to your intimacy , to be patted on the back in the local newspapers as though you were going to do something clever .
It 's not their affair .
And I 'm too old to be a blushing bridegroom .
Then think , what am I to do , George , if that cad Hagshot sends me a present ? ''
`` You do your best , '' the gentleman with the long hair was saying ; `` and they say , 'What is it for ? '
'It is for itself , ' you say .
Like the stars . ''
`` I have had the same experience , '' said the young gentleman with the hair .
`` A man sent to me only a week ago to ask what my sonnet 'The Scarlet Thread ' _meant_ ? ''
`` I gave him answer , '' said the poet , `` 'T was a sonnet ; not a symbol . ''
For a moment , perhaps , the poet was disconcerted .
`` A noble art , '' he said , recovering .
`` No artist is of any worth , '' said the poet , `` who primarily studies what the public needs . ''
`` If it were luminous you might , '' said the first speaker .
`` However , I will illuminate it . ''
He fumbled with something in his pocket , then held this object in his hand .
There was a scratch , a streak of greenish phosphorescent light , and then all the world beyond became black , as a fusee vesta flared .
`` I doubt it , '' said the man with the nose ; `` and even so , it is poor comfort .
Did you notice the shape ?
Like Snowdon , it has a steep side and a gentle slope .
The size is preposterous : my face is like a hen-house built behind a portico .
And the tints ! ''
`` If , '' said the second man , his voice a little unsteady , as though he was moved , `` if it eases your mind to talk of your nose , pray talk . ''
He whom the man with the nose had addressed now spoke .
`` I have certainly never thought before of a red nose as a sorrowful thing , but as you put it ... . ''
`` Besides love , '' interrupted the young man thoughtfully , `` there are other things worth living for -- duty .
An unattractive nose would not interfere with that .
Some people think it is rather more important than love .
I admit your loss , of course . ''
Is any greater contrast possible than between so implacable , patient , reasonable -- and above all things _capable_ -- a being as General Joffre and the rhetorician of Potsdam , with his talk of German Might , of Hammer Blows and Hacking Through ?
Can there be any doubt of the ultimate issue between them ?
I came round the corner upon a youngster with an intelligent face and steady eyes sitting up on the firing step , awake and thinking .
We looked at one another .
There are moments when mind leaps to mind .
It is natural for the man in the trenches suddenly confronted by so rare a beast as a middle-aged civilian with an enquiring expression , to feel oneself something of a spectacle and something generalised .
It is natural for the civilian to look rather in the vein of saying , `` Well , how do you take it ? ''
As I pushed past him we nodded slightly with an effect of mutual understanding .
And we said with our nods just exactly what General Joffre had said with his horizontal gestures of the hand and what the King of Italy conveyed by his friendly manner ; we said to each other that here was the trouble those Germans had brought upon us and here was the task that had to be done .
Followed a little silence .
Then I tried my second stock remark for such cases .
One does not talk to soldiers at the front in this war of Glory or the `` Empire on which the sun never sets '' or `` the meteor flag of England '' or of King and Country or any of those fine old headline things .
On the desolate path that winds about amidst the shell craters and the fragments and the red-rusted wire , with the silken shiver of passing shells in the air and the blue of the lower sky continually breaking out into eddying white puffs , it is wonderful how tawdry such panoplies of the effigy appear .
We knew that we and our allies are upon a greater , graver , more fundamental business than that sort of thing now .
We are very near the waking point .
`` Well , '' I said , `` it 's got to be done . ''
`` Aye , '' he said , easing the strap of his rifle a little ; `` it 's got to be done . ''
By devious routes I went on to certain batteries of big guns which had played their part in hammering the Austrian left above Monfalcone across an arm of the Adriatic , and which were now under orders to shift and move up closer .
The battery was the most unobtrusive of batteries ; its one desire seemed to be to appear a simple piece of woodland in the eye of God and the aeroplane .
I went about the network of railways and paths under the trees that a modern battery requires , and came presently upon a great gun that even at the first glance seemed a little less carefully hidden than its fellows .
Then I saw that it was a most ingenious dummy made of a tree and logs and so forth .
It was in the emplacement of a real gun that had been located ; it had its painted sandbags about it just the same , and it felt itself so entirely a part of the battery that whenever its companions fired t burnt a flash and kicked up a dust .
It was an excellent example of the great art of camouflage which this war has developed .
As a consequence when I visited it I found it very little injured -- compared , that is , with such other towns as have been fought through .
Here and there the front of a house has been knocked in by an Austrian shell , or a lamp-post prostrated .
But the road bridge had suffered a good deal ; its iron parapet was twisted about by shell bursts and interwoven with young trees and big boughs designed to screen the passer-by from the observation of the Austrian gunners upon Monte Santo .
Here and there were huge holes through which one could look down upon the blue trickles of water in the stony river bed far below .
The driver of our automobile displayed what seemed to me an extreme confidence in the margins of these gaps , but his confidence was justified .
At Sagrado the bridge had been much more completely demolished ; no effort had been made to restore the horizontal roadway , but one crossed by a sort of timber switchback that followed the ups and downs of the ruins .
As we approached San Martino an Austrian aeroplane made its presence felt overhead by dropping a bomb among the tents of some workmen , in a little scrubby wood on the hillside near at hand .
One heard the report and turned to see the fragments flying and the dust .
Probably they got someone .
And then , after a little pause , the encampment began to spew out men ; here , there and everywhere they appeared among the tents , running like rabbits at evening-time , down the hill .
Soon after and probably in connection with this signal , Austrian shells began to come over .
They do not use shrapnel because the rocky soil of Italy makes that unnecessary .
They fire a sort of shell that goes bang and releases a cloud of smoke overhead , and then drops a parcel of high explosive that bursts on the ground .
The ground leaps into red dust and smoke .
But these things are now to be seen on the cinema .
Forthwith the men working on the road about us begin to down tools and make for the shelter trenches , a long procession going at a steady but resolute walk .
Then like a blow in the chest came the bang of a big Italian gun somewhere close at hand ... .
The aspect of these mountains is particularly grim and wicked ; they are worn old mountains , they tower overhead in enormous vertical cliffs of sallow grey , with the square jointings and occasional clefts and gullies , their summits are toothed and jagged ; the path ascends and passes round the side of the mountain upon loose screes , which descend steeply to a lower wall of precipices .
In the distance rise other harsh and desolate-looking mountain masses , with shining occasional scars of old snow .
Far below is a bleak valley of stunted pine trees through which passes the road of the Dolomites .
Venice has suffered particularly from this ape-like impulse to hurt and terrorise enemy non-combatants .
Venice has indeed suffered from this war far more than any other town in Italy .
Her trade has largely ceased ; she has no visitors .
I woke up on my way to Udine and found my train at Venice with an hour to spare ; after much examining and stamping of my passport I was allowed outside the station wicket to get coffee in the refreshment room and a glimpse of a very sad and silent Grand Canal .
There was nothing doing ; a black despondent remnant of the old crowd of gondolas browsed dreamily among against the quay to stare at me the better .
The empty palaces seemed to be sleeping in the morning sunshine because it was not worth while to wake up ... .
The case of the individual Italian compactly is this : `` We do not like the Austrians and Germans .
These Imperialisms look always over the Alps .
Whatever increases German influence here threatens Italian life .
The German is a German first and a human being afterwards ... .
But on the other hand England seems commercially indifferent to us and France has been economically hostile ... ''
The reasonable uncommercial man would like to reject all this last sort of talk as `` suspicion mania . ''
So far as the Banca Commerciale Italiana goes , I at least find that easy enough ; I quote that instance simply because it is a case where suspicion has been dispelled , but in regard to a score of other business veins it is not so easy to dispel suspicion .
This war has been a shock to reasonable men the whole world over .
They have been forced to realise that after all a great number of Germans have been engaged in a crack-brained conspiracy against the non-German world ; that in a great number of cases when one does business with a German the business does not end with the individual German .
We hated to believe that a business could be tainted by German partners or German associations .
If now we err on the side of over-suspicion , it is the German 's little weakness for patriotic disingenuousness that is most to blame ... .
`` But , '' said the husband casually , `` Mr. Runciman is a shipowner . ''
The organisation of Soissons for defence is perfect .
I may not describe it , but think of whatever would stop and destroy an attacking party or foil the hostile shell .
Men have had nothing else to do and nothing else to think of for two years .
I crossed the bridge the English made in the pursuit after the Marne , and went into the first line trenches and peeped towards the invisible enemy .
To show me exactly where to look a seventy-five obliged with a shell .
In the crypt of the Abbey of St. Medard near by it -- it must provoke the Germans bitterly to think that all the rest of the building vanished ages ago -- the French boys sleep beside the bones of King Childebert the Second .
They shelter safely in the prison of Louis the Pious .
An ineffective shell from a German seventy-seven burst in the walled garden close at hand as I came out from those thousand-year-old memories again .
`` That must have been the Seminaire , '' said someone .
There is no waste of time about the business , the photographs are developed as rapidly as possible .
Within an hour and a half after the photographs were taken the first prints are going back into the bureau for the examination of the photographs .
Both British and French air photographs are thoroughly scrutinised and marked .
An air photograph to an inexperienced eye is not a very illuminating thing ; one makes our roads , blurs of wood , and rather vague buildings .
But the examiner has an eye that has been in training ; he is a picked man ; he has at hand yesterday 's photographs and last week 's photographs , marked maps and all sorts of aids and records .
If he is a Frenchman he is only too happy to explain his ideas and methods .
Here , he will point out , is a little difference between the German trench beyond the wood since yesterday .
For a number of reasons he thinks that will be a new machine gun emplacement ; here at the centre of the farm wall they have been making another .
This battery here -- is n't it plain ?
Well , it 's a dummy .
The grass in front of it has n't been scorched , and there 's been no serious wear on the road here for a week .
Presently the Germans will send one or two waggons up and down that road and instruct them to make figures of eight to imitate scorching on the grass in front of the gun .
We know all about that .
The real wear on the road , compare this and this and this , ends here at this spot .
It turns off into the wood .
There 's a sort of track in the trees .
Now look where the trees are just a little displaced !
( This lens is rather better for that . )
Here , I will show you another ... .
The British seem to be associated with the adventurous self-reliance needed in the air .
The British aeroplanes do not simply fight the Germans out of the sky ; they also make themselves an abominable nuisance by bombing the enemy trenches .
For every German bomb that is dropped by aeroplane on or behind the British lines , about twenty go down on the heads of the Germans .
British air bombs upon guns , stores and communications do some of the work that the French effect by their systematic demolition fire .
Now a cavalry pursuit alone may easily come upon disaster , cavalry can be so easily held up by wire and a few machine guns .
I think the Germans have reckoned on that and on automobiles , probably only the decay of their _morale_ prevents their opening their lines now on the chance of the British attempting some such folly as a big cavalry advance , but I do not think the Germans have reckoned on the use of machine guns in aeroplanes , supported by and supporting cavalry or automobiles .
At the present time I should imagine there is no more perplexing consideration amidst the many perplexities of the German military intelligence than the new complexion put upon pursuit by these low level air developments .
It may mean that in all sorts of positions where they had counted confidently on getting away , they may not be able to get away -- from the face of a scientific advance properly commanding and using modern material in a dexterous and intelligent manner .
Now and then one sees afar off an ammunition dump , many hundreds of stacks of shells -- without their detonators as yet -- being unloaded from railway trucks , transferred from the broad gauge to the narrow gauge line , or loaded onto motor trolleys .
Now and then one crosses a railway line .
The railway lines run everywhere behind the British front , the construction follows the advance day by day .
They go up as fast as the guns .
One 's guide remarks as the car bumps over the level crossing , `` That is one of Haig 's railways . ''
It is an aspect of the Commander-in-Chief that has much impressed and pleased the men .
And at last we begin to enter the region of the former Allied trenches , we pass the old German front line , we pass ruined houses , ruined fields , and thick patches of clustering wooden crosses and boards where the dead of the opening assaults lie .
There are no more reapers now , there is no more green upon the fields , there is no green anywhere , scarcely a tree survives by the roadside , but only overthrown trunks and splintered stumps ; the fields are wildernesses of shell craters and coarse weeds , the very woods are collections of blasted stems and stripped branches .
This absolutely ravaged and ruined battlefield country extends now along the front of the Somme offensive for a depth of many miles ; across it the French and British camps and batteries creep forward , the stores , the dumps , the railways creep forward , in their untiring , victorious thrust against the German lines .
Overhead hum and roar the aeroplanes , away towards the enemy the humped , blue sausage-shaped kite balloons brood thoughtfully , and from this point and that , guns , curiously invisible until they speak , flash suddenly and strike their one short hammer-blow of sound .
They ought to be called by the name of the man who designed them .
Presently we are advised to get into a communication trench .
It is not a very attractive communication trench , and we stick to our track across the open .
Three or four shells shiver overhead , but we decide they are British shells , going out .
We reach a supporting trench in which men are waiting in a state of nearly insupportable boredom for the midday stew , the one event of interest in a day-long vigil .
Here we are told imperatively to come right in at once , and we do .
My companion on this excursion is a man I have admired for years and never met until I came out to see the war , a fellow writer .
He is a journalist let loose .
Two-thirds of the junior British officers I met on this journey were really not `` army men '' at all .
One finds that the apparent subaltern is really a musician , or a musical critic , or an Egyptologist , or a solicitor , or a cloth manufacturer , or a writer .
At the outbreak of the war my guide dyed his hair to conceal its tell-tale silver , and having been laughed to scorn by the ordinary recruiting people , enlisted in the sportsmen 's battalion .
He was wounded , and then the authorities discovered that he was likely to be of more use with a commission and drew him , in spite of considerable resistance , out of the firing line .
To which he always returns whenever he can get a visitor to take with him as an excuse .
He now stood up , fairly high and clear , explaining casually that the Germans were no longer firing , and showed me the points of interest .
I wanted to catch the Boulogne boat .
It was then just past one in the afternoon .
We met the stew as we returned along the communication trench , and it smelt very good indeed ... .
We hurried across the great spaces of rusty desolation upon which every now and again a German shell was bursting ... .
Such are the landscapes and method of modern war .
It is more difficult in its nature from war as it was waged in the nineteenth century than that was from the nature of the phalanx or the legion .
The nucleus fact -- when I talked to General Joffre he was very insistent upon this point -- is still as ever the ordinary fighting man , but all the accessories and conditions of his personal encounter with the fighting man of the other side have been revolutionised in a quarter of a century .
The fighting together in a close disciplined order , shoulder to shoulder , which has held good for thousands of years as the best and most successful fighting , has been destroyed ; the idea of _breaking_ infantry formation as the chief offensive operation has disappeared , the cavalry charge and the cavalry pursuit are as obsolete as the cross-bow .
The modern fighting man is as individualised as a half back or a centre forward in a football team .
Personal fighting has become `` scrapping '' again , an individual adventure with knife , club , bomb , revolver or bayonet .
In this war we are working out things instead of thinking them out , and these enormous changes are still but imperfectly apprehended .
The trained and specialised military man probably apprehends them as feebly as anyone .
After the rush and the scrap comes the organisation of the captured trench .
`` Digging in '' completes the cycle of modern infantry fighting .
You may consider this the first or the last phase of an infantry operation .
It is probably at present the least worked-out part of the entire cycle .
Here lies the sole German superiority ; they bunch and crowd in the rush , they are inferior at the scrap , but they do dig like moles .
The weakness of the British is their failure to settle down .
They like the rush and the scrap ; they press on too far , they get outflanked and lost `` in the blue '' ; they are not naturally clever at the excavating part of the work , and they are not as yet well trained in making dug-outs and shelter-pits rapidly and intelligently .
They display most of the faults that were supposed to be most distinctively French before this war came to revolutionise all our conceptions of French character .
The shell factory and the explosives shed stand level with the drill yard as the real first stage in one of the two essential _punches_ in modern war .
When one meets the shell again it is being unloaded from the railway truck into an ammunition dump .
And here the work of control is much more the work of a good traffic manager than of the old-fashioned soldier .
I have already described the method of locating enemy guns and so forth by photography .
Many of the men at this work are like dentists rather than soldiers ; they are busy in carefully lit rooms , they wear white overalls , they have clean hands and laboratory manners .
The only really romantic figure in the whole of this process , the only figure that has anything of the old soldierly swagger about him still , is the aviator .
And , as one friend remarked to me when I visited the work of the British flying corps , `` The real essential strength of this arm is the organisation of its repairs .
Here is one of the repair vans through which our machine guns go .
It is a motor workshop on wheels .
But at any time all this park , everything , can pack up and move forward like Barnum and Bailey 's Circus .
The machine guns come through this shop in rotation ; they go out again , cleaned , repaired , made new again .
Since we got all that working we have heard nothing of a machine gun jamming in any air fight at all .
Occasionally into the writer 's study there come to hand drifting fragments of the American literature upon the question of `` preparedness , '' and American papers discussing the Mexican situation .
In none of these is there evident any clear realisation of the fundamental revolution that has occurred in military methods during the last two years .
It looks as if a Mexican war , for example , was thought of as an affair of rather imperfectly trained young men with rifles and horses and old-fashioned things like that .
A Mexican war on that level might be as tedious as the South African war .
But if the United States preferred to go into Mexican affairs with what I may perhaps call a 1916 autumn outfit instead of the small 1900 outfit she seems to possess at present , there is no reason why America should not clear up any and every Mexican guerilla force she wanted to in a few weeks .
Infantrymen with automobile transport , plentiful machine guns , Tanks and such-like accessories ; that is the first Arm in modern war .
The factory hand and all the material of the shell route from the factory to the gun constitute the second Arm .
Thirdly comes the artillery , the guns and the photographic aeroplanes working with the guns .
Next I suppose we must count sappers and miners as a fourth Arm of greatly increased importance .
The fifth and last combatant Arm is the modern substitute for cavalry ; and that also is essentially a force of aeroplanes supported by automobiles .
Several of the French leaders with whom I talked seemed to be convinced that the horse is absolutely done with in modern warfare .
There is nothing , they declared , that cavalry ever did that can not now be done better by aeroplane .
It may be argued that horses can go over country that is impossible for automobiles .
That is to ignore altogether what has been done in this war by such devices as caterpillar wheels .
So far from cavalry being able to negotiate country where machines would stick and fail , mechanism can now ride over places where any horse would flounder .
The young of even the most horrible beasts have something piquant and engaging about them , and so I suppose it is in the way of things that the land ironclad which opens a new and more dreadful and destructive phase in the human folly of warfare , should appear first as if it were a joke .
Never has any such thing so completely masked its wickedness under an appearance of genial silliness .
The Tank is a creature to which one naturally flings a pet name ; the five or six I was shown wandering , rooting and climbing over obstacles , round a large field near X , were as amusing and disarming as a little of lively young pigs .
Again the Tank is like a slug .
The slug , as every biological student knows , is unexpectedly complicated inside .
The Tank is as crowded with inward parts as a battleship .
It is filled with engines , guns and ammunition , and in the interstices men .
This logical development of the Tank idea may seem a gloomy prospect for mankind .
But it is open to question whether the tremendous development of warfare that has gone on in the last two years does after all open a prospect of unmitigated gloom .
There has been a good deal of cheap and despondent sneering recently at the phrase , `` The war that will end war . ''
It is still possible to maintain that that may be a correct description of this war .
It has to be remembered that war , as the aeroplane and the Tank have made it , has already become an impossible luxury for any barbaric or uncivilised people .
War on the grade that has been achieved on the Somme predicates an immense industrialism behind it .
Of all the States in the world only four can certainly be said to be fully capable of sustaining war at the level to which it has now been brought upon the western front .
These are Britain , France , Germany , and the United States of America .
Less certainly equal to the effort are Italy , Japan , Russia , and Austria .
These eight powers are the only powers _capable of warfare under modern conditions._ Five are already Allies and one is incurably pacific .
There is no other power or people in the world that can go to war now without the consent and connivance of these great powers .
If we consider their alliances , we may count it that the matter rests now between two groups of Allies and one neutral power .
So that while on the one hand the development of modern warfare of which the Tank is the present symbol opens a prospect of limitless senseless destruction , it opens on the other hand a prospect of organised world control .
This Tank development must ultimately bring the need of a real permanent settlement within the compass of the meanest of diplomatic intelligences .
A peace that will restore competitive armaments has now become a less desirable prospect for everyone than a continuation of the war .
Things were bad enough before , when the land forces were still in a primitive phase of infantry , cavalry and artillery , and when the only real race to develop monsters and destructors was for sea power .
But the race for sea power before 1914 was mere child 's play to the breeding of engineering monstrosities for land warfare that must now follow any indeterminate peace settlement .
I am no blind believer in the wisdom of mankind , but I can not believe that men are so insensate and headstrong as to miss the plain omens of the present situation .
DO THEY REALLY THINK AT ALL ?
All human affairs are mental affairs ; the bright ideas of to-day are the realities of to-morrow .
The real history of mankind is the history of how ideas have arisen , how they have taken possession of men 's minds , how they have struggled , altered , proliferated , decayed .
There is nothing in this war at all but a conflict of ideas , traditions , and mental habits .
The German Will clothed in conceptions of aggression and fortified by cynical falsehood , struggles against the fundamental sanity of the German mind and the confused protest of mankind .
So that the most permanently important thing in the tragic process of this war is the change of opinion that is going on .
What are people making of it ?
Is it producing any great common understandings , any fruitful unanimities ?
No doubt it is producing enormous quantities of cerebration , but is it anything more than chaotic and futile cerebration ?
We are told all sorts of things in answer to that , things without a scrap of evidence or probability to support them .
It is , we are assured , turning people to religion , making them moral and thoughtful .
It is also , we are assured with equal confidence , turning them to despair and moral disaster .
It will be followed by ( 1 ) a period of moral renascence , and ( 2 ) a debauch .
It is going to make the workers ( 1 ) more and ( 2 ) less obedient and industrious .
It is ( 1 ) inuring men to war and ( 2 ) filling them with a passionate resolve never to suffer war again .
I propose now to ask what is really happening in this matter ?
How is human opinion changing ?
I have opinions of my own and they are bound to colour my discussion .
The reader must allow for that , and as far as possible I will remind him where necessary to make his allowance .
For example , there is this business of the Zeppelin raids in England .
It is a supremely silly business ; it is the most conclusive demonstration of the intellectual inferiority of the German to the Western European that is should ever have happened .
There was the clearest _a priori_ case against the gas-bag .
I remember the discussions ten or twelve years ago in which it was established to the satisfaction of every reasonable man that ultimately the `` heavier than air '' machine ( as we called it then ) must fly better than the gas-bag , and still more conclusively that no gas-bag was conceivable that could hope to fight and defeat aeroplanes .
Nevertheless the German , with that dull faith of his in mere `` Will , '' persisted along his line .
He knew instinctively that he could not produce aviators to meet the Western European ; all his social instincts made him cling to the idea of a great motherly , almost sow-like bag of wind above him .
At an enormous waste of resources Germany has produced these futile monsters , that drift in the darkness over England promiscuously dropping bombs on fields and houses .
They are now meeting the fate that was demonstrably certain ten years ago .
If they found us unready for them it is merely that we were unable to imagine so idiotic an enterprise would ever be seriously sustained and persisted in .
We did not believe in the probability of Zeppelin raids any more than we believed that Germany would force the world into war .
It was a thing too silly to be believed .
But they came -- to their certain fate .
In the month after I returned from France and Italy , no less than four of these fatuities were exploded and destroyed within thirty miles of my Essex home ... .
There in chosen phrases you have the truth about these things .
But now mark the perversion of thought due to spectacular effect .
I submit that a man has not done his duty by himself as a rational creature unless he has formed an idea of what is going on , as one complicated process , until he has formed an idea sufficiently definite for him to make it the basis of a further idea , which is his own relationship to that process .
He must have some notion of what the process is going to do to him , and some notion of what he means to do , if he can , to the process .
That is to say , he must not only have an idea how the process is going , but also an idea of how he wants it to go .
It seems so natural and necessary for a human brain to do this that it is hard to suppose that everyone has not more or less attempted it .
But few people , in Great Britain at any rate , have the habit of frank expression , and when people do not seem to have made out any of these things for themselves there is a considerable element of secretiveness and inexpressiveness to be allowed for before we decide that they have not in some sort of fashion done so .
Still , after all allowances have been made , there remains a vast amount of jerry-built and ready-made borrowed stuff in most of people 's philosophies of the war .
The systems of authentic opinion in this world of thought about the war are like comparatively rare thin veins of living mentality in a vast world of dead repetitions and echoed suggestions .
And that being the case , it is quite possible that history after the war , like history before the war , will not be so much a display of human will and purpose as a resultant of human vacillations , obstructions , and inadvertences .
We shall still be in a drama of blind forces following the line of least resistance .
THE YIELDING PACIFIST AND THE CONSCIENTIOUS OBJECTOR
Both Italy and France produce parallel types to those latter , but it would seem that in each case England displays the finer developments .
The Latin mind is directer than the English , and its standards -- shall I say ?
-- more primitive ; it gets more directly to the fact that here are men who will not fight .
And it is less charitable .
I was asked quite a number of times for the English equivalent of an _embusque._ `` We don't generalise , '' I said , `` we treat each case on its merits ! ''
`` Here , '' he said , `` are sixty or seventy young Englishmen , all fit for military service ... .
Of course they go under fire , but it is not like being junior officers in the trenches .
Not one of them has been killed or wounded . ''
My French and Italian are only for very rough common jobs ; when it came to explaining the Conscientious Objector sympathetically they broke down badly .
I had to construct long parenthetical explanations of our antiquated legislative methods to show how it was that the `` conscientious objector '' had been so badly defined .
The foreigner does not understand the importance of vague definition in British life .
`` Practically , of course , we offered to exempt anyone who conscientiously objected to fight or serve .
Then the Pacifist and German people started a campaign to enrol objectors .
Of course every shirker , every coward and slacker in the country decided at once to be a conscientious objector .
Anyone but a British legislator could have foreseen that .
Then we started Tribunals to wrangle with the objectors about their _bona fides._ Then the Pacifists and the Pro-Germans issued little leaflets and started correspondence courses to teach people exactly how to lie to the Tribunals .
Trouble about freedom of the pamphleteer followed .
I had to admit -- it has been rather a sloppy business .
The people who made the law knew their own minds , but we English are not an expressive people . ''
And so I pressed them about the official socialists in Italy and the Socialist minority in France until I got the question out of the net of national comparisons and upon a broader footing .
In several conversations we began to work out in general terms the psychology of those people who were against the war .
But usually we could not get to that ; my interlocutors would insist upon telling me just what they would like to do or just what they would like to see done to stop-the-war pacifists and conscientious objectors ; pleasant rather than fruitful imaginative exercises from which I could effect no more than platitudinous uplifts .
The Resentful Employees are the outcome of our social injustices .
They are the failures of our social ad educational systems .
We may regret their pitiful degradation , we may exonerate them from blame ; none the less they are a pitiful crew .
I have seen the hardship of the trenches , the gay and gallant wounded .
I do a little understand what our soldiers , officers and men alike , have endured and done .
And though I know I ought to allow for all that I have stated , I can not regard these conscientious objectors with anything but contempt .
Into my house there pours a dismal literature rehearsing the hardships of these men who set themselves up to be martyrs for liberty ; So and So , brave hero , has been sworn at -- positively sworn at by a corporal ; a nasty rough man came into the cell of So and So and dropped several h 's ; So and So , refusing to undress and wash , has been undressed and washed , and soap was rubbed into his eyes -- perhaps purposely ; the food and accommodation are not of the best class ; the doctors in attendance seem hasty ; So and So was put into a damp bed and has got a nasty cold .
Then I recall a jolly vanload of wounded men I saw out there ... .
If our world had considered the advice of William James and insisted upon national service from everyone , national service in the drains or the nationalised mines or the nationalised deep-sea fisheries if not in the army or navy , we should not have had any such men .
If it had insisted that wealth and property are no more than a trust for the public benefit , we should have had no genteel indispensables .
These discords in our national unanimity are the direct consequence of our bad social organisation .
We permit the profiteer and the usurer ; they evoke the response of the Reluctant Employee , and the inheritor of their wealth becomes the Genteel Whig .
Indubitably the Christian church took a wide stride from the kingship of God when it placed a golden throne for the unbaptised Constantine in the midst of its most sacred deliberations at Nicaea .
But it seems to me that this abandonment of moral judgements in the present case by the Holy See is an almost wider step from the church 's allegiance to God ... .
`` The rule of Righteousness , '' said Mr. Lubin .
`` But _I_ say that , '' cried Mr. Lubin , `` I have put my name to that .
And -- it is _here !
It becomes more and more imperative that the foreign observer should distinguish between this narrower , older official Britain and the greater newer Britain that struggles to free itself from the entanglement of a system outgrown .
There are many Englishmen who would like to say to the French and Irish and the Italians and India , who indeed feel every week now a more urgent need of saying , `` Have patience with us . ''
The Riddle of the British is very largely solved if you will think of a great modern liberal nation seeking to slough an exceedingly tough and tight skin ... .
There is a great variety of suggestions for this increase of public wealth and production .
Many of them have an extreme reasonableness .
The extent to which they will be adopted depends , no doubt , very largely upon the politician and permanent official , and both these classes are prone to panic in the presence of reality .
In spite of its own interests in restraining a rise in prices , the old official `` salariat '' is likely to be obstructive to any such innovations .
It is the resistance of spurs and red tabs to military innovations over again .
This is the resistance of quills and red tape .
On the other hand the organisation of Britain for war has `` officialised '' a number of industrial leaders , and created a large body of temporary and adventurous officials .
They may want to carry on into peace production the great new factories the war has created .
At the end of the war , for example , every belligerent country will be in urgent need of cheap automobiles for farmers , tradesmen , and industrial purposes generally , America is now producing such automobiles at a price of eighty pounds .
But Europe will be heavily in debt to America , her industries will be disorganised , and there will therefore be no sort of return payment possible for these hundreds of thousands of automobiles .
A country that is neither creditor nor producer can not be an importer .
Consequently though those cheap tin cars may be stacked as high as the Washington Monument in America , they will never come to Europe .
On the other hand the great shell factories of Europe will be standing idle and ready , their staffs disciplined and available , for conversion to the new task .
The imperative common sense of the position seems to be that the European governments should set themselves straight away to out-Ford Ford , and provide their own people with cheap road transport .
What does British labour think of the outlook after the war ?
War is an evil thing , but most people who will not learn from reason must have an ugly teacher .
This war has brought home to everyone the supremacy of the public need over every sort of individual claim .
I like N 's ideas .
`` Practically , '' I said , `` you 've been a public official .
You 've treated your business like a public service . ''
`` How much land ? ''
`` What a waste ! ''
`` Of course you ought not to _own_ these acres ; what you ought to be is the agricultural controller of just as big an estate of the public lands as you could manage -- with a suitable salary . ''
I have my own very strong preconceptions here , and since my temperament is sanguine they necessarily colour my view .
I believe that this impulse to collective service can satisfy itself only under the formula that mankind is one state of which God is the undying king , and that the service of men 's collective needs is the true worship of God .
But eagerly as I would grasp at any evidence that this idea is being developed and taken up by the general consciousness , I am quite unable to persuade myself that anything of the sort is going on .
I do perceive a search for large forms into which the prevalent impulse to devotion can be thrown .
But the organised religious bodies , with their creeds and badges and their instinct for self-preservation at any cost , stand between men and their spiritual growth in just the same way the forestallers stand between men and food .
Their activities at present are an almost intolerable nuisance .
One can not say `` God '' but some tout is instantly seeking to pluck one into his particular cave of flummery and orthodoxy .
What a rational man means by God is just God .
The more you define and argue about God the more he remains the same simple thing .
Judaism , Christianity , Islam , modern Hindu religious thought , all agree in declaring that there is one God , master and leader of all mankind , in unending conflict with cruelty , disorder , folly and waste .
To my mind , it follows immediately that there can be no king , no government of any sort , which is not either a subordinate or a rebel government , a local usurpation , in the kingdom of God .
But no organised religious body has ever had the courage and honesty to insist upon this .
They all pander to nationalism and to powers and princes .
They exists so to pander .
Every organised religion in the world exists only to exploit and divert and waste the religious impulse in man .
Some of the French and Italian people I talked to said they were fighting for `` Civilisation . ''
That is one name for the kingdom of God , and I have heard English people use it too .
But much of the contemporary thought of England stills wanders with its back to the light .
Most of it is pawing over jerry-built , secondary things .
I have before me a little book , the joint work of Dr. Grey and Mr. Turner , of an ex-public schoolmaster and a manufacturer , called _Eclipse or Empire ?
_ ( The title _World Might or Downfall ?
_ had already been secured in another quarter . )
It is a book that has been enormously advertised ; it has been almost impossible to escape its column-long advertisements ; it is billed upon the hoardings , and it is on the whole a very able and right-spirited book .
It calls for more and better education , for more scientific methods , for less class suspicion and more social explicitness and understanding , for a franker and fairer treatment of labour .
But why does it call for these things ?
Does it call for them because they are right ?
Because in accomplishing them one serves God ?
But because otherwise this strange sprawling empire of ours will drop back into a secondary place in the world .
These two writers really seem to think that the slack workman , the slacker wealthy man , the negligent official , the conservative schoolmaster , the greedy usurer , the comfortable obstructive , confronted with this alternative , terrified at this idea of something or other called the Empire being `` eclipsed , '' eager for the continuance of this undefined glory over their fellow-creatures called `` Empire , '' will perceive the error of their ways and become energetic , devoted , capable .
They think an ideal of that sort is going to change the daily lives of men ... .
I sympathise with their purpose , and I deplore their conception of motives .
If men will not give themselves for righteousness , they will not give themselves for a geographical score .
If they will not work well for the hatred of bad work , they will not work well for the hatred of Germans .
This `` Empire '' idea has been cadging about the British empire , trying to collect enthusiasm and devotion , since the days of Disraeli .
It is , I submit , too big for the mean-spirited , and too tawdry and limited for the fine and generous .
It leaves out the French and the Italians and the Belgians and all our blood brotherhood of allies .
It has no compelling force in it .
We British are not naturally Imperialist ; we are something greater -- or something less .
For two years and a half now we have been fighting against Imperialism in its most extravagant form .
It is a poor incentive to right living to propose to parody the devil we fight against .
Let me sketch out here what I conceive to be the essentials of a world settlement .
Some of the items are the mere commonplaces of everyone who discusses this question ; some are less frequently insisted upon .
I have been joining up one thing to another , suggestions I have heard from this man and that , and I believe that it is really possible to state a solution that will be acceptable to the bulk of reasonable men all about the world .
Directly we put the panic-massacres of Dinant and Louvain , the crime of the _Lusitania_ and so on into the category of symptoms rather than essentials , outrages that call for special punishments and reparations , but that do not enter further into the ultimate settlement , we can begin to conceive a possible world treaty .
Let me state the broad outlines of this pacification .
The outlines depend one upon the other ; each is a condition of the other .
It is upon these lines that the thoughtful , as distinguished from the merely the combative people , seem to be drifting everywhere .
I set these things down plainly .
There is a very strong disposition in all the European countries to believe America fundamentally indifferent to the rights and wrongs of the European struggle ; sentimentally interested perhaps , but fundamentally indifferent .
President Wilson is regarded as a mere academic sentimentalist by a great number of Europeans .
There is a very widespread disposition to treat America lightly and contemptuously , to believe that America , as one man put it to me recently , `` has n't the heart to do anything great or the guts to do anything wicked . ''
There is a strong undercurrent of hostility therefore to the idea of America having any voice whatever in the final settlement after the war .
It is not for a British writer to analyse the appearance that have thus affected American world prestige .
I am telling what I have observed .
My companions were French writers and French military men , and they were discussing with very keen interest that persistent question , `` the ideal battery . ''
But that ambulance sent a shaft of light into our carriage , and we stared together .
Then he shrugged his shoulders and pulled down the corners of his mouth .
We felt there was nothing more to add to that , and after a little pause the previous question was resumed .
The second is a little one , but one that has taken hold of my imagination .
In the settlement of boundaries preceding this war the boundary between Serbia and north-eastern Albania was drawn with an extraordinary disregard of the elementary needs of the Albanians of that region .
It ran along the foot of the mountains which form their summer pastures and their refuge from attack , and it cut their mountains off from their winter pastures and market towns .
Their whole economic life was cut to pieces and existence rendered intolerable for them .
Now an intelligent Third Party settling Europe would certainly restore these market towns , Ipek , Jakova , and Prisrend , to Albania .
But the Albanians have no standing in this war ; theirs is the happy lot that might have fallen to Belgium had she not resisted ; the war goes to and fro through Albania ; and when the settlement comes , it is highly improbable that the slightest notice will be taken of Albania 's plight in the region .
In which case these particular Albanians will either be driven into exile to America or they will be goaded to revolt , which will be followed no doubt by the punitive procedure usual in the Balkan peninsula .
Now how in any of these three cases can the bargaining and trickery of diplomatists and the advantage-hunting of the belligerents produce any stable and generally beneficial solution ?
What all the neutrals want , what every rational and far-sighted man in the belligerent countries wants , what the common sense of the whole world demands , is neither the `` ascendancy '' of Germany nor the `` ascendancy '' of Great Britain nor the `` ascendancy '' of any state or people or interest in the shipping of the world .
The plain right thing is a world shipping control , as impartial as the Postal Union .
What right and reason and the welfare of coming generations demand in Poland is a unified and autonomous Poland , with Cracow , Danzig , and Posen brought into the same Polish-speaking ring-fence with Warsaw .
What everyone who has looked into the Albanian question desires is that the Albanians shall pasture their flocks and market their sheepskins in peace , free of Serbian control .
In every country at present at war , the desire of the majority of people is for a non-contentious solution that will neither crystallise a triumph nor propitiate an enemy , but which will embody the economic and ethnological and geographical common sense of the matter .
But while the formulae of national belligerence are easy , familiar , blatant , and instantly present , the gentler , greater formulae of that wider and newer world pacifism has still to be generally understood .
It is so much easier to hate and suspect than negotiate generously and patiently ; it is so much harder to think than to let go in a shrill storm of hostility .
The rational pacifist is hampered not only by belligerency , but by a sort of malignant extreme pacifism as impatient and silly as the extremest patriotism .
The most dangerous thing in the business so far is concerned is the wide disregard of the fact that national economic fighting is bound to cause war , and the almost universal ignorance of the necessity of subjecting shipping and overseas and international trade to some kind of international control .
These two things , restraint of trade and advantage of shipping , are the chief material causes of anger between modern states .
But they would not be in themselves dangerous things if it were not for the exaggerated delusions of kind and difference , and the crack-brained `` loyalties '' arising out of these , that seem still to rule men 's minds .
Years ago I came to the conviction that much of the evil in human life was due to the inherent vicious disposition of the human mind to intensify classification .
[ *See my `` First and Last Things , '' Book I. and my `` Modern Utopia , '' Chapter X . ]
I do not know how it will strike the reader , but to me this war , this slaughter of eight or nine million people , is due almost entirely to this little , almost universal lack of clear-headedness ; I believe that the share of wickedness in making war is quite secondary to the share of this universal shallow silliness of outlook .
These effigies of emperors and kings and statesmen that lead men into war , these legends of nationality and glory , would collapse before our universal derision , if they were not stuffed tight and full with the unthinking folly of the common man .
Several times Isbister heard him stumble as they came down , and his movements were slow and hesitating .
`` Come in with me , '' said Isbister , `` and try some cigarettes and the blessed gift of alcohol .
If you take alcohol ? ''
Long after he had smoked out his pipe , and when the bats were abroad , his curiosity dominated his complex hesitations , and he stole back into his darkling sitting-room .
He paused in the doorway .
The stranger was still in the same attitude , dark against the window .
Save for the singing of some sailors aboard one of the little slate-carrying ships in the harbour , the evening was very still .
Outside , the spikes of monkshood and delphinium stood erect and motionless against the shadow of the hillside .
Something flashed into Isbister 's mind ; he started , and leaning over the table , listened .
An unpleasant suspicion grew stronger ; became conviction .
Astonishment seized him and became -- dread !
It was the Isbister of the last chapter , but he was no longer a young man .
The hair that had been brown and a trifle in excess of the fashionable length , was iron grey and clipped close , and the face that had been pink and white was buff and ruddy .
He had a pointed beard shot with grey .
He talked to an elderly man who wore a summer suit of drill ( the summer of that year was unusually hot ) .
This was Warming , a London solicitor and next of kin to Graham , the man who had fallen into the trance .
And the two men stood side by side in a room in a house in London regarding his recumbent figure .
And then I became a married man .
I saw it was all up with black and white , very soon -- at least for a mediocre man , and I jumped on to process .
Those posters on the Cliffs at Dover are by my people . ''
`` Last as long as the cliffs , if necessary , '' exclaimed Isbister with satisfaction .
`` The world changes .
When he fell asleep , twenty years ago , I was down at Boscastle with a box of water-colours and a noble , old-fashioned ambition .
I did n't expect that some day my pigments would glorify the whole blessed coast of England , from Land 's End round again to the Lizard .
Luck comes to a man very often when he 's not looking . ''
You could see his muscles throb and jump , and he twisted about .
There was just two flaring yellow candles , and all the shadows were shivering , and the little doctor nervous and putting on side , and him -- stark and squirming in the most unnatural ways .
Well , it made me dream . ''
`` I 've felt that , '' said Isbister with a grimace .
`` But it makes it better for him . ''
Warming looked and thought for a space .
`` I doubt if he will wake , '' he said at last .
`` So would I , '' said Warming .
so would I , '' with an old man 's sudden turn to self pity .
`` But I shall never see him wake . ''
Then with a shock he remembered that he was naked , and casting about him for covering , saw a long black robe thrown on one of the chairs beside him .
This he wrapped about him and sat down again , trembling .
Suddenly Graham 's knees bent beneath him , his arm against the pillar collapsed limply , he staggered forward and fell upon his face .
It was all very puzzling , but apparently these people in unfamiliar dress knew what they were about .
Yet they were odd and the room was odd .
It seemed he was in some newly established place .
He had a sudden flash of suspicion .
Surely this was n't some hall of public exhibition !
If it was he would give Warming a piece of his mind .
But it scarcely had that character .
And in a place of public exhibition he would not have discovered himself naked .
They gave him some pink fluid with a greenish fluorescence and a meaty taste , and the assurance of returning strength grew .
He began to speak quickly with a twitching face , but his heart was cold within him .
`` But if it is two hundred years , every soul I know , every human being that ever I saw or spoke to before I went to sleep , must be dead . ''
`` That 's a comfort !
Is there London ? ''
E `` This _is_ London , eh ?
And you are my assistant -- custodian ; assistant-custodian .
He sat silent , rubbed his eyes , and , uncovering them , found another little glass of pinkish fluid held towards him .
He took the dose .
It was almost immediately sustaining .
Directly he had taken it he began to weep naturally and refreshingly .
The man with the fair beard made some inaudible remark , and Graham looking over his shoulder saw approaching a very short , fat , and thickset beardless man , with aquiline nose and heavy neck and chin .
Very thick black and slightly sloping eyebrows that almost met over his nose and overhung deep grey eyes , gave his face an oddly formidable expression .
He scowled momentarily at Graham and then his regard returned to the man with the flaxen beard .
`` These others , '' he said in a voice of extreme irritation .
`` You had better go . ''
`` Certainly -- go now .
But see the doorways are closed as you go . ''
`` They have told you that , have they ?
Two hundred and three , as a matter of fact . ''
he cried , `` How do they know ?
Or is it guessing ? ''
There was an inaudible reply .
He came hurrying back to Graham .
`` You must have clothes at once , '' he said .
`` You can not stop here -- and it will be impossible to -- ''
He rushed away , Graham shouting unanswered questions after him .
In a moment he was back .
`` Odd '' said Graham .
Then turning his back on the new comer , he asked in an undertone , `` Why is this man glaring at me ?
Is he a mesmerist ? ''
`` Did n't you have lions ?
You had the old pounds ?
They are our monetary units . ''
`` Just made , '' said the tailor .
He dropped the garments at the feet of Graham , walked to the bed on which Graham had so recently been lying , flung out the translucent mattress , and turned up the looking glass .
As he did so a furious bell summoned the thickset man to the corner .
The man with the flaxen beard rushed across to him and then hurried out by the archway .
`` Do n't you understand , Sire ? ''
cried the flaxen-bearded man with hurried politeness .
`` He is going to cut your hair . ''
This shout appeared to perturb Howard exceedingly .
By his gestures it seemed to Graham that he hesitated between two directions .
Abruptly he went towards the corner where the apparatus stood about the little crystal ball .
As he did so the undertone of tumultuous shouting from the archway that had continued during all these occurrences rose to a mighty sound , roared as if it were sweeping past , and fell again as if receding swiftly .
It drew Graham after it with an irresistible attraction .
He glanced at the thickset man , and then obeyed his impulse .
In two strides he was down the steps and in the passage , and , in a score he was out upon the balcony upon which | the three men had been standing .
Under the balcony this extraordinary roadway ran swiftly to Graham's right , an endless flow rushing along as fast as a nineteenth century express train , an endless platform of narrow transverse overlapping slats with little interspaces that permitted it to follow the curvatures of the street .
Upon it were seats , and here and there little kiosks , but they swept by too swiftly for him to see what might be therein .
From this nearest and swiftest platform a series of others descended to the centre of the space .
Each moved to the right , each perceptibly slower than the one above it , but the difference in pace was small enough to permit anyone to step from any platform to the one adjacent , and so walk uninterruptedly from the swiftest to the motionless middle way .
Beyond this middle way was another series of endless platforms rushing with varying pace to Graham 's left .
And seated in crowds upon the two widest and swiftest platforms , or stepping from one to another down the steps , or swarming over the central space , was an innumerable and wonderfully diversified multitude of people .
`` It will be clearer later , '' said Howard .
There came a passage in twilight , and into this passage a footway hung so that he could see the feet and ankles of people going to and fro thereon , but no more of them .
Then vague impressions of galleries and of casual astonished passers-by turning round to stare after the two of them with their red-clad guard .
Some negroes in a curious wasp-like uniform of black and yellow appeared down the passage , and one hastened to throw up a sliding shutter that had seemed a door to Graham , and led the way through it .
Graham found himself in a gallery overhanging the end of a great chamber .
The attendant in black and yellow crossed this , thrust up a second shutter and stood waiting .
`` What place is this ? ''
`` Who are those men ? ''
Graham sat down abruptly .
`` I suppose since I have waited so long to resume life , '' he said , `` that I must wait a little longer . ''
Presently he began to touch and examine all the unfamiliar appointments of the two small rooms in which he found himself .
The tumultuous memory of the moving platforms and the huge facade of that wonderful street reasserted itself .
The shouting multitudes came back clear and vivid , and those remote , inaudible , unfriendly councilors in white .
He felt himself a little figure , very small and ineffectual , pitifully conspicuous .
And all about him , the world was -- strange .
Presently Graham resumed his examination of his apartments .
Curiosity kept him moving in spite of his fatigue .
The inner room , he perceived , was high , and its ceiling dome shaped ' , with an oblong aperture in the centre , opening into a funnel in which a wheel of broad vans seemed to be rotating , apparently driving the air up the shaft .
The faint humming note of its easy motion was the only clear sound in that quiet place .
As these vans sprang up one after the other , Graham could get transient glimpses of the sky .
He was surprised to see a star .
This drew his attention to the fact that the bright lighting of these rooms was due to a multitude of very faint glow lamps set about the cornices .
There were no windows .
And he began to recall that along all the vast chambers and passages he had traversed with Howard he had observed no windows at all .
Had there been windows ?
There were windows on the street indeed , but were they for light ?
Or was the whole city lit day and night for evermore , so that there was no night there ?
He started and rubbed his eyes .
He had been so absorbed in the latter-day substitute for a novel , that he awoke to the little green and white room with more than a touch of the surprise of his first awakening .
`` I suppose they can fly and do all sorts of things Let me try and remember just how it began . ''
He was destined to become very familiar indeed with these apartments before he left them , for he remained imprisoned for three days .
During that time no one , except Howard , entered his prison .
The marvel of his fate mingled with and in some way minimised the marvel of his survival .
He had awakened to mankind it seemed only to be snatched away into this unaccountable solitude .
Howard came regularly with subtly sustaining and nutritive fluids , and light and pleasant foods , quite strange to Graham .
He always closed the door carefully as he entered .
On matters of detail he was increasingly obliging , but the bearing of Graham on the great issues that were evidently being contested so closely beyond the soundproof walls that enclosed him , he would not elucidate .
He evaded , as politely as possible , every question on the position of affairs in the outer world .
`` It is not that .
But you have -- I may tell you this much -- the automatic increase of your property puts great possibilities of interference in your hands .
And in certain other ways you have influence , with your eighteenth century notions . ''
`` Nineteenth century , '' corrected Graham .
Howard 's face lit with an idea .
He came towards Graham and spoke in an easy confidential tone .
_ We have treated you neglectfully . ''
For a moment he stood rigid , with clenched hands half raised .
Then he flung them down .
`` What a fool I have been ! ''
he said , and gave way to his anger again , stamping about the room and shouting curses .
For a long time he kept himself in a sort of frenzy , raging at his position , at his own folly , at the knaves who had imprisoned him .
He did this because he did not want to look calmly at his position .
He clung to his anger -- because he was afraid of Fear .
For several seconds neither he nor Graham spoke .
`` You were the Sleeper ? ''
said the stranger at last .
`` We want to speak to you , Sire , '' said the intruder .
`` I did not see you , Sire , '' panted the man .
He rose and assisted Graham to arise .
`` Are you hurt , Sire ? ''
A succession of heavy blows on the ventilator began , something fell close to Graham 's face , and a shivering edge of white metal danced , fell over , and lay flat upon the floor .
He was aware of a great difference in the temperature .
Half a dozen men stood about him , and light flakes of snow touched hands and face and melted .
For a moment it was dark , then for a flash a ghastly violet white , and then everything was dark again .
All this he appreciated in a fragmentary manner as his rescuers stood about him .
Someone threw a thick soft cloak of fur-like texture about him , and fastened it by buckled straps at waist and shoulders .
Things were said briefly , decisively .
Someone thrust him forward .
`` Come on ! ''
cried his guide , with terror in his voice .
`` Come on ! ''
`` Come on ! ''
shouted his guide ten yards off , and , without waiting , ran swiftly through the incandescent glare towards the iron supports of the next range of wind-wheels .
Graham , recovering from his astonishment , followed as fast , convinced of his imminent capture .
They cowered panting and stared out .
`` Where are the markets ? ''
asked Graham staring out .
`` Where are all the people ? ''
`` Do as I do , '' whispered his guide .
He lay down and crawled to the edge , thrust his head over and twisted until one leg hung .
He seemed to feel for something with his foot , found it , and went sliding over the edge into the gulf .
`` It is a ledge , '' he whispered .
`` In the dark all the way along .
Do as I did . ''
Graham did as he was told .
Jump -- in God 's name !
Or they will have us , '' cried Graham 's guide , and in the violence of his passion thrust him forward .
Graham had a surging vision of a great hall crowded with people .
He saw no individuals , he was conscious of a froth of pink faces , of waving arms and garments , he felt the occult influence of a vast crowd pouring over him , buoying him up .
There were balconies , galleries , great archways giving remoter perspectives , and everywhere people , a vast arena of people , densely packed and cheering .
Across the nearer space lay the collapsed cable like a huge snake .
It had been cut by the men of the flying machine at its upper end , and had crumpled down into the hall .
Men seemed to be hauling this out of the way .
But the whole effect was vague , the very buildings throbbed and leapt with the roar of the voices .
He stood unsteadily and looked at those about him .
Someone supported him by one arm .
`` Let me go into a little room , '' he said , weeping ; `` a little room , '' and could say no more .
A man in black stepped forward , took his disengaged arm .
He was aware of officious men opening a door before him .
Someone guided him to a seat .
He sat down heavily and covered his face with his hands ; he was trembling violently , his nervous control was at an end .
He was relieved of his cloak , he could not remember how ; his purple hose he saw were black with wet .
People were running about him , things were happening , but for some time he gave no heed to them .
The younger man suddenly became audible in a pause of the outer thunder , indignant and vociferous , a high penetrating voice under his red aquiline nose and bushy moustache .
`` No one expected you to wake .
No one expected you to wake .
But they were taken by surprise .
They did not know whether to drug you , hypnotise you , kill you . ''
He was urged towards the door .
The strength of that chant took hold of him , stirred him , emboldened him .
The hall opened to him , a vast welter of fluttering colour swaying to the music .
`` Wave your arm to them , '' said Lincoln .
`` Wave your arm to them . ''
Abruptly he noted a contrast .
The buildings on the opposite side of the way seemed deserted , the cables and bridges that laced across the aisle were empty and shadowy .
It came into Graham 's mind that these also should have swarmed with people .
His voice was drowned .
Voices were shouting , `` Save the Sleeper .
Take care of the Sleeper . ''
A guard stumbled against Graham and hurt his hand by an inadvertent blow of his weapon .
A wild tumult tossed and whirled about him , growing , as it seemed , louder , denser , more furious each moment .
Fragments of recognisable sounds drove towards him , were whirled away from him as his mind reached out to grasp them .
Voices seemed to be shouting conflicting orders , other voices answered .
There were suddenly a succession of piercing screams close beneath them .
From very far away down the street he could hear the sound of a struggle .
But it was evident to him that this was not the street into which the theatre opened .
That former fight , it seemed , had suddenly dropped out of sound and hearing .
And -- grotesque thought !
-- they were fighting for him !
And then in a desolate place came the shock of an earthquake -- a roaring and thundering -- a mighty wind of cold air pouring through the city , the smash of glass , the slip and thud of falling masonry -- a series of gigantic concussions .
A mass of glass and ironwork fell from the remote roofs into the middle gallery , not a hundred yards away from him , and in the distance were shouts and running .
He , too , was startled to an aimless activity , and ran first one way and then as aimlessly back .
The great buildings rose dimly , veiled by a perplexing twilight , albeit the rivulet of sky above was now bright with day .
He noted many strange features , understanding none at the time ; he even spelt out many of the inscriptions in Phonetic lettering .
But what profits it to decipher a confusion of odd-looking letters resolving itself , after painful strain of eye and mind , into `` Here is Eadhamite , '' or , `` Labour Bureau -- Little Side ? ''
Grotesque thought , that in all probability some or all of these cliff-like houses were his !
`` It is no dream , '' he said , `` no dream . ''
And he bowed his face upon his hands .
His wheezy breathing could be heard .
`` The greatest Boss the world has ever seen , '' said the voice .
The senile voice sank to a confidential whisper , the dim , pale face came close .
`` The real Sleeper -- ''
`` You do n't say so ! ''
Graham was so astonished at these things that he had to interrupt , to make the old man repeat his words , to re-question vaguely , before he was sure of the meaning and folly of what he heard .
And his awakening had not been natural !
Was that an old man 's senile superstition , too , or had it any truth in it ?
Feeling in the dark corners of his memory , he presently came on something that might conceivably be an impression of some such stimulating effect .
It dawned upon him that he had happened upon a lucky encounter , that at last he might learn something of the new age .
The old man wheezed a while and spat , and then the piping , reminiscent voice resumed :
`` The first time they rejected him .
I 've followed it all . ''
`` Rejected whom ? ''
`` The Sleeper ? ''
`` I 'm a dull man , older than I look , and forgetful , '' said Graham .
`` Lots of things that have happened -- especially of late years -- .
If I was the Sleeper , to tell you the truth , I could n't know less about them . ''
`` That 's it , '' said Graham .
`` And I 've a queer history .
I know very little .
Practically I know no history .
The Sleeper and Julius Caesar are all the same to me .
It 's interesting to hear you talk of these things . ''
`` You must know he had a cousin named Warming a solitary man without children , who made a big fortune speculating in roads -- the first Eadhamite roads .
But surely you 've heard ?
He bought all the patent rights and made a big company .
In those days there were grosses of grosses of separate businesses and business companies .
His roads killed the railroads -- the old things -- in two dozen years ; he bought up and Eadhamited ' the tracks .
And because he didn't want to break up his great property or let in shareholders , he left it all to the Sleeper , and put it under a Board of Trustees that he had picked and trained .
He knew then the Sleeper would n't wake , that he would go on sleeping , sleeping till he died .
He knew that quite well !
a man in the United States , who had lost two sons in a boat accident , followed that up with another great bequest .
His trustees found themselves with a dozen myriads of lions'-worth or more of property at the very beginning . ''
`` Why , I do n't even know the name . ''
`` Men are strange , '' said the old man .
`` Here are you , young and ignorant , and me -- sevendy years old , and I might reasonably be forgetting -- explaining it all to you short and clear .
His voice died away in scarcely articulate praises of Ostrog
`` Let me see , '' he said , `` if I have it right . ''
said the old man .
`` That 's so -- that 's a good comparison .
You 're not so -- ''
The old man made him repeat his words .
`` Men do n't live beyond ten dozen .
It 's not in the order of things , '' said the old man .
`` I 'm not a fool .
Fools may believe it , but not me . ''
`` As if Ostrog would let the Sleeper run about alone !
No , you 're telling that to the wrong man altogether .
as if I should believe .
And besides , we 've been talking of the Sleeper . ''
He moved in gusty irritation and went striding .
In a moment the old man was pursuing him .
but do n't go ! ''
cried the old man .
`` I 'm an old fool , I know .
Do n't leave me in all this darkness . ''
`` I have heard the vague outline of these things . ''
He indicated the outbreak by a gesture , and Graham moved his head to show that he understood .
Looking more attentively as this warlike episode moved silently across the centre of the mirror , Graham saw that the white building was surrounded on every side by ruins , and Ostrog proceeded to describe in concise phrases how its defenders had sought by such destruction to isolate themselves from a storm .
He spoke of the loss of men that huge downfall had entailed in an indifferent tone .
He indicated an improvised mortuary among the wreckage showed ambulances swarming like cheese-mites along a ruinous groove that had once been a street of moving ways .
He was more interested in pointing out the parts of the Council House , the distribution of the besiegers .
In a little while the civil contest that had convulsed London was no longer a mystery to Graham .
It was no tumultuous revolt had occurred that night , no equal warfare , but a splendidly organised _coup d'etat_ .
Ostrog 's grasp of details was astonishing ; he seemed to know the business of even the smallest knot of black and red specks that crawled amidst these places .
`` But that white flag -- ''
`` But have n't the Council flying machines ?
Why is there no fighting with them ? ''
Graham clutched desperately at one of the questions in his mind .
`` What is the population of London ? ''
`` More than thirty-three millions . ''
These figures went beyond Graham 's imagination `` You will be expected to say something , '' said Ostrog .
`` Not what you used to call a Speech , but what our people call a Word -- just one sentence , six or seven words .
If I might suggest -- ' I have awakened and my heart is with you . '
That is the sort of thing they want . ''
`` What was that ? ''
Graham saw his index finger , black and colossal , above the mirrored Council House .
For a moment he did not understand .
And then he perceived that the flagstaff that had carried the white banner was bare .
and Ostrog pointed to a coil of black that crept in little jerks up the vacant flagstaff , unfolding as it rose .
Ostrog kept his grip of Graham 's arm .
While he was breaking his fast , the sound of a telephone bell jetted from a corner , and his chief attendant called his attention to the voice of Ostrog making polite enquiries .
Graham interrupted his refreshment to reply .
Very shortly Lincoln arrived , and Graham at once expressed a strong desire to talk to people and to be shown more of the new life that was opening before him .
Lincoln informed him that in three hours' time a representative gathering of officials and their wives would be held in the state apartments of the wind-vane Chief .
Graham 's desire to traverse the ways of the city was , however , at present impossible , because of the enormous excitement of the people .
It was , however , quite possible for him to take a bird 's eye view of the city from the crow's nest of the windvane keeper .
To this accordingly Graham was conducted by his attendant .
Lincoln , with a graceful compliment to the attendant , apologised for not accompanying them , on account of the present pressure of administrative work .
A thing Graham had already learnt , and which he found very hard to imagine , was that nearly all the towns in the country , and almost all the villages , had disappeared .
Here and there only , he understood , some gigantic hotel-like edifice stood amid square miles of some single cultivation and preserved the name of a town -- as Bournemouth , Wareham , or Swanage .
Yet the officer had speedily convinced him how inevitable such a change had been .
The old order had dotted the country with farmhouses , and every two or three miles was the ruling landlord's estate , and the place of the inn and cobbler , the grocer 's shop and church -- the village .
Every eight miles or so was the country town , where lawyer , corn merchant , wool-stapler , saddler , veterinary surgeon , doctor , draper , milliner and so forth lived .
Every eight miles -- simply because that eight mile marketing journey , four there and back , was as much as was comfortable for the farmer .
But directly the railways came into play , and after them the light railways , and all the swift new motor cars that had replaced waggons and horses , and so soon as the high roads began to be made of wood , and rubber , and Eadhamite , and all sorts of elastic durable substances -- the necessity of having such frequent market towns disappeared .
And the big towns grew .
They drew the worker with the gravitational force of seemingly endless work , the employer with their suggestions of an infinite ocean of labour .
And as the standard of comfort rose , as the complexity of the mechanism of living increased life in the country had become more and more costly , or narrow and impossible .
The disappearance of vicar and squire , the extinction of the general practitioner by the city specialist , had robbed the village of its last touch of culture .
After telephone , kinematograph and phonograph had replaced newspaper , book , schoolmaster , and letter , to live outside the range of the electric cables was to live an isolated savage .
In the country were neither means of being clothed nor fed ( according to the refined conceptions of the time ) , no efficient doctors for an emergency , no company and no pursuits .
He had a vision of city beyond city , cities on great plains , cities beside great rivers , vast cities along the sea margin , cities girdled by snowy mountains .
Over a great part of the earth the English tongue was spoken ; taken together with its Spanish American and Hindoo and Negro and `` Pidgin '' dialects , it was the everyday language of two-thirds of the people of the earth .
On the Continent , save as remote and curious survivals , three other languages alone held sway -- German , which reached to Antioch and Genoa and jostled Spanish-English at Gdiz , a Gallicised Russian which met the Indian English in Persia and Kurdistan and the `` Pidgin '' English in Pekin , and French still clear and brilliant , the language of lucidity , which shared the Mediterranean with the Indian English and German and reached through a negro dialect to the Congo .
To the westward beyond the smashed Council House were the voluminous offices of municipal control and government ; and to the eastward , towards the port , the trading quarters , the huge public markets , the theatres , houses of resort , betting palaces , miles of billiard saloons , baseball and football circuses , wild beast rings and the innumerable temples of the Christian and quasi-Christian sects , the Mahomedans , Buddhists , Gnostics , Spook Worshippers , the Incubus Worshippers , the Furniture Worshippers , and so forth ; and to the south again a vast manufacture of textiles , pickles , wines and condiments .
And from point to point tore the countless multitudes along the roaring mechanical ways .
A gigantic hive , of which the winds were tireless servants , and the ceaseless wind-vanes an appropriate crown and symbol .
His Japanese attendant , Asano , in expounding the political history of the intervening two centuries , drew an apt image from a seed eaten by insect parasites .
First there is the original seed , ripening vigorously enough .
And then comes some insect and lays an egg under the skin , and behold !
in a little while the seed is a hollow shape with an active grub inside that has eaten out its substance .
And then comes some secondary parasite , some ichneumon fly , and lays an egg within this grub , and behold !
that , too , is a hollow shape , and the new living thing is inside its predecessor 's skin which itself is snug within the seed coat .
And the seed coat still keeps its shape , most people think it a seed still , and for all one knows it may still think itself a seed , vigorous and alive .
`` Your Victorian kingdom , '' said Asano , `` was like that -- kingship with the heart eaten out .
The landowners -- the barons and gentry -- began ages ago with King John ; there were lapses , but they beheaded King Charles , and ended practically with King George mere husk of a king ... the real power in the hands of their parliament .
But the Parliament -- the organ of the land-holding tenant-ruling gentry -- did not keep its power long .
The change had already come in the nineteenth century .
The franchises had been broadened until it included masses of ignorant men , 'urban myriads , ' who went in their featureless thousands to vote together .
And the natural consequence of a swarming constituency is the rule of the party organisation .
Power was passing even in the Victorian time to the party machinery , secret , complex , and corrupt .
Very speedily power was in the hands of great men of business who financed the machines .
A time came when the real power and interest of the Empire rested visibly between the two party councils , ruling by newspapers and electoral organisations -- two small groups of rich and able men , working at first in opposition , then presently together . ''
Wielding an enormous influence and patronage , the Council had early assumed a political aspect ; and in its development it had continually used its wealth to tip the beam of political decisions and its political advantages to grasp yet more and more wealth .
At last the party organisations of two hemispheres were in its hands ; it became an inner council of political control .
Its last struggle was with the tacit alliance of the great Jewish families .
But these families were linked only by a feeble sentiment , at any time inheritance might fling a huge fragment of their resources to a minor , a woman or a fool , marriages and legacies alienated hundreds of thousands at one blow .
The Council had no such breach in its continuity .
Steadily , steadfastly it grew .
When the Council , in conflict with the workers in some of its huge monopolies , did something flagrantly illegal and that without even the ordinary civility of bribery , the old Law , alarmed for the profits of its complaisance , looked about it for weapons .
But there were no more armies , no fighting navies ; the age of Peace had ' come .
The only possible war ships were the great steam vessels of the Council's Navigation Trust .
The police forces they controlled ; the police of the railways , of the ships , of their agricultural estates , their time-keepers and order-keepers , outnumbered the neglected little forces of the old country and municipal organisations ten to one .
And they produced flying machines .
There were men alive still who could remember the last great debate in the London House of Commons -- the legal party , the party against the Council was in a minority , but it made a desperate fight -- and how the members came crowding out upon the terrace to see these great unfamiliar winged shapes circling quietly overhead .
The Council had soared to its power .
The last sham of a democracy that had permitted unlimited irresponsible property was at an end .
A man and a woman were far below on a roof space to the southward enjoying the freshness of the morning air .
The man had brought out a perspective glass to spy upon the Council House and he was showing her how to use it .
Presently their curiosity was satisfied , they could see no traces of bloodshed from their position , and after a survey of the empty sky she came round to the crow 's nest .
And there she saw two little black figures , so small it was hard to believe they were men , one who watched and one who gesticulated with hands outstretched to the silent emptiness of Heaven .
`` I believe it is the Master .
It is the Master ! ''
Everyone 's movements seemed graceful .
Graham remarked to Lincoln that he saw men as Raphael 's cartoons walking , and Lincoln told him that the attainment of an appropriate set of gestures was part of every rich person 's education .
The Master 's entry was greeted with a sort of tittering applause , but these people showed their distinguished manners by not crowding upon him nor annoying him by any persistent scrutiny , as he descended the steps towards the floor of the aisle .
`` About the public elementary schools , '' said Graham .
`` Do you control them ? ''
The Surveyor-General did , `` entirely . ''
Now , Graham , in his later democratic days , had taken a keen interest in these and his questioning quickened .
Certain casual phrases that had fallen from the old man with whom he had talked in the darkness recurred to him .
The Surveyor-General , in effect , endorsed the old man 's words .
`` We have abolished Cram , '' he said , a phrase Graham was beginning to interpret as the abolition of all sustained work .
The Surveyor-General became sentimental .
`` We try and make the elementary schools very pleasant for the little children .
They will have to work so soon .
Just a few simple principles -- obedience -- industry . ''
`` Of course not .
I suppose they are the men who control the great public businesses .
Who is that distinguished looking man ? ''
`` A myriad myriad .
No wonder he looks proud , '' said Graham .
What a wonderful time it is !
That man in purple ? ''
`` He is not quite one of the inner circle , you know .
But we like him .
He is really clever and very amusing .
He is one of the heads of the Medical Faculty of our London University .
All medical men , you know , are shareholders in the Medical Faculty Company , and wear that purple .
You have to be -- to be qualified .
But of course , people who are paid by fees for doing something -- '' She smiled away the social pretensions of all such people .
They are mostly such queer people -- and so preoccupied about themselves .
And they quarrel so dreadfully !
They will fight , some of them , for precedence on staircases !
Dreadful is n't it ?
But I think Wraysbury , the fashionable capillotomist , is here .
`` Capillotomist , '' said Graham .
`` But what did you think I meant ? ''
`` I can not tell you now . ''
`` Wait till you are in the air , '' said Lincoln .
`` The wind has fallen ; even now an aeropile awaits you . ''
For a while , as Graham went through the passages of the Wind-Vane offices with Lincoln , he was preoccupied .
But , by an effort , he attended to the things which Lincoln was saying .
Soon his preoccupation vanished .
Lincoln was talking of flying .
Graham had a strong desire to know more of this new human attainment .
He began to ply Lincoln with questions .
He had followed the crude beginnings of aerial navigation very keenly in his previous life ; he was delighted to find the familiar names of Maxim and Pilcher , Langley and Chanute , and , above all , of the aerial proto-martyr Lillienthal , still honoured by men .
At first Graham felt disappointed with these cumbersome contrivances , but he speedily grasped the fact that smaller machines would have been unremunerative , for the simple reason that their carrying power would be disproportionately diminished with diminished size .
Moreover , the huge size of these things enabled them -- and it was a consideration of primary importance -- to traverse the air at enormous speeds , and so run no risks of unanticipated weather .
The briefest journey performed , that from London to Paris , took about three-quarters of an hour , but the velocity attained was not high ; the leap to New York occupied about two hours , and by timing oneself carefully at the intermediate stations it was possible in quiet weather to go around the world in a day .
The flying stage about him was empty save for Asano and their suite of attendants .
Directed by the aeronaut he placed himself in his seat .
He then drank a mixture containing ergot -- a dose , he learnt , invariably administered to those about to fly , and designed to counteract the possible effect of diminished air pressure upon the system .
Having done so , he declared himself ready for the journey .
Asano took the empty glass from him , stepped through the bars of the hull , and stood below on the stage waving his hand .
Suddenly he seemed to slide along the stage to the right and vanish .
And when these had vanished in the distance Graham heard a peewit wailing close at hand .
He perceived he was now above the South Downs , and staring over his shoulder saw the battlements of Portsmouth Landing Stage towering over the ridge of Portsdown Hill .
In another moment there came into sight a spread of shipping like floating cities , the little white cliffs of the Needles dwarfed and sunlit , and the grey and glittering waters of the narrow sea .
They seemed to leap the Solent in a moment , and in a few seconds the Isle of Wight was running past , and then beneath him spread a wider and wide extent of sea , here purple with the shadow of a cloud , here grey , here a burnished mirror , and here a spread of cloudy greenish blue .
The Isle of Wight grew smaller and smaller .
In a few more minutes a strip of grey haze detached itself from other strips that were clouds , descended out of the sky and became a coastline -- sunlit and pleasant -- the coast of northern France .
It rose , it took colour , became definite and detailed , and the counterpart of the Downland of England was speeding by below .
Graham waved the penalties aside .
`` What is it ? ''
`` I hate ballets , '' said Graham , shortly .
That 's not what I want to see .
We had dancers in the old days .
For the matter of that , they had them in ancient Egypt .
`` They can afford to wait , '' said Graham ; `` they can afford to wait .
I 'm not a Latin .
There 's questions I want to ask some expert -- about your machinery .
I want no distractions . ''
Asano appeared , and under the escort of a strong guard they returned through the city streets to Graham 's apartments .
Far larger crowds had assembled to witness his return than his departure had gathered , and the shouts and cheering of these masses of people sometimes drowned Lincoln 's answers to the endless questions Graham 's aerial journey had suggested .
At first Graham had acknowledged the cheering and cries of the crowd by bows and gestures , but Lincoln warned him that such a recognition would be considered incorrect behaviour .
Graham , already a little wearied by rhythmic civilities , ignored his subjects for the remainder of his public progress .
Graham , like most of the people of his former time , distrusted the hypnotist , or he might then and there have eased his mind of many painful preoccupations .
But in spite of Lincoln 's assurances he held to the old theory that to be hypnotised was in some way the surrender of his personality , the abdication of his will .
At the banquet of wonderful experiences that was beginning , he wanted very keenly to remain absolutely himself .
For a moment she was silent still .
`` Not clearly , perhaps .
But -- tell me . ''
`` I know how great this kingship of mine is , '' he said haltingly .
`` I know how great it seems .
But is it real ?
It is incredible -- dreamlike .
Is it real , or is it only a great delusion ? ''
`` Most people will work at that pitch , and the Company has powers .
There are stages of unpleasantness in the work -- stoppage of food -- and a man or woman who has refused to work once is known by a thumb-marking system in the Company 's offices all over the world .
Besides , who can leave the city poor ?
To go to Paris costs two Lions .
And for insubordination there are the prisons -- dark and miserable -- out of sight below .
There are prisons now for many things . ''
`` That is our hope .
That is the hope of the world .
But Ostrog will not do it .
He is a politician .
To him it seems things must be like this .
He does not mind .
He takes it for granted .
All the rich , all the influential , all who are happy , come at last to take these miseries for granted .
They use the people in their politics , they live in ease by their degradation .
But you -- you who come from a happier age -- it is to you the people look .
`` And you will rule ? ''
`` That you will help me . ''
`` I shall know of your going and coming .
I will wait for you here again . ''
`` We had to stir up their discontent , we had to revive the old ideals of universal happiness -- all men equal -- all men happy -- no luxury that everyone may not share -- ideas that have slumbered for two hundred years .
We had to revive these ideals , impossible as they are -- in order to overthrow the Council .
`` Our revolution is accomplished , and the Council is overthrown , and people whom we have stirred up remain surging .
There was scarcely enough fighting ... We made promises , of course .
It is extraordinary how violently and rapidly this vague out-of-date humanitarianism has revived and spread .
We who sowed the seed even , have been astonished .
In Paris , as I say -- we have had to call in a little external help . ''
`` You will see , '' said Ostrog , with a forced smile that would brush these difficult questions aside .
`` I have not roused the force to destroy myself -- trust me . ''
`` I wonder , '' said Graham .
`` Do n't you trouble about these things , '' he said .
`` Everything will be settled in a few days now .
The Crowd is a huge foolish beast .
What if it does not die out ?
Even if it does not die , it can still be tamed and driven .
I have no sympathy with servile men .
You heard those people shouting and singing two nights ago .
They were taught that song .
If you had taken any man there in cold blood and asked why he shouted , he could not have told you .
They think they are shouting for you , that they are loyal and devoted to you .
Just then they were ready to slaughter the Council .
To-day -- they are already murmuring against those who have overthrown the Council . ''
`` And what was their hope ?
What is their hope ?
What right have they to hope ?
They work ill and they want the reward of those who work well .
The hope of mankind -- what is it ?
That some day the Over-man may come , that some day the inferior , the weak and the bestial may be subdued or eliminated .
Subdued if not eliminated .
The world is no place for the bad , the stupid , the enervated .
Their duty -- it 's a fine duty too !
-- is to die .
The death of the failure !
That is the path by which the beast rose to manhood , by which man goes on to higher things . ''
For a moment he stood downcast .
Ostrog , after a pause , decided not to speak , and bowed deferentially .
This was his first real contact with the people of these latter days .
He realised that all that had gone before , saving his glimpses of the public theatres and markets , had had its element of seclusion , had been a movement within the comparatively narrow political quarter , that all his previous experiences had revolved immediately about the question of his own position .
But here was the city at the busiest hours of night , the people to a large extent returned to their own immediate interests , the resumption of the real informal life , he common habits of the new time .
They emerged at first into a street whose opposite ways were crowded with the blue canvas liveries .
This swarm Graham saw was a portion of a procession -- it was odd to see a procession parading the city seated They carried banners of coarse red stuff with red letters .
`` No disarmament , '' said the banners , for the most part in crudely daubed letters and with variant spelling , and `` Why should we disarm ? ''
`` No disarming . ''
`` No disarming . ''
Banner after banner went by , a stream of banners flowing past , and at last at the end , the song of the revolt and a noisy band of strange instruments .
`` They all ought to be at work , '' said Asano .
`` They have had no food these two days , or they have stolen it . ''
Presently Asano made a detour to avoid the congested crowd that gaped upon the occasional passage of dead bodies from hospital to a mortuary , the gleanings after death 's harvest of the first revolt .
Graham still felt a difficulty with the coinage , and this mention of a dozen lions brought him abruptly to that matter .
In a moment the screaming temples and their swarming touts were forgotten in this new interest .
A turn of a phrase suggested , and an answer confirmed the idea that gold and silver were both demonetised , that stamped gold which had begun its reign amidst the merchants of Phoenicia was at last dethroned .
The change had been graduated but swift , brought about by an extension of the system of cheques that had even in his previous life already practically superseded gold in all the larger business transactions .
The common traffic of the city , the common currency indeed of all the world , was conducted by means of the little brown , green and pink council cheques for small amounts , printed with a blank payee .
Asano had several with him , and at the first opportunity he supplied the gaps in his set .
They were printed not on tearable paper , but on a semi-transparent fabric of silken , flexibility , interwoven with silk .
Across them all sprawled a facsimile of Graham 's signature , his first encounter with the curves and turns of that familiar autograph for two hundred and three years .
He noted a slight significant thing ; the table , as far as he could see , was and remained delightfully neat , there was nothing to parallel the confusion , the broadcast crumbs , the splashes of viand and condiment , the overturned drink and displaced ornaments , which would have marked the stormy progress of the Victorian meal .
The table furniture was very different .
There were no ornaments , no flowers , and the table was without a cloth , being made , he learnt , of a solid substance having the texture and appearance of damask .
He discerned that this damask substance was patterned with gracefully designed trade advertisements .
There was a confused murmur of disapproval among the crowd .
`` Damned niggers . ''
A man began to harangue near them .
`` Is this the Master 's doing , brothers ?
Is this the Master 's doing ? ''
`` But , '' began Graham .
As he and his companion pushed their way through the excited crowd that swarmed beneath these voices , towards the exit , Graham conceived more clearly the proportion and features of this room .
Altogether , great and small , there must have been nearly a thousand of these erections , piping , hooting , bawling and gabbling in that great space , each with its crowd of excited listeners , the majority of them men dressed in blue canvas .
There were all sizes of machines , from the little gossipping mechanisms that chuckled out mechanical sarcasm in odd corners , through a number of grades to such fifty-foot giants as that which had first hooted over Graham .
`` Along here we shall come to the dancing place , '' said Asano by way of reply .
`` It is sure to be crowded .
In spite of all the political unrest it will be crowded .
The women take no great interest in politics -- except a few here and there .
You will see the mothers -- most young women in London are mothers .
In that class it is considered a creditable thing to have one child -- a proof of animation .
Few middle class people have more than one .
With the Labour Company it is different .
As for motherhood They still take an immense pride in the children .
They come here to look at them quite often . ''
`` Then do you mean that the population of the world -- ? ''
The gallery they stood upon ran along the upper edge of a huge screen that cut the dancing hall on one side from a sort of outer hall that showed through broad arches the incessant onward rush of the city ways .
In this outer hall was a great crowd of less brilliantly dressed people , as numerous almost as those who danced within , the great majority wearing the blue uniform of the Labour Company that was now so familiar to Graham .
Too poor to pass the turnstiles to the festival , they were yet unable to keep away from the sound of its seductions .
Some of them even had cleared spaces , and were dancing also , fluttering their rags in the air .
Some shouted as they danced , jests and odd allusions Graham did not understand .
Once someone began whistling the refrain of the revolutionary song , but it seemed as though that beginning was promptly suppressed .
The corner was dark and Graham could not see .
He turned to the hall again .
Above the caryatidae were marble busts of men whom that age esteemed great moral emancipators and pioneers ; for the most part their names were strange to Graham , though he recognised Grant Allen , Le Gallienne , Nietzsche , Shelley and Goodwin .
Great black festoons and eloquent sentiments reinforced the huge inscription that partially defaced the upper end of the dancing place , and asserted that `` The Festival of the Awakening '' was in progress .
`` There are weary moments , '' said the little officer , reflectively .
`` I am uncivilised , '' said Graham , not heeding him .
`` That is the trouble .
I am primitive -- Palaeolithic .
Their fountain of rage and fear and anger is sealed and closed , the habits of a lifetime make them cheerful and easy and delightful .
You must bear with my nineteenth century shocks and disgusts .
These people , you say , are skilled workers and so forth .
And while these dance , men are fighting -- men are dying in Paris to keep the world -- that they may dance . ''
`` For that matter , men are dying in London , '' he said .
For a long time he was silent .
`` This , '' he said at last , smiling in the shadow , `` seems the strangest thing of all .
To stand in the dome of Saint Paul 's and look once more upon these familiar , silent stars ! ''
`` But , Sire , we simply could not stand that stuff without the purple , '' said Asano .
`` In your days people could stand such crudities , they were nearer the barbaric by two hundred years . ''
Once and again , and again a third time , Graham heard the song of the revolt during his long , unpleasant research in these places , and once he saw a confused struggle down a passage , and learnt that a number of these serfs had seized their bread before their work was done .
Graham was ascending towards the ways again when he saw a number of blue-clad children running down a transverse passage , and presently perceived the reason of their panic in a company of the Labour Police armed with clubs , trotting towards some unknown disturbance .
And then came a remote disorder .
But for the most part this remnant that worked , worked hopelessly .
All the spirit that was left in fallen humanity was above in the streets that night , calling for the Master , and valiantly and noisily keeping its arms .
`` What has happened now ? ''
said Graham , puzzled , for he could not understand their thick speech .
Then he heard it in English and perceived that the thing that everyone was shouting , that men yelled to one another , that women took up screaming , that was passing like the first breeze of a thunderstorm , chill and sudden through the city , was this : `` Ostrog has ordered the Black Police to London .
The Black Police are coming from South Africa ... .
The Black Police . ''
`` It has come , '' he said .
`` I might have known .
The hour has come . ''
`` What am I to do ? ''
`` It sounds true , '' said Asano .
They went up the stepped platforms to the swiftest one , and there Asano accosted a labourer .
The answers to his questions were in the thick , vulgar speech .
As Asano and Graham hurried along to the ruins about the Council House , they saw everywhere the excitement of the people rising .
`` To your Wards To your Wards ! ''
Everywhere men and women in blue were hurrying from unknown subterranean employments , up the staircases of the middle path -- at one place Graham saw an arsenal of the revolutionary committee besieged by a crowd of shouting men , at another a couple of men in the hated yellow uniform of the Labour Police , pursued by a gathering crowd , fled precipitately along the swift way that went in the opposite direction .
They crossed to the Council House by a cable cradle .
Already in the brief interval since the capitulation of the Councillors a great change had been wrought in the appearance of the ruins .
The spurting cascades of the ruptured sea water-mains had been captured and tamed , and huge temporary pipes ran overhead along a flimsy looking fabric of girders .
The sky was laced with restored cables and wires that served the Council House , and a mass of new fabric with cranes and other building machines going to and fro upon it , projected to the left of the white pile .
`` Where is Helen Wotton ? ''
`` Where is Helen Wotton ? ''
`` Do you mean that these infernal negroes are on the way ? ''
But -- after what was said .
You have taken too much on yourself , Ostrog . ''
`` I believe in the people . ''
`` We taught them that , '' said Ostrog .
There was a pause and Ostrog looked him in the eyes .
`` They will , '' he said .
He saw men in blue and black hurrying after the retreating Ostrogites and firing .
Lifted up , he saw now across the whole expanse of the hall beneath the Atlas image , saw that he was being carried towards the raised platform in the centre of the place .
The far end of the hall was already full of people running towards him .
They were looking at him and cheering .
The man he questioned pointed over the heads towards the lower panels about the hall on the side opposite the gap .
They stood open and armed men , blue clad with black sashes , were running through them and vanishing into the chambers and passages beyond .
It seemed to Graham that a sound of firing drifted through the riot .
He was carried in a staggering curve across the great hall towards an opening beneath the gap .
And then a shadow came between Graham and the sun .
He looked up and the sky was clear , but he knew the aeropile had passed .
The man in yellow thrust before him , zealous and perspiring , pointing and blatent .
Graham could not understand .
He heard loud voices repeating these enigmatical orders .
A man beside him cheered hoarsely , and he saw that the blue rebels had gained the archway that had been contested by the men in black and yellow a moment before , and were running in a continual stream along the open passage .
it was clear and soaring , still heeling sideways , upward , upward into the wind-swept sky .
The suspense of the moment gave place to a fury of exasperation as the swarming people realised that Ostrog had escaped them .
With belated activity they renewed their fire , until the rattling wove into a roar , until the whole area became dim and blue and the air pungent with the thin smoke of their weapons .
The aeropile dwindled smaller and smaller , and curved about and swept gracefully downward to the flying stage from which it had so lately risen .
The little group of men about him shouted congratulations on his escape .
The man in yellow was close to him , with a set face and shining eyes .
And the song was rising , louder and louder ; tramp , tramp , tramp , tramp .
Her face was aflame , and the heavy coils of her black hair fell about her shoulders .
The folds of the soft silk robe she wore streamed from her and floated in the rhythm of her advance .
She drew nearer and nearer , and his heart was beating fast .
All his doubts were gone .
The shadow of the doorway fell athwart her face and she was near him .
`` You have not betrayed us ? ''
`` You are with us ? ''
`` Where have you been ? ''
`` I told them .
I knew of the order .
I heard that the negroes were to come to London to guard you and to keep the people down -- to keep you a prisoner .
And I stopped it .
I came out and told the people .
And you are Master still . ''
`` For you , '' she cried .
That you for whom the world has waited should not be cheated of your power . ''
Things that he had long wished to believe , he found that he believed .
He plunged at belief and seized it , and clung for a time at her level .
He spoke gustily , in broken incomplete sentences , but with all his heart and strength , of this new faith within him .
He spoke of the greatness of self-abnegation , of his belief in an immortal life of Humanity in which we live and move and have our being .
His voice rose and fell , and the recording appliances hummed their hurried applause , dim attendants watched him out of the shadow .
Through all those doubtful places his sense of that silent spectator beside him sustained his sincerity .
For a few glorious moments he was carried away ; he felt no doubt of his heroic quality , no doubt of his heroic words , he had it all straight and plain .
His eloquence limped no longer .
And at last he made an end to speaking .
`` Here and now , '' he cried , `` I make my will .
All that is mine in the world I give to the people of the world .
All that is mine in the world I give to the people of the world .
I give it to you , and myself I give to you .
And as God wills , I will live for you , or I will die . ''
He felt even as he spoke that this was not what had been in his mind before the interruption .
He saw a touch of surprise in her eyes .
She seemed about to speak and a shrill bell drowned her voice .
It occurred to Graham that she expected him to lead these marching people , that that was the thing he had to do .
He made the offer abruptly .
He addressed the man in yellow , but he spoke to her .
He saw her face respond .
`` Here I am doing nothing , '' he said .
`` Where are the attendants who were in the great Hall of the Atlas ? ''
Graham returned to Helen .
`` No news , '' he said `` No news . ''
`` We have driven them out of the under galleries at Norwood , Streatham is afire and burning wildly , and Roehampton is ours .
-- and we have taken the aeropile that lay thereon . ''
`` Another hour ? ''
The man in yellow hesitated .
The old man dumbly interrogated the man in yellow , nodded , and hurried out .
He stopped , he could speak no more , he swept the alternative aside by a gesture , and they stood looking at one another .
Two men in pale blue were lying in the irregular line that stretched along the edge of the captured Roehampton stage from end to end , grasping their carbines and peering into the shadows of the stage called Wimbledon Park .
Now and then they spoke to one another .
They spoke the mutilated English of their class and period .
The fire of the Ostrogites had dwindled and ceased , and few of the enemy had been seen for some time .
But the echoes of the fight that was going on now far below in the lower galleries of that stage , came every now and then between the staccato of shots from the popular side .
One of these men was describing to the other how he had seen a man down below there dodge behind a girder , and had aimed at a guess and hit him cleanly as he dodged too far `` He 's down there still , '' said the marksman .
`` See that little patch .
Between those bars . ''
A few yards behind them lay a dead stranger , face upward to the sky , with the blue canvas of his jacket smoldering in a circle about the neat bullet hole on his chest .
Close beside him a wounded man , with a leg swathed about , sat with an expressionless face and watched the progress of that burning .
Gigantic behind them , athwart the carrier lay the captured aeropile .
`` I ca n't see him now , '' said the second man in a ton of provocation .
`` We do n't want all these fools , '' said his friend .
`` They only crowd up and spoil shots .
What are they after ? ''
-- they 're shouting something . ''
The two men listened .
The swarming new-comers had crowded densely about the aeropile .
Three Ward Leaders , conspicuous by their black mantles and badges , clambered into the body and appeared above it .
The rank and file flung themselves upon the vans , gripping hold of the edges , until the entire outline of the thing was manned , in some places three deep .
One of the marksmen knelt up .
`` They 're putting it on the carrier -- that's what they 're after . ''
`` That 's what they 're doing anyhow . ''
He looked at his rifle , looked at the struggling crowd , and suddenly turning to the wounded man .
`` Mind these , mate , '' he said , handing his carbine and cartridge belt ; and in a moment he was running towards the aeropile .
For a quarter of an hour he was a perspiring Titan , lugging , thrusting , shouting and heeding shouts , and then the thing was done , and he stood with a multitude of others cheering their own achievement .
By this time he knew , what indeed everyone in the city knew , that the Master , raw learner though he was , intended to fly this machine himself , was coming even now to take control of it , would let no other man attempt it .
`` He who takes the greatest danger , he who bears the heaviest burden , that man is King , '' so the Master was reported to have spoken .
And even as this man cheered , and while the beads of sweat still chased one another from the disorder of his hair , he heard the thunder of a greater tumult , and in fitful snatches the beat and impulse of the revolutionary song .
He saw through a gap in the people that a thick stream of heads still poured up the stairway .
`` The Master is coming , '' shouted voices , `` the Master is coming , '' and the crowd about him grew denser and denser .
He began to thrust himself towards the central groove .
`` The Master is coming ! ''
`` The Sleeper , the Master ! ''
`` God and the Master ! ''
With that clanging in his ears Graham drew near the aeropile , marched into the shadow of its tilting wing .
He became aware that a number of people about him were offering to accompany him , and waved their offers aside .
He wanted to think how one started the engine .
The bell clanged faster and faster , and the feet of the retreating people roared faster and louder .
The man in yellow was assisting him to mount through the ribs of the body .
He clambered into the aeronaut 's place , fixing himself very carefully and deliberately .
The man in yellow was pointing to two aeropiles driving upward in the southern sky .
No doubt they were looking for the coming aeroplanes .
That -- presently -- the thing to do now was to start .
Things were being shouted at him , questions , warnings .
He wanted to think about the aeropile , to recall every item of his previous experience .
He waved the people from him , saw the man in yellow dropping off through the ribs , saw the crowd cleft down the line of the girders by his gesture .
At first he did not understand , and then a wild joy possessed him .
He shouted at the top of his voice , an inarticulate shout , and drove higher and higher up the sky .
Throb , throb , throb , pause , throb , throb , throb .
`` Where was the other aeropile ? ''
`` They too -- . ''
As he looked round the empty heavens he had a momentary fear that this machine had risen above him , and then he saw it alighting on the Norwood stage .
They had meant shooting .
To risk being rammed headlong two thousand feet in the air was beyond their latter-day courage .
The combat was declined .
In the southward , low down and glittering swiftly nearer , were two little patches of nebulous light .
And then two more , and then a nebulous glow of swiftly driving shapes .
Presently he could count them .
There were four and twenty .
The first fleet of aeroplanes had come !
Beyond appeared a yet greater glow .
He swept round in a half circle , staring at this advancing fleet .
It flew in a wedge-like shape , a triangular flight of gigantic phosphorescent shapes sweeping nearer through the lower air .
He made a swift calculation of their pace , and spun the little wheel that brought the engine forward .
He touched a lever and the throbbing effort of the engine ceased .
He began to fall , fell swifter and swifter .
He aimed at the apex of the wedge .
He dropped like a stone through the whistling air .
It seemed scarce a second from that soaring moment before he struck the foremost aeroplane .
He had aimed at the body of the aeroplane , but at the very last instant a better idea had flashed into his mind .
He twisted about and struck near the edge of the starboard wing with all his accumulated weight .
He was jerked back as he struck .
His prow went gliding across its smooth expanse towards the rim .
He felt the forward rush of the huge fabric sweeping him and his aeropile along with it , and for a moment that seemed an age he could not tell what was happening .
He heard a thousand throats yelling , and perceived that his machine was balanced on the edge of the gigantic float , and driving down , down ; glanced over his shoulder and saw the backbone of the aeroplane and the opposite float swaying up .
He had a vision through the ribs of sliding chairs , staring faces , and hands clutching at the tilting guide bars .
The fenestrations in the further float flashed open as the aeronaut tried to right her .
Beyond , he saw a second aeroplane leaping steeply to escape the whirl of its heeling fellow .
The broad area of swaying wings seemed to jerk upward .
He felt his aeropile had dropped clear , that the monstrous fabric , clean overturned , hung like a sloping wall above him .
THE NECESSARY POWERS OF THE LEAGUE
V. GETTING THE LEAGUE IDEA CLEAR IN RELATION TO IMPERIALISM
THE PLAIN NECESSITY FOR A LEAGUE
Now , that clearly is a precedent of the utmost value in our schemes for this council of the League of Nations .
We must begin by delegating , as the States began by delegating .
It is a far cry to the time when we shall talk and think of the Sovereign People of the Earth .
That council of the League of Nations will be a tie as strong , we hope , but certainly not so close and multiplex as the early tie of the States at Washington .
It will begin by having certain delegated powers and no others .
It will be an `` _ad hoc_ '' body .
Later its powers may grow as mankind becomes accustomed to it .
But at first it will have , directly or mediately , all the powers that seem necessary to restrain the world from war -- and unless I know nothing of patriotic jealousies it will have not a scrap of power more .
The danger is much more that its powers will be insufficient than that they will be excessive .
What I want to discuss here now is the constitution of this delegated body .
I want to discuss that first in order to set aside out of the discussion certain fantastic notions that will otherwise get very seriously in our way .
Fantastic as they are , they have played a large part in reducing the Hague Tribunal to an ineffective squeak amidst the thunders of this war .
And here , again , I turn from any European precedents to that political outcome of the British mind , the Constitution of the United States .
( Because we must always remember that while our political institutions in Britain are a patch-up of feudalism , Tudor , Stuart , and Hanoverian monarchist traditions and urgent merely European necessities , a patch-up that has been made quasi-democratic in a series of after-thoughts , the American Constitution is a real , deliberate creation of the English-speaking intelligence . )
The President of the United States , then , we have to note , is elected in a most extraordinary way , and in a way that has now the justification of very great successes indeed .
On several occasions the United States has achieved indisputable greatness in its Presidents , and very rarely has it failed to set up very leaderly and distinguished men .
It is worth while , therefore , to inquire how this President is elected .
He is neither elected directly by the people nor appointed by any legislative body .
He is chosen by a special college elected by the people .
This college exists to elect him ; it meets , elects him , and disperses .
( I will not here go into the preliminary complications that makes the election of a President follow upon a preliminary election of two Presidential Candidates .
The point I am making here is that he is a specially selected man chosen _ad hoc_ . )
Is there any reason why we should , not adopt this method in this new necessity we are under of sending representatives , first , to the long overdue and necessary Allied Council , then to the Peace Congress , and then to the hoped-for Council of the League of Nations ?
I am anxious here only to start for discussion the idea of an electoral representation of the nations upon these three bodies that must in succession set themselves to define , organize , and maintain the peace of the world .
I do not wish to complicate the question by any too explicit advocacy of methods of election or the like .
In the United States this college which elects the President is elected on the same register of voters as that which elects the Senate and Congress , and at the same time .
But I suppose if we are to give a popular mandate to the three or five or twelve or twenty ( or whatever number it is ) men to whom we are going to entrust our Empire 's share in this great task of the peace negotiations , it will be more decisive of the will of the whole nation if the college that had to appoint them is elected at a special election .
I suppose that the great British common-weals over-seas , at present not represented in Parliament , would also and separately at the same time elect colleges to appoint their representatives .
I suppose there would be at least one Indian representative elected , perhaps by some special electoral conference of Indian princes and leading men .
The chief defect of the American Presidential election is that as the old single vote method of election is employed it has to be fought on purely party lines .
He is the select man of the Democratic half , or of the Republican half of the nation .
He is not the select man of the whole nation .
It would give a far more representative character to the electoral college if it could be elected by fair modern methods , if for this particular purpose parliamentary constituencies could be grouped and the clean scientific method of proportional representation could be used .
But I suppose the party politician in this , as in most of our affairs , must still have his pound of our flesh -- and we must reckon with him later for the bloodshed .
Here is a giant in the path ... .
It is quite justifiable for us British , no doubt , if we do really play the part of honest trustees , to remain in Egypt and in India under existing conditions ; it is even possible for us to glance at the helplessness of Arabia , Palestine , and Mesopotamia , as yet incapable of self-government , helpless as new-born infants .
But our case , our only justifiable case , is that we are trustees because there is no better trustee possible .
And the creation of a council of a League of Free Nations would be like the creation of a Public Trustee for the world .
The creation of a League of Free Nations must necessarily be the creation of an authority that may legitimately call existing empires to give an account of their stewardship .
For an unchecked fragmentary control of tropical and chaotic regions , it substitutes the possibility of a general authority .
And this must necessarily alter the problems not only of the politically immature nations and the control of the tropics , but also of the regulation of the sea ways , the regulation of the coming air routes , and the distribution of staple products in the world .
I will not go in detail over the items of this list , because the reader can fill in the essentials of the argument from what has gone before .
I want simply to suggest how widely this project of a League of Free Nations swings when once you have let it swing freely in your mind !
And if you do not let it swing freely in your mind , it remains nothing -- a sentimental gesture .
And the essential thing I would like to point out to these authorities upon African questions is that not one of them even hints at any other formula which covers the broad essentials of the African riddle .
And closely connected with this function of controlling the arms trade is another great necessity of Africa under `` tutelage , '' and that is the necessity of a common collective agreement not to demoralize the native population .
That demoralization , physical and moral , has already gone far .
The whole negro population of Africa is now rotten with diseases introduced by Arabs and Europeans during the last century , and such African statesmen as Sir Harry Johnston are eloquent upon the necessity of saving the blacks -- and the baser whites -- from the effects of trade gin and similar alluring articles of commerce .
Moreover , from Africa there is always something new in the way of tropical diseases , and presently Africa , if we let it continue to fester as it festers now , may produce an epidemic that will stand exportation to a temperate climate .
A bacterium that may kill you or me in some novel and disgusting way may even now be developing in some Congo muck-heap .
So here is the need for another Commission to look after the Health of Africa .
That , too , should be of authority over all the area of `` tutelage '' Africa .
It is no good stamping out infectious disease in Nyasaland while it is being bred in Portuguese East Africa .
And if there is a Disarmament Commission already controlling the importation of arms , why should not that body also control at the same time the importation of trade gin and similar delicacies , and direct quarantine and such-like health regulations ?
Now beneath the supervision and restraint of such a delegated Commission I do not see why the existing administrations of tutelage Africa should not continue .
I do not believe that the Labour proposal contemplates any humiliating cession of European sovereignty .
Under that international Commission the French flag may still wave in Senegal and the British over the protected State of Uganda .
Given a new spirit in Germany I do not see why the German flag should not presently be restored in German East Africa .
But over all , standing for righteousness , patience , fair play for the black , and the common welfare of mankind would wave a new flag , the Sun of Africa representing the Central African Commission of the League of Free Nations .
Is it not time for us British not merely to admit to ourselves , but to assure the world that our Empire as it exists to-day is a provisional thing , that in scarcely any part of the world do we regard it as more than an emergency arrangement , as a necessary association that must give place ultimately to the higher synthesis of a world league , that here we hold as trustees and there on account of strategic considerations that may presently disappear , and that though we will not contemplate the replacement of our flag anywhere by the flag of any other competing nation , though we do hope to hold together with our kin and with those who increasingly share our tradition and our language , nevertheless we are prepared to welcome great renunciations of our present ascendency and privileges in the interests of mankind as a whole .
We need to make the world understand that we do not put our nation nor our Empire before the commonwealth of man .
Unless presently we are to follow Germany along the tragic path her national vanity and her world ambitions have made for her , that is what we have to make clear now .
It is not only our duty to mankind , it is also the sane course for our own preservation .
( 2 ) Shipping and international trade ; and
I do not mean here mere diplomatic discussions and `` understandings , '' I mean such full and plain statements as will be spread through the whole world and grasped and assimilated by ordinary people everywhere , statements by which we , as a people , will be prepared to stand or fall .
The international situation at the present time is beyond question the most wonderful that the world has ever seen .
There is not a country in the world in which the great majority of sensible people are not passionately desirous of peace , of an enduring peace , and -- the war goes on .
The conditions of peace can now be stated , in general terms that are as acceptable to a reasonable man in Berlin as they are to a reasonable man in Paris or London or Petrograd or Constantinople .
There are to be no conquests , no domination of recalcitrant populations , no bitter insistence upon vindictive penalties , and there must be something in the nature of a world-wide League of Nations to keep the peace securely in future , to `` make the world safe for democracy , '' and maintain international justice .
To that the general mind of the world has come to-day .
The answer which seems to suffice in all the Allied countries is that the German Imperial Government -- that the German Imperial Government alone -- stands in the way , that its tradition is incurably a tradition of conquest and aggression , that until German militarism is overthrown , etc .
Few people in the Allied countries will dispute that that is broadly true .
But is it the whole and complete truth ?
Is there nothing more to be done on our side ?
Let us put a question that goes to the very heart of the problem .
Why does the great mass of the German people still cling to its incurably belligerent Government ?
The answer to that question is not overwhelmingly difficult .
The German people sticks to its militarist imperialism as Mazeppa stuck to his horse ; because it is bound to it , and the wolves pursue .
The attentive student of the home and foreign propaganda literature of the German Government will realize that the case made by German imperialism , the main argument by which it sticks to power , is this , that the Allied Governments are also imperialist , that they also aim at conquest and aggression , that for Germany the choice is world empire or downfall and utter ruin .
This is the argument that holds the German people stiffly united .
For most men in most countries it would be a convincing argument , strong enough to override considerations of right and wrong .
I find that I myself am of this way of thinking , that whether England has done right or wrong in the past -- and I have sometimes criticized my country very bitterly -- I will not endure the prospect of seeing her at the foot of some victorious foreign nation .
Neither will any German who matters .
Very few people would respect a German who did .
But the case for the Allies is that this great argument by which , and by which alone , the German Imperial Government keeps its grip upon the German people at the present time , and keeps them facing their enemies , is untrue .
The Allies declare that they do not want to destroy the German people , they do not want to cripple the German people ; they want merely to see certain gaping wounds inflicted by Germany repaired , and beyond that reasonable requirement they want nothing but to be assured , completely assured , absolutely assured , against any further aggressions on the part of Germany .
In many respects this war has been an amazing display of human inadaptability .
The military history of the war has still to be written , the grim story of machinery misunderstood , improvements resisted , antiquated methods persisted in ; but the broad facts are already before the public mind .
After three years of war the air offensive , the only possible decisive blow , is still merely talked of .
Not once nor twice only have the Western Allies had victory within their grasp -- and failed to grip it .
The British cavalry generals wasted the great invention of the tanks as a careless child breaks a toy .
At least equally remarkable is the dragging inadaptability of European statecraft .
Everywhere the failure of ministers and statesmen to rise to the urgent definite necessities of the present time is glaringly conspicuous .
They seem to be incapable even of thinking how the war may be brought to an end .
They seem incapable of that plain speaking to the world audience which alone can bring about a peace .
They keep on with the tricks and feints of a departed age .
Both on the side of the Allies and on the side of the Germans the declarations of public policy remain childishly vague and disingenuous , childishly `` diplomatic . ''
They chaffer like happy imbeciles while civilization bleeds to death .
It was perhaps to be expected .
Few , if any , men of over five-and-forty completely readjust themselves to changed conditions , however novel and challenging the changes may be , and nearly all the leading figures in these affairs are elderly men trained in a tradition of diplomatic ineffectiveness , and now overworked and overstrained to a pitch of complete inelasticity .
They go on as if it were still 1913 .
Could anything be more palpably shifty and unsatisfactory , more senile , more feebly artful , than the recent utterances of the German Chancellor ?
And , on our own side --
A second question is equally essential to any really permanent settlement , and it is one upon which these eloquent but unsatisfactory mouthpieces of ours turn their backs with an equal resolution , and that is the fate of the Ottoman Empire .
What in plain English are we up to there ?
Whatever happens , that Humpty Dumpty can not be put back as it was before the war .
The idea of the German imperialist , the idea of our own little band of noisy but influential imperialist vulgarians , is evidently a game of grab , a perilous cutting up of these areas into jostling protectorates and spheres of influence , from which either the Germans or the Allies ( according to the side you are on ) are to be viciously shut out .
On such a basis this war is a war to the death .
Neither Germany , France , Britain , Italy , nor Russia can live prosperously if its trade and enterprise is shut out from this cardinally important area .
There is , therefore , no alternative , if we are to have a satisfactory permanent pacification of the world , but local self-development in these regions under honestly conceived international control of police and transit and trade .
Let it be granted that that will be a difficult control to organize .
None the less it has to be attempted .
It has to be attempted because _there is no other way of peace_ .
But once that conception has been clearly formulated , a second great motive why Germany should continue fighting will have gone .
We in Britain are not clear-minded , I would point out , because we are double-minded .
No good end is served by trying to ignore in the fancied interests of `` unity '' a division of spirit and intention that trips us up at every step .
We are , we declare , fighting for a complete change in international methods , and we are bound to stick to the logical consequences of that .
We have placed ourselves on the side of democratic revolution against autocratic monarchy , and we can not afford to go on shilly-shallying with that choice .
We can not in these days of black or white play the part of lukewarm friends to freedom .
I will not remind the reader here of the horrible vacillations and inconsistencies of policy in Greece that have prolonged the war and cost us wealth and lives beyond measure , but President Wilson himself has reminded us pungently enough and sufficiently enough of the follies and disingenuousness of our early treatment of the Russian Revolution .
What I want to point out here is the supreme importance of a clear lead in this matter _now_ in order that we should state our War Aims effectively .
In every war there must be two sets of War Aims kept in mind ; we ought to know what we mean to do in the event of victory so complete that we can dictate what terms we choose , and we ought to know what , in the event of a not altogether conclusive tussle , are the minimum terms that we should consider justified us in a discontinuance of the tussle .
Now , unless our leading statesmen are humbugs and unless we are prepared to quarrel with America in the interests of the monarchist institutions of Europe , we should , in the event of an overwhelming victory , destroy both the Hohenzollern and Hapsburg Imperialisms , and that means , if it means anything at all and is not mere lying rhetoric , that we should insist upon Germany becoming free and democratic , that is to say , in effect if not in form republican , and upon a series of national republics , Polish , Hungarian , Serbo-Croatian , Bulgarian , and the like , in Eastern Europe , grouped together if possible into congenial groups -- crowned republics it might be in some cases , in the case of the Serb for example , but in no case too much crowned -- that we should join with this renascent Germany and with these thus liberalized Powers and with our Allies and with the neutrals in one great League of Free Nations , trading freely with one another , guaranteeing each other freedom , and maintaining a world-wide peace and disarmament and a new reign of law for mankind .
If that is not what we are out for , then I do not understand what we are out for ; there is dishonesty and trickery and diplomacy and foolery in the struggle , and I am no longer whole-hearted for such a half-hearted war .
If after a complete victory we are to bolster up the Hohenzollerns , Hapsburgs , and their relations , set up a constellation of more cheating little subordinate kings , and reinstate that system of diplomacies and secret treaties and secret understandings , that endless drama of international threatening and plotting , that never-ending arming , that has led us after a hundred years of waste and muddle to the supreme tragedy of this war , then the world is not good enough for me and I shall be glad to close my eyes upon it .
I am not alone in these sentiments .
I believe that in writing thus I am writing the opinion of the great mass of reasonable British , French , Italian , Russian , and American men .
I believe , too , that this is the desire also of great numbers of Germans , and that they would , if they could believe us , gladly set aside their present rulers to achieve this plain common good for mankind .
But it is the truculent wing of this same anti-democratic movement that is far more active .
While our sons suffer and die for their comforts and conceit , these people scheme to prevent any communication between the Republican and Socialist classes in Germany and the Allied population .
At any cost this class of pampered and privileged traitors intend to have peace while the Kaiser is still on his throne .
If not they face a new world -- in which their part will be small indeed .
And with the utmost ingenuity they maintain a dangerous vagueness about the Allied peace terms , _with the sole object of preventing a revolutionary movement in Germany_ .
But suppose a German wished to try to start a revolutionary movement in Germany at the present time , have we given him any reason at all for supposing that a Germany liberated and democratized , but , of course , divided and weakened as she would be bound to be in the process , would get better terms from the Allies than a Germany still facing them , militant , imperialist , and wicked ?
He would have no reason for believing anything of the sort .
If we Allies are honest , then if a revolution started in Germany to-day we should if anything lower the price of peace to Germany .
But these people who pretend to lead us will state nothing of the sort .
For them a revolution in Germany would be the signal for putting up the price of peace .
At any risk they are resolved that that German revolution shall not happen .
Your sane , good German , let me assert , is up against that as hard as if he was a wicked one .
And so , poor devil , he has to put his revolutionary ideas away , they are hopeless ideas for him because of the power of the British reactionary , they are hopeless because of the line we as a nation take in this matter , and he has to go on fighting for his masters .
Here , quite compactly , is the plain statement of the essential cause and process of the war to which I would like to see the Allied Foreign Offices subscribe , and which I would like to have placed plainly before the German mind .
It embodies much that has been learnt and thought out since this war began , and I think it is much truer and more fundamental than that mere raging against German `` militarism , '' upon which our politicians and press still so largely subsist .
While the rulers of Germany to-day are more openly aggressive and imperialist than they were in August , 1914 , the Allies arrayed against them have made great progress in clearing up and realizing the instincts and ideals which brought them originally into the struggle .
The German government offers the world to-day a warring future in which Germany alone is to be secure and powerful and proud .
_Mankind will not endure that_ .
The Allies offer the world more and more definitely the scheme of an organized League of Free Nations , a rule of law and justice about the earth .
To fight for that and for no other conceivable end , the United States of America , with the full sympathy and co-operation of every state in the western hemisphere , has entered the war .
The British Empire , in the midst of the stress of the great war , has set up in Dublin a Convention of Irishmen of all opinions with the fullest powers of deciding upon the future of their country .
If Ireland were not divided against herself she could be free and equal with England to-morrow .
It is the open intention of Great Britain to develop representative government , where it has not hitherto existed , in India and Egypt , to go on steadfastly increasing the share of the natives of these countries in the government of their own lands , until they too become free and equal members of the world league .
Neither France nor Italy nor Britain nor America has ever tampered with the shipping of other countries except in time of war , and the trade of the British Empire has been impartially open to all the world .
The extra-national `` possessions , '' the so-called `` subject nations '' in the Empires of Britain , France , Italy , and Japan , are , in fact , possessions held in trust against the day when the League of Free Nations will inherit for mankind .
You can still hear very old dull men say gravely that `` kings are better than pronunciamentos '' ; there was an article upon Greece to this effect quite recently in that uncertain paper _The New Statesman_ .
Then a kind of illustrative gesture would be made to the South American republics , although the internal disturbances of the South American republics have diminished to very small dimensions in the last three decades and although pronunciamentos rarely disturb the traffic in Switzerland , the United States , or France .
But there can be no doubt that the influence of the Germanic monarchy up to the death of Queen Victoria upon British thought was in the direction of estrangement from the two great modern republics and in the direction of assistance and propitiation to Germany .
We surrendered Heligoland , we made great concessions to German colonial ambitions , we allowed ourselves to be jockeyed into a phase of dangerous hostility to France .
A practice of sneering at things American has died only very recently out of English journalism and literature , as any one who cares to consult the bound magazines of the 'seventies and 'eighties may soon see for himself .
It is well too in these days not to forget Colonel Marchand , if only to remember that such a clash must never recur .
But in justice to our monarchy we must remember that after the death of Queen Victoria , the spirit , if not the forms , of British kingship was greatly modified by the exceptional character and ability of King Edward VII .
He was curiously anti-German in spirit ; he had essentially democratic instincts ; in a few precious years he restored good will between France and Great Britain .
It is no slight upon his successor to doubt whether any one could have handled the present opportunities and risks of monarchy in Great Britain as Edward could have handled them .
The stars in their courses , the logic of circumstances , the everyday needs and everyday intelligence of men , all these things march irresistibly towards a permanent world peace based on democratic republicanism .
The question of the future of monarchy is not whether it will be able to resist and overcome that trend ; it has as little chance of doing that as the Lama of Thibet has of becoming Emperor of the Earth .
It is whether it will resist openly , become the centre and symbol of a reactionary resistance , and have to be abolished and swept away altogether everywhere , as the Romanoffs have already been swept away in Russia , or whether it will be able in this country and that to adapt itself to the necessities of the great age that dawns upon mankind , to take a generous and helpful attitude towards its own modification , and so survive , for a time at any rate , in that larger air .
It is the fashion for the apologists of monarchy in the British Empire to speak of the British system as a crowned republic .
That is an attractive phrase to people of republican sentiments .
It is quite conceivable that the British Empire may be able to make that phrase a reality and that the royal line may continue , a line of hereditary presidents , with some of the ancient trappings and something of the picturesque prestige that , as the oldest monarchy in Europe , it has to-day .
Two kings in Europe have already gone far towards realizing this conception of a life president ; both the King of Italy and the King of Norway live as simply as if they were in the White House and are far more accessible .
Along that line the British monarchy must go if it is not to go altogether .
Will it go along those lines ?
It is supposed that the common man _cannot_ govern , and that government therefore must be through the agency of Able Persons who may be classified under one of the following sub-heads , either as
All round the world there is this same obscuration of the real intelligence of men .
In Germany , human good will and every fine mind are subordinated to political forms that have for a mouthpiece a Chancellor with his brains manifestly addled by the theories of _Welt-Politik_ and the Bismarckian tradition , and for a figurehead a mad Kaiser .
Nevertheless there comes even from Germany muffled cries for a new age .
A grinning figure like a bloodstained Punch is all that speaks for the best brains in Bulgaria .
We Western allies know all that by heart ; but , after all , the immediate question for each one of us is , `` _What speaks for me ?
_ '' So far as official political forms go I myself am as ineffective as any right-thinking German or Bulgarian could possibly be .
I am more ineffective than a Galician Pole or a Bohemian who votes for his nationalist representative .
Politically I am a negligible item in the constituency of this Mr. Burdett Coutts into whose brain we have been peeping .
Politically I am less than a waistcoat button on that quaint figure .
And that is all I am -- except that I revolt .
I have written of it so far as if it were just a joke .
But indeed bad and foolish political institutions can not be a joke .
Sooner or later they prove themselves to be tragedy .
This war is that .
It is yesterday's lazy , tolerant , `` sense of humour '' wading out now into the lakes of blood it refused to foresee .
I am a man who looks now towards the end of life ; fifty-one years have I scratched off from my calendar , another slips by , and I can not tell how many more of the sparse remainder of possible years are really mine .
I live in days of hardship and privation , when it seems more natural to feel ill than well ; without holidays or rest or peace ; friends and the sons of my friends have been killed ; death seems to be feeling always now for those I most love ; the newspapers that come in to my house tell mostly of blood and disaster , of drownings and slaughterings , of cruelties and base intrigues .
Yet never have I been so sure that there is a divinity in man and that a great order of human life , a reign of justice and world-wide happiness , of plenty , power , hope , and gigantic creative effort , lies close at hand .
Even now we have the science and the ability available for a universal welfare , though it is scattered about the world like a handful of money dropped by a child ; even now there exists all the knowledge that is needed to make mankind universally free and human life sweet and noble .
We need but the faith for it , and it is at hand ; we need but the courage to lay our hands upon it and in a little space of years it can be ours .
The doctor turned round again to his patient and looked up into his troubled face .
The doctor made a little calculation .
`` Three weeks ... .
It 's scarcely time enough to begin . ''
`` Then what do you say ? ''
`` There 's something very pleasant , '' said the doctor , envisaging his own rash proposal , `` in travelling along roads you do n't know and seeing houses and parks and villages and towns for which you do not feel in the slightest degree responsible .
They hide all their troubles from the road .
Their backyards are tucked away out of sight , they show a brave face ; there 's none of the nasty self-betrayals of the railway approach .
And everything will be fresh still .
There will still be a lot of apple-blossom -- and bluebells ... .
And all the while we can be getting on with your affair . ''
`` Or fails ... .
And that is where these new methods of treatment come in .
We explore that failure .
What the psychoanalyst does-and I will confess that I owe much to the psychoanalyst -- what he does is to direct thwarted , disappointed and perplexed people to the realities of their own nature .
Which they have been accustomed to ignore and forget .
They come to us with high ambitions or lovely illusions about themselves , torn , shredded , spoilt .
They are morally denuded .
Dreams they hate pursue them ; abhorrent desires draw them ; they are the prey of irresistible yet uncongenial impulses ; they succumb to black despairs .
The first thing we ask them is this : 'What else could you expect ? '
`` But is it any good to tell a man that the job he is attempting is above him -- that he is just a hairy reptile twice removed -- and all that sort of thing ? ''
`` Well , it saves him from hoping too much and being too greatly disappointed .
It recalls him to the proportions of the job .
He gets something done by not attempting everything .
... And it clears him up .
We get him to look into himself , to see directly and in measurable terms what it is that puts him wrong and holds him back .
He 's no longer vaguely incapacitated .
`` Like a man who tries to forget that his petrol is running short and a cylinder missing fire ... .
Come back to the question of what you are , '' said the doctor .
`` A creature of the darkness with new lights .
Lit and half-blinded by science and the possibilities of controlling the world that it opens out .
In that light your will is all for service ; you care more for mankind than for yourself .
You begin to understand something of the self beyond your self .
But it is a partial and a shaded light as yet ; a little area about you it makes clear , the rest is still the old darkness -- of millions of intense and narrow animal generations ... .
You are like someone who awakens out of an immemorial sleep to find himself in a vast chamber , in a great and ancient house , a great and ancient house high amidst frozen and lifeless mountains -- in a sunless universe .
You are not alone in it .
You are not lord of all you survey .
Your leadership is disputed .
The darkness even of the room you are in is full of ancient and discarded but quite unsubjugated powers and purposes ... .
They thrust ambiguous limbs and claws suddenly out of the darkness into the light of your attention .
They snatch things out of your hand , they trip your feet and jog your elbow .
They crowd and cluster behind you .
Wherever your shadow falls , they creep right up to you , creep upon you and struggle to take possession of you .
The souls of apes , monkeys , reptiles and creeping things haunt the passages and attics and cellars of this living house in which your consciousness has awakened ... . ''
He was a man of extensive reservations .
His private life was in some respects exceptionally private .
`` I do n't confide ... .
Do I even confide in myself ?
I imagine I do ... .
Is there anything in myself that I have n't looked squarely in the face ?
... How much are we going into ?
Even as regards facts ?
`` Does it really help a man -- to see himself ?
Sir Richmond detested eating alone in an atmosphere of observant criticism .
And he did not like talking with his mouth full to an unembarrassed interlocutor who made no conversational leads of her own .
After a few mouthfuls he pushed his plate away from him .
`` Then let's have up the ice pudding , '' he said with a faint note of bitterness .
`` The ice pudding ! ''
`` The ice pudding ! ''
Both men were considerably reassured when at last they set eyes on each other again .
Indeed each was surprised to find something almost agreeable in the appearance of the other .
Dr. Martineau at once perceived that the fierceness of Sir Richmond was nothing more than the fierceness of an overwrought man , and Sir Richmond realized at a glance that the curiosity of Dr. Martineau 's bearing had in it nothing personal or base ; it was just the fine alertness of the scientific mind .
The cap of the radiator was adorned with a little brass figure of a flying Mercury .
Frozen in a sprightly attitude , its stiff bound and its fixed heavenward stare was highly suggestive of a forced and tactful disregard of current unpleasantness .
Nothing was said , however , to confirm or dispel this suspicion of a disagreement between the man and the car .
Sir Richmond directed and assisted Dr. Martineau 's man to adjust the luggage at the back , and Dr. Martineau watched the proceedings from his dignified front door .
He was wearing a suit of fawn tweeds , a fawn Homburg hat and a light Burberry , with just that effect of special preparation for a holiday which betrays the habitually busy man .
Sir Richmond 's brown gauntness was , he noted , greatly set off by his suit of grey .
There had certainly been some sort of quarrel .
Sir Richmond was explaining the straps to Dr. Martineau's butler with the coldness a man betrays when he explains the uncongenial habits of some unloved intimate .
And when the moment came to start and the little engine did not immediately respond to the electric starter , he said : `` Oh !
COME up , you -- ! ''
`` Probably not , '' said Dr. Martineau .
`` One has to fit oneself to one 's circumstances , '' said Sir Richmond , opening up another line of thought .
`` I must wind it up , '' he said at last in a profound and awful voice .
`` I must wind it up . ''
The two gentlemen resumed their seats .
The car started and then by an unfortunate inadvertency Sir Richmond pulled the gear lever over from the first speed to the reverse .
There was a metallic clangour beneath the two gentlemen , and the car slowed down and stopped although the engine was still throbbing wildly , and the dainty veil of blue smoke still streamed forward from the back of the car before a gentle breeze .
The doctor got out almost precipitately , followed by a gaunt madman , mouthing vileness , who had only a minute or so before been a decent British citizen .
He made some blind lunges at the tremulous but obdurate car , but rather as if he looked for offences and accusations than for displacements to adjust .
Quivering and refusing , the little car was extraordinarily like some recalcitrant little old aristocratic lady in the hands of revolutionaries , and this made the behaviour of Sir Richmond seem even more outrageous than it would otherwise have done .
He stopped the engine , he went down on his hands and knees in the road to peer up at the gear-box , then without restoring the spark , he tried to wind up the engine again .
He spun the little handle with an insane violence , faster and faster for -- as it seemed to the doctor -- the better part of a minute .
Beads of perspiration appeared upon his brow and ran together ; he bared his teeth in a snarl ; his hat slipped over one eye .
He groaned with rage .
Then , using the starting handle as a club , he assailed the car .
He smote the brazen Mercury from its foothold and sent it and a part of the radiator cap with it flying across the road .
He beat at the wings of the bonnet , until they bent in under his blows .
Finally , he hurled the starting-handle at the wind-screen and smashed it .
The starting-handle rattled over the bonnet and fell to the ground ... .
`` Do n't the bucks fight ? ''
`` They do n't , '' said Dr. Martineau .
`` Not nearly as much . ''
The two philosophers returned to practical matters .
`` Findings ai n't keepings nowadays , not by no manner of means , Masterrarry .
All of which grumblings Master Harry treated with an experienced disregard .
He knew definitely that he would never relinquish this bright and lovely possession again .
It was the first beautiful thing he had ever possessed .
He was the darling of fond and indulgent parents and his nursery was crowded with hideous rag and sawdust dolls , golliwogs , comic penguins , comic lions , comic elephants and comic policemen and every variety of suchlike humorous idiocy and visual beastliness .
This figure , solid , delicate and gracious , was a thing of a different order .
`` If we are to explore the secret places of the heart , '' Sir Richmond went on , `` we shall have to give some attention to this Maidenhead side of life .
It is very material to my case .
I have , -- as I have said -- BEEN HERE .
This place has beauty and charm ; these piled-up woods behind which my Lords Astor and Desborough keep their state , this shining mirror of the water , brown and green and sky blue , this fringe of reeds and scented rushes and forget-me-not and lilies , and these perpetually posing white swans : they make a picture .
A little artificial it is true ; one feels the presence of a Conservancy Board , planting the rushes and industriously nicking the swans ; but none the less delightful .
And this setting has appealed to a number of people as an invitation , as , in a way , a promise .
They come here , responsive to that promise of beauty and happiness .
They conceive of themselves here , rowing swiftly and gracefully , punting beautifully , brandishing boat-hooks with ease and charm .
They look to meet , under pleasant or romantic circumstances , other possessors and worshippers of grace and beauty here .
There will be glowing evenings , warm moonlight , distant voices singing ... .There is your desire , doctor , the desire you say is the driving force of life .
But reality mocks it .
Boats bump and lead to coarse ungracious quarrels ; rowing can be curiously fatiguing ; punting involves dreadful indignities .
The romance here tarnishes very quickly .
Romantic encounters fail to occur ; in our impatience we resort to -- accosting .
Chilly mists arise from the water and the magic of distant singing is provided , even excessively , by boatloads of cads -- with collecting dishes .
When the weather keeps warm there presently arises an extraordinary multitude of gnats , and when it does not there is a need for stimulants .
That is why the dreamers who come here first for a light delicious brush with love , come down at last to the Thamesside barmaid with her array of spirits and cordials as the quintessence of all desire . ''
He held his sculls awash , rippling in the water .
... '' The doctor cast about .
`` Big these trees are , '' said the doctor with infinite approval .
`` They have the same jumble of motives and traditions , I suspect , whether they are eventful or not .
The brakes may be strong or weak but the drive is the same .
I ca n't remember much of the beginnings of curiosity and knowledge in these matters .
`` What is normally ?
Here again I may be forgetting much secret and shameful curiosity .
I got my ideas into definite form out of a little straightforward physiological teaching and some dissecting of rats and mice .
My schoolmaster was a capable sane man in advance of his times and my people believed in him .
I think much of this distorted perverse stuff that grows up in people 's minds about sex and develops into evil vices and still more evil habits , is due to the mystery we make about these things . ''
`` A picture of the Catholic atmosphere ; a young soul shut up in darkness and ignorance to accumulate filth .
In the name of purity and decency and under threats of hell fire . ''
A study of intolerable tensions , the tensions that make young people write unclean words in secret places . ''
`` On the whole I came up to adolescence pretty straight and clean , '' said Sir Richmond .
`` What stands out in my memory now is this idea , of a sort of woman goddess who was very lovely and kind and powerful and wonderful .
That ruled my secret imaginations as a boy , but it was very much in my mind as I grew up . ''
Dr. Martineau , under his green umbrella , nodded his conceded agreement .
`` This -- what shall I call it ?
-- this Dream of Women , grew up in my mind as I grew up -- as something independent of and much more important than the reality of Women .
It came only very slowly into relation with that .
That girl on the Dymchurch beach was one of the first links , but she ceased very speedily to be real -- she joined the women of dreamland at last altogether .
She became a sort of legendary incarnation .
I thought of these dream women not only as something beautiful but as something exceedingly kind and helpful .
The girls and women I met belonged to a different creation ... . ''
Sir Richmond stopped abruptly and rowed a few long strokes .
`` That I take it is Nature 's device to keep the lovers together in the interest of the more or less unpremeditated offspring . ''
`` I was very grave about it at first .
I married very simply and purely .
I was not one of those young men who sow a large crop of wild oats .
I was a fairly decent youth .
It suddenly appeared to me that a certain smiling and dainty girl could make herself into all the goddesses of my dreams .
I had but to win her and this miracle would occur .
Of course I forget now the exact things I thought and felt then , but surely I had some such persuasion .
Or why should I have married her ?
My wife was seven years younger than myself , -- a girl of twenty .
She is a wonderfully intelligent and understanding woman .
She has made a home for me -- a delightful home .
I am one of those men who have no instinct for home making .
I owe my home and all the comfort and dignity of my life to her ability .
I have no excuse for any misbehaviour -- so far as she is concerned .
By all the rules I should have been completely happy .
But instead of my marriage satisfying me , it presently released a storm of long-controlled desires and imprisoned cravings .
A voice within me became more and more urgent .
'This will not do .
This is not love .
Where are your goddesses ?
This is not love. '
... And I was unfaithful to my wife within four years of my marriage .
It was a sudden overpowering impulse .
But I suppose the ground had been preparing for a long time .
I forget now all the emotions of that adventure .
I suppose at the time it seemed beautiful and wonderful ... .
I do not excuse myself .
Still less do I condemn myself .
I put the facts before you .
So it was . ''
`` No , '' he said , `` it was n't fair to your wife . ''
`` And as I am made , '' said Sir Richmond with sudden insistence , `` AS I AM MADE -- I do not believe that I could go on without these affairs .
I know that you will be disposed to dispute that . ''
Dr. Martineau made a reassuring noise .
Sir Richmond looked with quick curiosity at his companion .
`` You have avoided them ! ''
`` For me , '' said the doctor , `` for any friendliness , a woman must be modest ... .
My habits of thought are old-fashioned , I suppose , but the mere suggestion about a woman that there were no barriers , no reservation , that in any fashion she might more than meet me half way ... ''
`` You lose something .
You lose a reality of insight . ''
`` Having found so excellent a friend , '' said the doctor , `` why did you ever part from her ? ''
`` You care for your wife , '' he said .
`` You care very much for your wife .
She is , as you say , your great obligation and you are a man to respect obligations .
Then you tell me of these women who have come and gone ... .
About them too you are perfectly frank ...
There remains someone else . ''
Sir Richmond stared at his physician .
`` Well , '' he said and laughed .
`` I did n't pretend to have made my autobiography anything more than a sketch . ''
`` From some little things that have dropped from you , I should say there is a child . ''
`` H 'm , '' said Sir Richmond .
`` I think that is a fair description .
When she cares , that is .
When she is in good form . ''
`` It is very painful , '' said Dr. Martineau .
`` No doubt it is , '' said Sir Richmond .
`` No doubt it is . ''
His voice grew bitter .
He spoke with deliberation .
`` A perfectly aimless , useless illness , -- and as painful as it CAN be . ''
After tea Dr. Martineau left Sir Richmond in a chair upon the lawn , brooding darkly -- apparently over the crime of the carbuncle .
The doctor went to his room , ostensibly to write a couple of letters and put on a dinner jacket , but really to make a few notes of the afternoon's conversation and meditate over his impressions while they were fresh .
`` That I think explains HER ... .
The doctor frowned and nodded his head slowly with the corners of his mouth drawn in .
`` She has retained her effect of being central , she still makes the social atmosphere , she raises men 's instinctive hopes of help and direction .
Except , '' the doctor stipulated , `` for a few highly developed modern types , most men found the sense of achieving her a necessary condition for sustained exertion .
And there is no direction in her any more .
Apart from the procreative necessity , was woman an unavoidable evil ?
The doctor 's untrammelled thoughts began to climb high , spin , nose dive and loop the loop .
Nowadays we took a proper care of the young , we had no need for high birth rates , quite a small proportion of women with a gift in that direction could supply all the offspring that the world wanted .
Given the power of determining sex that science was slowly winning today , and why should we have so many women about ?
A drastic elimination of the creatures would be quite practicable .
A fantastic world to a vulgar imagination , no doubt , but to a calmly reasonable mind by no means fantastic .
But this was where the case of Sir Richmond became so interesting .
Was it really true that the companionship of women was necessary to these energetic creative types ?
Was it the fact that the drive of life towards action , as distinguished from contemplation , arose out of sex and needed to be refreshed by the reiteration of that motive ?
It was a plausible proposition : it marched with all the doctor 's ideas of natural selection and of the conditions of a survival that have made us what we are .
It was in tune with the Freudian analyses .
`` A neutralized world .
How we should jostle in the streets !
But the early Christians have tried it already .
The thing is impossible . ''
`` Or again , -- Jane Smith was charged with neglecting her lover to the common danger ... .
The inspector said the man was in a pitiful state , morally quite uncombed and infested with vulgar , showy ideas ... . ''
He and Dr. Martineau sat in wide-armed cane chairs on the lawn with a wickerwork table bearing coffee cups and little glasses between them .
A few other diners chatted and whispered about similar tables but not too close to our talkers to disturb them ; the dining room behind them had cleared its tables and depressed its illumination .
The moon , in its first quarter , hung above the sunset , sank after twilight , shone brighter and brighter among the western trees , and presently had gone , leaving the sky to an increasing multitude of stars .
The Maidenhead river wearing its dusky blue draperies and its jewels of light had recovered all the magic Sir Richmond had stripped from it in the afternoon .
The grave arches of the bridge , made complete circles by the reflexion of the water , sustained , as if by some unifying and justifying reason , the erratic flat flashes and streaks and glares of traffic that fretted to and fro overhead .
A voice sang intermittently and a banjo tinkled , but remotely enough to be indistinct and agreeable .
`` What , '' said the doctor after a pause , leaning back and sending wreaths of smoke up towards the star-dusted zenith , `` what is your idea of your work ?
I mean , how do you see it in relation to yourself -- and things generally ? ''
`` Put in the most general terms ? ''
`` Desire , mutual flattery , egotistical dreams , greedy solicitudes fill them up .
They have n't begun to get out of themselves . ''
`` We , I suppose , have , '' doubted Sir Richmond .
The doctor had no doubt .
He lay back in his chair , with his hands behind his head and his smoke ascending vertically to heaven .
With the greatest contentment he began quoting himself .
`` This getting out of one's individuality -- this conscious getting out of one 's individuality -- is one of the most important and interesting aspects of the psychology of the new age that is now dawning .
As compared with any previous age .
Unconsciously , of course , every true artist , every philosopher , every scientific investigator , so far as his art or thought went , has always got out of himself , -- has forgotten his personal interests and become Man thinking for the whole race .
And intimations of the same thing have been at the heart of most religions .
But now people are beginning to get this detachment without any distinctively religious feeling or any distinctive aesthetic or intellectual impulse , as if it were a plain matter of fact .
Plain matter of fact , that we are only incidentally ourselves .
That really each one of us is also the whole species , is really indeed all life . ''
`` And my job is to stop what I can of that waste , to do what I can to organize , first of all sane fuel getting and then sane fuel using .
And that second proposition carries us far .
Into the whole use we are making of life .
`` And this stuff , '' said Sir Richmond , bringing his hand down so smartly on the table that the startled coffee cups cried out upon the tray ; `` was given to men to give them power over metals , to get knowledge with , to get more power with . ''
`` I want to get the whole business of the world 's fuel discussed and reported upon as one affair so that some day it may be handled as one affair in the general interest . ''
`` Still -- it 's rather a difficult proposition , as things are . ''
`` But with the whole Committee against you ! ''
`` The curious thing is that the whole Committee is n't against me .
Every individual is ... . ''
`` A world conscience ?
I do n't know .
But I do know that there is this drive in nearly every member of the Committee , some drive anyhow , towards the decent thing .
It is the same drive that drives me .
But I am the most driven .
It has turned me round .
It has n't turned them .
I go East and they go West .
And they do n't want to be turned round .
Tremendously , they do n't . ''
But I warn you I have been near breaking point .
And if I tumble off the high horse , if I ca n't keep going regularly there to ride the moral high horse , that Committee will slump into utter scoundrelism .
It will turn out a long , inconsistent , botched , unreadable report that will back up all sorts of humbugging bargains and sham settlements .
It will contain some half-baked scheme to pacify the miners at the expense of the general welfare .
It wo n't even succeed in doing that .
But in the general confusion old Cassidy will get away with a series of hauls that may run into millions .
Which will last his time -- damn him !
And that is where we are ... .
I must do this job .
I do n't need any telling that my life will be nothing and mean nothing unless I bring this thing through ... .
He heard Sir Richmond move in his chair , creaking an interrogation .
`` I ca n't believe in a God , '' said Sir Richmond .
`` Perhaps I only persuaded myself that I had .
I had been reading William James on religious experiences and I was thinking very much of Conversion .
I tried to experience Conversion ... . ''
Neither gentleman had ever seen Avebury , but Dr. Martineau had once visited Stonehenge .
`` Avebury is much the oldest , '' said the doctor .
`` They must have made Silbury Hill long before 2000 B.C .
It may be five thousand years old or even more .
It is the most important historical relic in the British Isles .
And the most neglected . ''
Then Sir Richmond saw fit to amplify his confessions in one particular .
`` Vulgar poem , '' said the doctor remarkably .
`` I discounted that . ''
Byron in sexual psychology is like a stink in a kitchen . ''
Sir Richmond perceived he had struck upon the sort of thing that used to be called a pet aversion .
`` I do n't want you to think that I run about after women in an habitual and systematic manner .
Or that I deliberately hunt them in the interests of my work and energy .
Your questions had set me theorizing about myself .
And I did my best to improvise a scheme of motives yesterday .
It was , I perceive , a jerry-built scheme , run up at short notice .
My nocturnal reflections convinced me of that .
I put reason into things that are essentially instinctive .
The truth is that the wanderings of desire have no single drive .
All sorts of motives come in , high and low , down to sheer vulgar imitativeness and competitiveness .
What was true in it all was this , that a man with any imagination in a fatigue phase falls naturally into these complications because they are more attractive to his type and far easier and more refreshing to the mind , at the outset , than anything else .
And they do work a sort of recovery in him , They send him back to his work refreshed -- so far , that is , as his work is concerned . ''
`` But there is another set of motives altogether , '' Sir Richmond went on with an air of having cleared the ground for his real business , `` that I did n't go into at all yesterday . ''
`` I abused her very probably .
I forget exactly what I said ... . ''
`` That carbuncle has made me suffer FRIGHTFULLY ... .
It is n't mine . ''
`` Extremely amusing stuff . ''
`` I 'd never had to do with an intellectually brilliant woman before .
I see now that the more imaginative force a woman has , the more likely she is to get into a state of extreme self-abandonment with any male thing upon which her imagination begins to crystallize .
Before I came along she 'd mixed chiefly with a lot of young artists and students , all doing nothing at all except talk about the things they were going to do .
I suppose I profited by the contrast , being older and with my hands full of affairs .
Perhaps something had happened that had made her recoil towards my sort of thing .
I do n't know .
But she just let herself go at me . ''
`` Let myself go too .
I 'd never met anything like her before .
It was her wit took me .
It did n't occur to me that she was n't my contemporary and as able as I was .
As able to take care of herself .
All sorts of considerations that I should have shown to a sillier woman I never dreamt of showing to her .
I had never met anyone so mentally brilliant before or so helpless and headlong .
And so here we are on each other's hands ! ''
`` But things do not always go well ? ''
`` Things , '' said Sir Richmond with the deliberation of a man who measures his words , `` are apt to go wrong ... .
At the flat there is constant trouble with the servants ; they bully her .
A woman is more entangled with servants than a man .
Women in that position seem to resent the work and freedom of other women .
Her servants wo n't leave her in peace as they would leave a man ; they make trouble for her ... .
And when we have had a few days anywhere away , even if nothing in particular has gone wrong -- ''
`` She wants to go on with her work .
She is able to work anywhere .
All she wants is just cardboard and ink .
My mind on the other hand turns back to the Fuel Commission ... . ''
`` Frightfully at times .
If it were a boy it would be easier .
It needs constant tact and dexterity to fix things up .
Neither of us have any .
It needs attention ... . ''
`` But this is where we cease to be Man on his Planet and all the rest of it .
This is where the idea of a definite task , fanatically followed to the exclusion of all minor considerations , breaks down .
When the work is good , when we are sure we are all right , then we may carry off things with a high hand .
But the work is n't always good , we are n't always sure .
We blunder , we make a muddle , we are fatigued .
Then the sacrificed affections come in as accusers .
Then it is that we want to be reassured . ''
`` Yes , but -- ''
Then they returned to the car and ran round by a winding road into the wonder of Avebury .
They found a clean little inn there kept by pleasant people , and they garaged the car in the cowshed and took two rooms for the night that they might the better get the atmosphere of the ancient place .
Wonderful indeed it is , a vast circumvallation that was already two thousand years old before the dawn of British history ; a great wall of earth with its ditch most strangely on its inner and not on its outer side ; and within this enclosure gigantic survivors of the great circles of unhewn stone that , even as late as Tudor days , were almost complete .
A whole village , a church , a pretty manor house have been built , for the most part , out of the ancient megaliths ; the great wall is sufficient to embrace them all with their gardens and paddocks ; four cross-roads meet at the village centre .
There are drawings of Avebury before these things arose there , when it was a lonely wonder on the plain , but for the most part the destruction was already done before the MAYFLOWER sailed .
To the southward stands the cone of Silbury Hill ; its shadow creeps up and down the intervening meadows as the seasons change .
Around this lonely place rise the Downs , now bare sheep pastures , in broad undulations , with a wart-like barrow here and there , and from it radiate , creeping up to gain and hold the crests of the hills , the abandoned trackways of that forgotten world .
These trackways , these green roads of England , these roads already disused when the Romans made their highway past Silbury Hill to Bath , can still be traced for scores of miles through the land , running to Salisbury and the English Channel , eastward to the crossing at the Straits and westward to Wales , to ferries over the Severn , and southwestward into Devon and Cornwall .
The place had stirred up his imagination .
He wrestled with his ignorance as if he thought that by talking he might presently worry out some picture of this forgotten world , without metals , without beasts of burthen , without letters , without any sculpture that has left a trace , and yet with a sense of astronomical fact clear enough to raise the great gnomon of Silbury , and with a social system complex enough to give the large and orderly community to which the size of Avebury witnesses and the traffic to which the green roads testify .
`` And what was our Mind like in those days ? ''
`` That , I suppose , is what interests you .
A vivid childish mind , I guess , with not a suspicion as yet that it was Man ruling his Planet or anything of that sort . ''
The doctor pursed his lips .
`` None , '' he delivered judicially .
`` If one were able to recall one 's childhood -- at the age of about twelve or thirteen -- when the artistic impulse so often goes into abeyance and one begins to think in a troubled , monstrous way about God and Hell , one might get something like the mind of this place . ''
In that personal way that gives death a nightmare terror .
And as for the fading of the artistic impulse , they 've left not a trace of the paintings and drawings and scratchings of the Old Stone people who came before them . ''
`` Adults with the minds of thirteen-year-old children .
Thirteen-year-old children with the strength of adults -- and no one to slap them or tell them not to ... .
After all , they probably only thought of death now and then .
And they never thought of fuel .
They supposed there was no end to that .
So they used up their woods and kept goats to nibble and kill the new undergrowth .
DID these people have goats ? ''
`` Let it rest then , '' said the doctor generously .
`` I should n't say that -- quite -- yet , '' said the doctor .
`` Which is the theory I started with .
I am a case of fatigue under irritating circumstances with very little mental complication or concealment . ''
`` As I said . ''
they had things all right .
Fibre of all sorts .
`` Or they may have used wicker , '' the young lady went on , undismayed .
She seemed to concede a point .
`` Wicker IS likelier . ''
`` But surely , '' said the father of the family with the expostulatory voice and gesture of one who would recall erring wits to sanity , `` it is far more impressive standing out bare and noble as it does .
In lonely splendour . ''
`` You came to it through a grove , '' said the young lady , eagerly picking up the idea .
`` Probably beech , '' said Sir Richmond .
`` That 's where the bug bit her . ''
said the stout lady with a note of querulous humour .
set eyes on Carnac , she just turned against all her up-bringing .
'Why was n't I told of this before ? '
'What 's Notre Dame to this ?
This is where we came from .
This is the real starting point of the MAYFLOWER .
Belinda , ' she said , 'we 've got to see all we can of this sort of thing before we go back to America .
They 've been keeping this from us . '
And that 's why we 're here right now instead of being shopping in Paris or London like decent American women . ''
`` Now that 's after V.V .
's own heart , '' cried the stout lady in grey .
`` She 'll agree to all that .
She 's been saying it right across Europe .
Rome , Paris , London ; they 're simply just done .
They do n't signify any more .
They 've got to be cleared away . ''
`` The way she went on about the Victor Emmanuele Monument ! ''
said the lady who answered to the name of Belinda .
`` It gave me cold shivers to think that those Italian officers might understand English . ''
`` It puzzles me . ''
`` This Roman empire seems to be Europe 's first and last idea .
And such a poor idea !
... America never came out of that .
It 's no good-telling me that it did .
It escaped from it ... .
So I said to Belinda here , 'Let 's burrow , if we can , under all this marble and find out what sort of people we were before this Roman empire and its acanthus weeds got hold of us . '
But this action had scarcely the effect he had intended it to have .
It set the young lady who was called Belinda asking about ways and means of getting to Salisbury ; it brought to light the distressing fact that V.V .
had the beginnings of a chafed heel .
Once he had set things going they moved much too quickly for the doctor to deflect their course .
He found himself called upon to make personal sacrifices to facilitate the painless transport of the two ladies to Salisbury , where their luggage awaited them at the Old George Hotel .
In some way too elusive to trace , it became evident that he and Sir Richmond were to stay at this same Old George Hotel .
The luggage was to be shifted to the top of the coupe , the young lady called V.V .
was to share the interior of the car with Sir Richmond , while the lady named Belinda , for whom Dr. Martineau was already developing a very strong dislike , was to be thrust into an extreme proximity with him and the balance of the luggage in the dicky seat behind .
Sir Richmond displayed a complete disregard of the sufferings of Dr. Martineau , shamefully compressed behind him .
Of these he was to hear later .
He ran his overcrowded little car , overcrowded so far as the dicky went , over the crest of the Down and down into Amesbury and on to Salisbury , stopping to alight and stretch the legs of the party when they came in sight of Old Sarum .
It 's true of a lot of us .
We come over to Europe as if it had n't anything to do with us except to supply us with old pictures and curios generally .
We stare at the natives -- like visitors at a Zoo .
We do n't realize that we belong ... .
I know our style ... .
But we are n't all like that .
Some of us are learning a bit better than that .
We have one or two teachers over there to lighten our darkness .
There's Professor Breasted for instance .
He comes sometimes to my father's house .
And there 's James Harvey Robinson and Professor Hutton Webster .
They 've been trying to restore our memory . ''
`` Well , you are the first civilized person I 've met in Europe for a long time .
If I understand you . ''
`` And favours the dog . ''
And incidentally my friend and I may have the pleasure of showing you Salisbury and Avebury .
If you are free ? ''
`` That I have some writing to do -- before the post goes , '' said the doctor brightly .
Miss Grammont stood up .
`` We can go first to look for shops , '' she said .
`` There 's those things you want to buy , Belinda ; a fountain pen and the little books .
We can all go together as far as that .
And while you are shopping , if you would n't mind getting one or two things for me ... . ''
But just as man on his planet taking control of life had failed altogether to remember why the ditch at Avebury was on the inside instead of the outside of the vallum , so now Miss Grammont and Sir Richmond found very great difficulty in recalling why they had built Salisbury Cathedral .
`` But are we building anything at all ? ''
The conversation drifted from topic to topic .
It had none of the steady continuity of Sir Richmond 's duologue with Miss Grammont .
Miss Seyffert 's methods were too discursive and exclamatory .
She broke every thread that appeared .
The Old George at Salisbury is really old ; it shows it , and Miss Seyffert laced the entire evening with her recognition of the fact .
`` Just look at that old beam ! ''
she would cry suddenly .
`` To think it was exactly where it is before there was a Cabot in America ! ''
Miss Grammont let her companion pull the talk about as she chose .
After the animation of the afternoon a sort of lazy contentment had taken possession of the younger lady .
She sat deep in a basket chair and spoke now and then .
Miss Seyffert gave her impressions of France and Italy .
She talked of the cabmen of Naples and the beggars of Amalfi .
`` Little children working like slaves , '' said Miss Grammont .
`` How many people are there in the world ? ''
`` But could you pick out two hundred and fifty million aristocrats ? ''
`` My native instinctive democracy -- ''
Miss Grammont smiled an enquiry at Miss Seyffert .
`` If YOU are , '' said Belinda .
`` I do n't like the American type , '' the doctor pronounced judicially .
`` We can be back in the early afternoon , '' said Sir Richmond .
`` To give them a chance of seeing the cathedral .
The chapter house here is not one to miss ... . ''
`` And then I suppose we shall go on ?
`` We might drop Belinda , '' he suggested turning to his friend and speaking in low , confidential tones .
`` She is quite a manageable person .
She could -- for example -- be left behind with the luggage and sent on by train .
I do not know if you realize how the land lies in that quarter .
It needs only a word to Miss Grammont . ''
`` And of course you told her I was . ''
There were some moments of silence .
`` I think this must be near the truth of her biography , '' said Sir Richmond .
`` I suppose she has lovers . ''
Dr. Martineau rolled his face towards Sir Richmond .
`` These miracles -- grotesquely -- happen , '' he said .
`` She knows nothing of Martin Leeds ... .
You must remember that ... .
`` Well , '' said Sir Richmond in conclusion , `` I am very sorry indeed , Martineau , that we have to part like this . ''
For a little while he thought confusedly of the collapse of his expedition into the secret places of his own heart with Dr. Martineau , and then his prepossession with Miss Grammont resumed possession of his mind .
Dr. Martineau was forgotten .
`` First , '' said Sir Richmond , `` as much right as a pig has to food .
But whether we get life and happiness or fail to get them we human beings who have imaginations want something more nowadays ... .
Of course we want bright lives , of course we want happiness .
Just as we want food , just as we want sleep .
But when we have eaten , when we have slept , when we have jolly things about us -- it is nothing .
We have been made an exception of -- and got our rations .
The big thing confronts us still .
It is vast , I agree , but vast as it is it is the thing we have to think about .
I do not know why it should be so , but I am compelled by something in my nature to want to serve this idea of a new age for mankind .
I want it as my culminating want .
I want a world in order , a disciplined mankind going on to greater things .
Do n't you ? ''
You 've made it clear .
It was n't clear before . ''
`` I suppose it has , '' she said , meditatively , as though she had been thinking over some such question before .
`` You have some sort of work cut out for you , '' she said abruptly .
`` Incidentally , '' he smiled , `` I want to get a lasso over the neck of that very forcible and barbaric person , your father .
I am doing my best to help lay the foundation of a scientific world control of fuel production and distribution .
We have a Fuel Commission in London with rather wide powers of enquiry into the whole world problem of fuel .
We shall come out to Washington presently with proposals . ''
She considered and turned on Sir Richmond gravely .
`` Tell me what you want to do to him .
You find out so many things for me that I seem to have been thinking about in a sort of almost invisible half-conscious way .
I 've been suspecting for a long time that Civilization was n't much good unless it got people like my father under some sort of control .
But controlling father -- as distinguished from managing him ! ''
She reviewed some private and amusing memories .
`` He is a most intractable man . ''
`` That ca n't go on , '' she said .
`` I realize I 've got to be a responsible American citizen , '' she had said .
That did n't mean that she attached very much importance to her recently acquired vote .
She evidently classified voters into the irresponsible who just had votes and the responsible who also had a considerable amount of property as well .
She had no illusions about the power of the former class .
It did n't exist .
They were steered to their decisions by people employed , directed or stimulated by `` father '' and his friends and associates , the owners of America , the real `` responsible citizens . ''
Or they fell a prey to the merely adventurous leading of `` revolutionaries . ''
But anyhow they were steered .
She herself , it was clear , was bound to become a very responsible citizen indeed .
She would some day , she laughed , be swimming in oil and such like property .
Her interest in Sir Richmond 's schemes for a scientific world management of fuel was therefore , she realized , a very direct one .
But it was remarkable to find a young woman seeing it like that .
Sir Richmond Hardy was not the only man who was thinking intently about Miss Grammont at that particular moment .
Two gentlemen were coming towards her across the Atlantic whose minds , it chanced , were very busily occupied by her affairs .
One of these was her father , who was lying in his brass bed in his commodious cabin on the Hollandia , regretting his diminishing ability to sleep in the early morning now , even when he was in the strong and soothing air of mid-Atlantic , and thinking of V.V .
because she had a way of coming into his mind when it was undefended ; and the other was Mr. Gunter Lake on the Megantic , one day out from Sandy Hook , who found himself equally sleepless and preoccupied .
And although Mr. Lake was a man of vast activities and complicated engagements he was coming now to Europe for the express purpose of seeing V.V .
and having things out with her fully and completely because , in spite of all that had happened , she made such an endless series of delays in coming to America .
Old Grammont stared at his memory of that moment for a while .
That affair was all right , quite all right .
Of course it was all right .
And also , happily , Caston was among the dead .
But it was well her broken engagement with Lake had been resumed as though it had never been broken off .
If there had been any talk that fact answered it .
And now that Lake had served his purpose old Grammont did not care in the least if he was shelved .
An interminable speech unfolded itself .
`` I ask for nothing in return .
I 've never worried you about that Caston business and I never will .
Married to me you shall be as free as if you were unmarried .
Do n't I know , my dear girl , that you do n't love me yet .
Let that be as you wish .
I want nothing you are not willing to give me , nothing at all .
All I ask is the privilege of making life happy -- and it shall be happy -- for you ... .
Protect , guard , cherish ... . ''
For to Mr. Gunter Lake it seemed there could be no lovelier thing in life than a wife `` in name only '' slowly warmed into a glow of passion by the steadfast devotion and the strength and wisdom of a mate at first despised .
Until at last a day would come ... .
`` My darling ! ''
Mr. Gunter Lake whispered to the darkness .
`` My little guurl .
IT HAS BEEN WORTH THE WAITING ... . ''
`` And yet I know I am right . ''
`` I know you are right .
-- Love of beauty , love of romance .
I want to give things their proper names ; I do n't want to pretend to you ... .
It was more or less than that ... .
It was -- imaginative sensuousness .
Why should I pretend it was n't in me ?
I believe that streak is in all women . ''
`` I tried to devote that streak to Lake , '' she said .
`` I did my best for him .
But Lake was much too much of a gentleman or an idealist about women , or what you will , to know his business as a lover .
And that side of me fell in love , the rest of me protesting , with a man named Caston .
It was a notorious affair .
Everybody in New York couples my name with Caston .
Except when my father is about .
His jealousy has blasted an area of silence -- in that matter -- all round him .
He will not know of that story .
And they dare not tell him .
I should pity anyone who tried to tell it him . ''
`` They told me Caston had been killed .
But someone hinted -- or I guessed -- that there was more in it than an ordinary casualty .
It is no good your inventing excuses for a man you know nothing about .
It was vile , contemptible cowardice and meanness .
It fitted in with a score of ugly little things I remembered .
It explained them all .
I know the evidence and the judgment against him were strictly just and true , because they were exactly in character ... .
And that , you see , was my man .
That was the lover I had chosen .
That was the man to whom I had given myself with both hands . ''
`` And I believe in it , when I talk of it to you . ''
`` I had n't thought about him sufficiently .
But now I had to think about him a lot .
The other affair had given me an idea perhaps of what it means to be married to a man .
And here I am drifting back to him .
The horrible thing about him is the steady ENVELOPING way in which he has always come at me .
Without any community of ideas .
Ready to make the most extraordinary bargains .
So long as he can in any way fix me and get me .
What does it mean ?
What is there behind those watching , soliciting eyes of his ?
I do n't in the least love him , and this desire and service and all the rest of it he offers me -- it 's not love .
It 's not even such love as Caston gave me .
It 's a game he plays with his imagination . ''
She had released a flood of new ideas in Sir Richmond 's mind .
`` This is illuminating , '' he said .
`` You dislike Lake acutely .
You always have disliked him . ''
`` In the interests of Lake , '' she said , smiling softly at Sir Richmond in the moonlight .
`` But you are perfectly right . ''
That was the dawn of a long day of tension for Sir Richmond and Miss Grammont .
Because each was now vividly aware of being in love with the other and so neither was able to see how things were with the other .
They were afraid of each other .
A restraint had come upon them both , a restraint that was greatly enhanced by their sense of Belinda , acutely observant , ostentatiously tactful and self-effacing , and prepared at the slightest encouragement to be overwhelmingly romantic and sympathetic .
Their talk waned , and was revived to an artificial activity and waned again .
The historical interest had evaporated from the west of England and left only an urgent and embarrassing present .
`` I had long ceased to hope , '' said Sir Richmond , `` that I should ever find a friend ... a lover ... perfect companionship ... . ''
`` All the things I wanted to think I believe have come alive in me , '' she said ... .
They stopped short and stood quite still , trembling .
He saw her face , dim and tender , looking up to his .
`` She wanted a man to love , she wanted perfected fellowship , and you have made her that tremendous promise .
That was implicit in your embrace .
And how can you keep that promise ? ''
It was as if Martin spoke ; it was her voice ; it was the very quality of her thought .
`` You belong to this work of yours , which must needs be interrupted or abandoned if you take her .
Whatever is not mortgaged to your work is mortgaged to me .
For the strange thing in all this is that you and I love one another -- and have no power to do otherwise .
In spite of all this .
`` And that is why you must not take this brave young life , so much simpler and braver than your own , and exalt it -- as you can do -- and then fail it , as you will do ... . ''
As if by a lightning flash he saw his car with himself and Miss Grammont -- Miss Seyffert had probably fallen out -- traversing Europe and Asia in headlong flight .
To a sunlit beach in the South Seas ... .
`` We have to carry the whole affair on to a Higher Plane -- and keep it there .
We two love one another -- that has to be admitted now .
( I ought never to have touched her .
I ought never to have thought of touching her . )
But we two are too high , our aims and work and obligations are too high for any ordinary love making .
That sort of thing would embarrass us , would spoil everything .
For a time Sir Richmond , exhausted by moral effort , lay staring at the darkness .
`` Queer that Martin can come in a dream to me and take the upper hand with me .
`` Queer that NOW -- I love Martin . ''
`` This is realler England than ever , '' she said .
`` I 've been up an hour .
I found a little path down to the river bank .
It 's the greenest morning world and full of wild flowers .
Look at these . ''
`` And there are cowslips ! ''
Sir Richmond , faced with his own nocturnal decision , was now moved to oppose it flatly .
`` Nothing that one can do is impossible . ''
`` That goes without saying . ''
`` I thought we ought not to go on to be lovers in any way that Would affect you , touch you too closely ... .
I was sorry -- I had kissed you . ''
`` If I could believe that ! ''
`` There are many more people think as we do than you suppose .
Are you and I such very strange and wonderful and exceptional people ? ''
Sir Richmond sank his head and voice in response .
`` That almost had me ... .
`` I ought -- MY dear .
I have no right to be ill-tempered .
We two are among the supremely fortunate ones of our time .
We have no excuse for misbehaviour .
Got nothing to grumble at .
Always I am lucky .
THAT -- with the waggon -- was a very near thing .
`` It was you who swore , '' smiled Miss Grammont .
Down below the Pump Room our travellers explored the memories of the days when the world was Latin from York to the Tigris , and the Corinthian capital flourished like a weed from Bath to Baalbek .
And they considered a little doubtfully the seventeenth century statue of Bladud , who is said to have been healed by the Bath waters and to have founded the city in the days when Stonehenge still flourished , eight hundred years before the Romans came .
`` I want you to kiss me . ''
`` I suppose I ought to be more concerned tonight about the work I have to do in the world and anxious for you to tell me this and that , but indeed I am not concerned at all about it .
I seem to have it in outline all perfectly clear .
I mean to play a man 's part in the world just as my father wants me to do .
I mean to win his confidence and work with him -- like a partner .
Then some day I shall be a power in the world of fuel .
And at the same time I must watch and read and think and learn how to be the servant of the world ... .
We two have to live like trusted servants who have been made guardians of a helpless minor .
We have to put things in order and keep them in order against the time when Man -- Man whom we call in America the Common Man -- can take hold of his world -- ''
`` All that is perfectly clear in my mind .
That is what I am going to live for ; that is what I have to do . ''
`` I 'm never surprised at the badness of human beings , '' said Sir Richmond ; `` seeing how they have come about and what they are ; but I have been surprised time after time by fine things ... .
Often in people I disliked or thought little of ... .
I can understand that I find you full of divine quality , because I am in love with you and all alive to you .
Necessarily I keep on discovering loveliness in you .
But I have seen divine things in dear old Martineau , for example .
A vain man , fussy , timid -- and yet filled with a passion for truth , ready to make great sacrifices and to toil tremendously for that .
And in those men I am always cursing , my Committee , it is astonishing at times to discover what streaks of goodness even the really bad men can show ... .
But one ca n't make use of just anyone 's divinity .
I can see the divinity in Martineau but it leaves me cold .
He tired me and bored me ... .
But I live on you .
It's only through love that the God can reach over from one human being to another .
All real love is a divine thing , a reassurance , a release of courage .
It is wonderful enough that we should take food and drink and turn them into imagination , invention and creative energy ; it is still more wonderful that we should take an animal urging and turn it into a light to discover beauty and an impulse towards the utmost achievements of which we are capable .
All love is a sacrament and all lovers are priests to each other .
You and I -- ''
Some deep-toned clock close by proclaimed the hour eleven .
`` She is a miracle of tact . ''
For a time she peered down at the dark figure wading in the foam below as though it was the only thing of interest in the world .
Then she turned to Sir Richmond .
Then presently she said : `` In the New Age all lovers will have to be accustomed to meeting and parting .
We women will not be tied very much by domestic needs .
Unless we see fit to have children .
We shall be going about our business like men ; we shall have world-wide businesses -- many of us -- just as men will ... .
`` Some day -- somewhere -- we two will certainly meet again . ''
`` No one -- '' began Sir Richmond , startled .
`` I shall feel you 're there , '' he said , `` whether you tug or not ... . ''
She glanced back at Belinda .
`` We shall write letters .
Do letters breathe faster or slower as you read them ?
A few seconds more , he realized , and he would give way to anger .
Whatever happened that must not happen .
He pulled himself together .
What was it he had to do now ?
He had not to be angry , he had not even to be sorry .
They had done the right thing .
Outside the station his car was waiting .
But things were not like that .
He looked to see if his car was short of water or petrol ; both needed replenishing , and so he would have to go up the hill into Exeter town again .
He got into his car and sat with his fingers on the electric starter .
The Majority and Minority Reports of the Fuel Commission were received on their first publication with much heat and disputation , but there is already a fairly general agreement that they are great and significant documents , broadly conceived and historically important .
They do lift the questions of fuel supply and distribution high above the level of parochial jealousies and above the petty and destructive profiteering of private owners and traders , to a view of a general human welfare .
They form an important link in a series of private and public documents that are slowly opening out a prospect of new economic methods , methods conceived in the generous spirit of scientific work , that may yet arrest the drift of our western civilization towards financial and commercial squalor and the social collapse that must ensue inevitably on that .
In view of the composition of the Committee , the Majority Report is in itself an amazing triumph of Sir Richmond 's views ; it is astonishing that he was able to drive his opponents so far and then leave them there securely advanced while he carried on the adherents he had altogether won , including , of course , the labour representatives , to the further altitudes of the Minority Report .
After the Summer recess the Majority Report was discussed and adopted .
Sir Richmond had shown signs of flagging energy in June , but he had come back in September in a state of exceptional vigour ; for a time he completely dominated the Committee by the passionate force of his convictions and the illuminating scorn he brought to bear on the various subterfuges and weakening amendments by which the meaner interests sought to save themselves in whole or in part from the common duty of sacrifice .
But toward the end he fell ill .
He had worked to the pitch of exhaustion .
He neglected a cold that settled on his chest .
He began to cough persistently and betray an increasingly irritable temper .
In the last fights in the Committee his face was bright with fever and he spoke in a voiceless whisper , often a vast angry whisper .
His place at table was marked with scattered lozenges and scraps of paper torn to the minutest shreds .
Such good manners as had hitherto mitigated his behaviour on the Committee departed from him , He carried his last points , gesticulating and coughing and wheezing rather than speaking .
But he had so hammered his ideas into the Committee that they took the effect of what he was trying to say .
`` Is your wife at home ! ''
They parted with an affectionate handshake .
`` Forgive my sending for you , '' he said .
`` Not your line .
-- an exasperating sort of ass .
Ca n't stand him .
No one else . ''
The second doctor presently came , with the right sort of nurse hard on his heels .
Sir Richmond submitted almost silently to his expert handling and was sounded and looked to and listened at .
`` There 's a lot about this I do n't like , '' said the second doctor and drew Dr. Martineau by the arm towards the study .
For a moment or so Sir Richmond listened to the low murmur of their voices , but he did not feel very deeply interested in what they were saying .
He began to think what a decent chap Dr. Martineau was , how helpful and fine and forgiving his professional training had made him , how completely he had ignored the smothered incivilities of their parting at Salisbury .
All men ought to have some such training , Not a bad idea to put every boy and girl through a year or so of hospital service ... .
Sir Richmond must have dozed , for his next perception was of Dr. Martineau standing over him and saying `` I am afraid , my dear Hardy , that you are very ill indeed .
Much more so than I thought you were at first . ''
An expression of obstinate calm overspread Sir Richmond 's face .
He seemed to regard the matter as settled .
He closed his eyes .
But Sir Richmond was also remorseful .
`` Give them my love , '' he said .
`` Best love ... Old Martin .
`` It had been splendid work , '' said Dr. Martineau , and was not sure that Sir Richmond heard .
Dr. Martineau 's thoughts relaxed and passed into the picture land of dreams .
He saw the figure of Sir Richmond , going as it were away from him along a narrow path , a path that followed the crest of a ridge , between great darknesses , enormous cloudy darknesses , above him and below .
He was going along this path without looking back , without a thought for those he left behind , without a single word to cheer him on his way , walking as Dr. Martineau had sometimes watched him walking , without haste or avidity , walking as a man might along some great picture gallery with which he was perhaps even over familiar .
His hands would be in his pockets , his indifferent eyes upon the clouds about him .
And as he strolled along that path , the darkness closed in upon him .
His figure became dim and dimmer .
Lady Hardy arrived home in response to Dr. Martineau 's telegram late on the following evening .
He was with her next morning , comforting and sympathetic .
Her big blue eyes , bright with tears , met his very wistfully ; her little body seemed very small and pathetic in its simple black dress .
And yet there was a sort of bravery about her .
When he came into the drawing-room she was in one of the window recesses talking to a serious-looking woman of the dressmaker type .
She left her business at once to come to him .
`` Why did I not know in time ? ''
`` I might have known that if it had been possible you would have told me , '' she said .
`` You know , '' she added , `` I do n't believe it yet .
I do n't realize it .
I go about these formalities -- ''
`` I think I can understand that . ''
Dr. Martineau nodded and then , not to be too portentous , took and bit a biscuit .
`` Did he by any chance ever mention someone called Martin Leeds ? ''
Dr. Martineau pressed the limp hand upon the little tea table .
`` I understand , dear lady , '' he said .
Now ... suppose _I_ were to write to her and arrange -- I do not see that you need be put to the pain of meeting her .
Suppose I were to meet her here myself ?
The doctor was quite prepared to save the lady any further distresses , no matter at what trouble to himself .
`` You are so good to me , '' she said , letting the tears have their way with her .
He took over Martin 's brief note to Lady Hardy and set to work by telegram to arrange for her visit .
She was in London at her Chelsea flat and easily accessible .
She was to come to the house at mid-day on the morrow , and to ask not for Lady Hardy but for him .
He would stay by her while she was in the house , and it would be quite easy for Lady Hardy to keep herself and her daughter out of the way .
They could , for example , go out quietly to the dressmakers in the closed car , for many little things about the mourning still remained to be seen to .
`` You are Dr .
`` He talked of you . ''
As she spoke her glance went from him to the pictures that stood about the room .
She walked up to the painting and stood in front of it with her distressed gaze wandering about her .
... Did SHE do this ? ''
`` None of them are a bit like him .
They are like blows aimed at his memory .
Not one has his life in it .
How could she do it ?
Look at that idiot statuette !
He was extraordinarily difficult to get .
I have burnt every photograph I had of him .
For fear that this would happen ; that he would go stiff and formal -- just as you have got him here .
I have been trying to sketch him almost all the time since he died .
But I can't get him back .
He 's gone . ''
She followed the doctor upstairs .
`` This was his study , '' the doctor explained .
They entered the big bedroom in which the coffined body lay .
Dr. Martineau , struck by a sudden memory , glanced nervously at the desk , but someone had made it quite tidy and the portrait of Aliss Grammont had disappeared .
Miss Leeds walked straight across to the coffin and stood looking down on the waxen inexpressive dignity of the dead .
Sir Richmond 's brows and nose had become sharper and more clear-cut than they had ever been in life and his lips had set into a faint inane smile .
She stood quite still for a long time .
At length she sighed deeply .
`` He was too kind to life ever to call it the foolish thing it is .
He took it seriously because it takes itself seriously .
He worked for it and killed himself with work for it ... . ''
She turned to Dr. Martineau and her face was streaming with tears .
`` And life , you know , is n't to be taken seriously .
It is a joke -- a bad joke -- made by some cruel little god who has caught a neglected planet ... .
Like torturing a stray cat ... .
But he took it seriously and he gave up his life for it .
`` I do n't complain of him .
I do n't blame him .
He did his best -- to be kind .
MODERN RELIGION HAS NO FOUNDER
It is as if it still did not realise its own difference .
Many of those who hold it still think of it as if it were a kind of Christianity .
Some , catching at a phrase of Huxley 's , speak of it as Christianity without Theology .
They do not know the creed they are carrying .
It has , as a matter of fact , a very fine and subtle theology , flatly opposed to any belief that could , except by great stretching of charity and the imagination , be called Christianity .
One might find , perhaps , a parallelism with the system ascribed to some Gnostics , but that is far more probably an accidental rather than a sympathetic coincidence .
Of that the reader shall presently have an opportunity of judging .
It is with these things in mind that those who profess the new faith are becoming so markedly anxious to distinguish God from the Trinitarian's deity .
At present if anyone who has left the Christian communion declares himself a believer in God , priest and parson swell with self-complacency .
There is no reason why they should do so .
That many of us have gone from them and found God is no concern of theirs .
It is not that we who went out into the wilderness which we thought to be a desert , away from their creeds and dogmas , have turned back and are returning .
It is that we have gone on still further , and are beyond that desolation .
Never more shall we return to those who gather under the cross .
By faith we disbelieved and denied .
By faith we said of that stuffed scarecrow of divinity , that incoherent accumulation of antique theological notions , the Nicene deity , `` This is certainly no God . ''
And by faith we have found God .
A life perfectly adjusted to its surroundings is a life without mentality ; no judgment is called for , no inhibition , no disturbance of the instinctive flow of perfect reactions .
Such a life is bliss , or nirvana .
It is unconsciousness below dreaming .
Consciousness is discord evoking the will to adjust ; it is inseparable from need .
At every need consciousness breaks into being .
Imperfect adjustments , needs , are the rents and tatters in the smooth dark veil of being through which the light of consciousness shines -- the light of consciousness and will of which God is the sun .
It is a human paradox that the desire for seemliness , the instinct for restraints and fair disciplines , and the impulse to cherish sweet familiar things , that these things of the True God should so readily liberate cruelty and tyranny .
It is like a woman going with a light to tend and protect her sleeping child , and setting the house on fire .
None the less , right down to to-day , the heresy of God the Revengeful , God the Persecutor and Avenger , haunts religion .
It is only in quite recent years that the growing gentleness of everyday life has begun to make men a little ashamed of a Deity less tolerant and gentle than themselves .
The recent literature of the Anglicans abounds in the evidence of this trouble .
Bishop Colenso of Natal was prosecuted and condemned in 1863 for denying the irascibility of his God and teaching `` the Kaffirs of Natal '' the dangerous heresy that God is all mercy .
`` We can not allow it to be said , '' the Dean of Cape Town insisted , `` that God was not angry and was not appeased by punishment . ''
He was angry `` on account of Sin , which is a great evil and a great insult to His Majesty . ''
The case of the Rev .
Charles Voysey , which occurred in 1870 , was a second assertion of the Church 's insistence upon the fierceness of her God .
This case is not to be found in the ordinary church histories nor is it even mentioned in the latest edition of the ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA ; nevertheless it appears to have been a very illuminating case .
It is doubtful if the church would prosecute or condemn either Bishop Colenso or Mr. Voysey to-day .
Children do not naturally love God .
They have no great capacity for an idea so subtle and mature as the idea of God .
While they are still children in a home and cared for , life is too kind and easy for them to feel any great need of God .
All things are still something God-like .
Yet children are sometimes very near to God .
Creative passion stirs in their play .
At times they display a divine simplicity .
But it does not follow that therefore they should be afflicted with theological formulae or inducted into ceremonies and rites that they may dislike or misinterpret .
If by any accident , by the death of a friend or a distressing story , the thought of death afflicts a child , then he may begin to hear of God , who takes those that serve him out of their slain bodies into his shining immortality .
Or if by some menial treachery , through some prowling priest , the whisper of Old Bogey reaches our children , then we may set their minds at ease by the assurance of his limitless charity .
Now this is where those who have left the old creeds and come asking about the new realisations find their chief difficulty .
They say , Show us this person ; let us hear him .
( If they listen to the silences within , presently they will hear him . )
But when one argues , one finds oneself suddenly in the net of those ancient controversies between species and individual , between the one and the many , which arise out of the necessarily imperfect methods of the human mind .
Upon these matters there has been much pregnant writing during the last half century .
Such ideas as this writer has to offer are to be found in a previous little book of his , `` First and Last Things , '' in which , writing as one without authority or specialisation in logic and philosophy , as an ordinary man vividly interested , for others in a like case , he was at some pains to elucidate the imperfections of this instrument of ours , this mind , by which we must seek and explain and reach up to God .
Suffice it here to say that theological discussion may very easily become like the vision of a man with cataract , a mere projection of inherent imperfections .
If we do not use our phraseology with a certain courage , and take that of those who are trying to convey their ideas to us with a certain politeness and charity , there is no end possible to any discussion in so subtle and intimate a matter as theology but assertions , denials , and wranglings .
And about this word `` person '' it is necessary to be as clear and explicit as possible , though perfect clearness , a definition of mathematical sharpness , is by the very nature of the case impossible .
Now when we speak of a person or an individual we think typically of a man , and we forget that he was once an embryo and will presently decay ; we forget that he came of two people and may beget many , that he has forgotten much and will forget more , that he can be confused , divided against himself , delirious , drunken , drugged , or asleep .
On the contrary we are , in our hasty way of thinking of him , apt to suppose him continuous , definite , acting consistently and never forgetting .
But only abstract and theoretical persons are like that .
We couple with him the idea of a body .
Indeed , in the common use of the word `` person '' there is more thought of body than of mind .
We speak of a lover possessing the person of his mistress .
We speak of offences against the person as opposed to insults , libels , or offences against property .
And the gods of primitive men and the earlier civilisations were quite of that quality of person .
They were thought of as living in very splendid bodies and as acting consistently .
If they were invisible in the ordinary world it was because they were aloof or because their `` persons '' were too splendid for weak human eyes .
Moses was permitted a mitigated view of the person of the Hebrew God on Mount Horeb ; and Semele , who insisted upon seeing Zeus in the glories that were sacred to Juno , was utterly consumed .
The early Islamic conception of God , like the conception of most honest , simple Christians to-day , was clearly , in spite of the theologians , of a very exalted anthropomorphic personality away somewhere in Heaven .
The personal appearance of the Christian God is described in The Revelation , and however much that description may be explained away by commentators as symbolical , it is certainly taken by most straightforward believers as a statement of concrete reality .
Now if we are going to insist upon this primary meaning of person and individual , then certainly God as he is now conceived is not a person and not an individual .
The true God will never promenade an Eden or a Heaven , nor sit upon a throne .
Most of the old religions derive from a patriarchal phase .
God is in those systems the Ancient of Days .
I know of no Christian attempt to represent or symbolise God the Father which is not a bearded , aged man .
White hair , beard , bearing , wrinkles , a hundred such symptoms of senile decay are there .
These marks of senility do not astonish our modern minds in the picture of God , only because tradition and usage have blinded our eyes to the absurdity of a time-worn immortal .
Jove too and Wotan are figures far past the prime of their vigour .
These are gods after the ancient habit of the human mind , that turned perpetually backward for causes and reasons and saw all things to come as no more than the working out of Fate , --
Let us state as compactly as possible the nature of these changes that biological science has wrought almost imperceptibly in the general scheme and method of our thinking .
Now Professor Metchnikoff is anti-religious , and he is anti-religious because to him as to so many Europeans religion is confused with priest-craft and dogmas , is associated with disagreeable early impressions of irrational repression and misguidance .
How completely he misconceives the quality of religion , how completely he sees it as an individual 's affair , his own words may witness :
This altar to the Future of his , we can claim as an altar to our God -- an altar rather indistinctly inscribed .
I have recently been reading a book by Mr. Joseph McCabe called `` The Tyranny of Shams , '' in which he displays very typically this curious tendency to a sort of religion with God `` blacked out . ''
His is an extremely interesting case .
He is a writer who was formerly a Roman Catholic priest , and in his reaction from Catholicism he displays a resolution even sterner than Professor Metchnikoff 's , to deny that anything religious or divine can exist , that there can be any aim in life except happiness , or any guide but `` science . ''
But -- and here immediately he turns east again -- he is careful not to say `` individual happiness . ''
And he says `` Pleasure is , as Epicureans insisted , only a part of a large ideal of happiness . ''
So he lets the happiness of devotion and sacrifice creep in .
So he opens indefinite possibilities of getting away from any merely materialistic rule of life .
A NOTE ON A LECTURE BY PROFESSOR GILBERT MURRAY
Let me now quote and discuss a very beautiful passage from a lecture upon Stoicism by Professor Gilbert Murray , which also displays the same characteristic of an involuntary shaping out of God in the forms of denial .
It is a passage remarkable for its conscientious and resolute Agnosticism .
And it is remarkable too for its blindness to the possibility of separating quite completely the idea of the Infinite Being from the idea of God .
It is another striking instance of that obsession of modern minds by merely Christian theology of which I have already complained .
Professor Murray has quoted Mr. Bevan 's phrase for God , `` the Friend behind phenomena , '' and he does not seem to realise that that phrase carries with it no obligation whatever to believe that this Friend is in control of the phenomena .
He assumes that he is supposed to be in control as if it were a matter of course :
`` We know absolutely nothing concerning the Force we call God ; and , assuming such an intelligent ruling force to be in existence , permeating this universe of millions of stars and ( no doubt ) tens of millions of planets , we do not know under what conditions and limitations It works .
We are quite entitled to assume that the end of such an influence is intended to be order out of chaos , happiness and perfection out of incompleteness and misery ; and we are entitled to identify the reactionary forces of brute Nature with the anthropomorphic Devil of primitive religions , the power of darkness resisting the power of light .
But in these conjectures we must surely come to the conclusion that the theoretical potency we call 'God ' makes endless experiments , and scrap-heaps the failures .
Think of the Dinosaurs and the expenditure of creative energy that went to their differentiation and their well-nigh incredible physical development .
The conception of a young and energetic God , an Invisible Prince growing in strength and wisdom , who calls men and women to his service and who gives salvation from self and mortality only through self-abandonment to his service , necessarily involves a demand for a complete revision and fresh orientation of the life of the convert .
But when all this has been said , it is well to add that it concerns the figure of Christ only in so far as that professes to be the figure of God , and the crucifix only so far as that stands for divine action .
The figure of Christ crucified , so soon as we think of it as being no more than the tragic memorial of Jesus , of the man who proclaimed the loving-kindness of God and the supremacy of God 's kingdom over the individual life , and who , in the extreme agony of his pain and exhaustion , cried out that he was deserted , becomes something altogether distinct from a theological symbol .
Immediately that we cease to worship , we can begin to love and pity .
Here was a being of extreme gentleness and delicacy and of great courage , of the utmost tolerance and the subtlest sympathy , a saint of non-resistance .
I find , too , a still more remarkable expression of the modern spirit in a tract , `` The Call of the Kingdom , '' by that very able and subtle , Anglican theologian , the Rev .
W. Temple , who declares that under the vitalising stresses of the war we are winning `` faith in Christ as an heroic leader .
We have thought of Him so much as meek and gentle that there is no ground in our picture of Him , for the vision which His disciple had of Him : 'His head and His hair were white , as white wool , white as snow ; and His eyes were as a flame of fire : and His feet like unto burnished brass , as if it had been refined in a furnace ; and His voice was as the voice of many waters .
And He had in His right hand seven stars ; and out of His mouth proceeded a sharp two-edged sword ; and His countenance was as the sun shineth in its strength . '
It may be that minds will presently appear among us of such a quality that the face of that Unknown will not be altogether hidden .
The plain duty that will be understood by the proprietor of land and of every sort of general need and service , so soon as he becomes aware of God , is so to administer his possessions as to achieve the maximum of possible efficiency , the most generous output , and the least private profit .
He may set aside a salary for his maintenance ; the rest he must deal with like a zealous public official .
And if he perceives that the affair could be better administered by other hands than his own , then it is his business to get it into those hands with the smallest delay and the least profit to himself .
The rights and wrongs of human equity are very different from right and wrong in the sight of God .
In the sight of God no landlord has a RIGHT to his rent , no usurer has a RIGHT to his interest .
A man is not justified in drawing the profits from an advantageous agreement nor free to spend the profits of a speculation as he will .
God takes no heed of savings nor of abstinence .
He recognises no right to the `` rewards of abstinence , '' no right to any rewards .
Those profits and comforts and consolations are the inducements that dangle before the eyes of the spiritually blind .
Wealth is an embarrassment to the religious , for God calls them to account for it .
The servant of God has no business with wealth or power except to use them immediately in the service of God .
Finding these things in his hands he is bound to administer them in the service of God .
Now this condition of things is clearly incompatible with the modern conception of the world as becoming a divine kingdom .
When the world is openly and confessedly the kingdom of God , the law court will exist only to adjust the differing views of men as to the manner of their service to God ; the only right of action one man will have against another will be that he has been prevented or hampered or distressed by the other in serving God .
The idea of the law court will have changed entirely from a place of dispute , exaction and vengeance , to a place of adjustment .
The individual or some state organisation will plead ON BEHALF OF THE COMMON GOOD either against some state official or state regulation , or against the actions or inaction of another individual .
This is the only sort of legal proceedings compatible with the broad beliefs of the new faith .
Every religion that becomes ascendant , in so far as it is not otherworldly , must necessarily set its stamp upon the methods and administration of the law .
That this was not the case with Christianity is one of the many contributory aspects that lead one to the conviction that it was not Christianity that took possession of the Roman empire , but an imperial adventurer who took possession of an all too complaisant Christianity .
The procedure of that silent , lit , and empty court in which a man states his case to God , is very simple and perfect .
The excuses and the special pleading shrivel and vanish .
In a little while the case lies bare and plain .
The service of God is not to achieve a delicate consistency of statement ; it is to do as much as one can of God 's work .
Are any sorts of people shut off as if by inherent necessity from God ?
The emancipation of mankind from obsolete theories and formularies may be accompanied by great tides of moral and emotional release among types and strata that by the standards of a trained and explicit intellectual , may seem spiritually hopeless .
It is not necessary to imagine the whole world critical and lucid in order to imagine the whole world unified in religious sentiment , comprehending the same phrases and coming together regardless of class and race and quality , in the worship and service of the true God .
The coming kingship of God if it is to be more than hieratic tyranny must have this universality of appeal .
As the head grows clear the body will turn in the right direction .
To the mass of men modern religion says , `` This is the God it has always been in your nature to apprehend . ''
To the believer , relationship with God is the supreme relationship .
It is difficult to imagine how the association of lovers and friends can be very fine and close and good unless the two who love are each also linked to God , so that through their moods and fluctuations and the changes of years they can be held steadfast by his undying steadfastness .
But it has been felt by many deep-feeling people that there is so much kindred between the love and trust of husband and wife and the feeling we have for God , that it is reasonable to consider the former also as a sacred thing .
They do so value that close love of mated man and woman , they are so intent upon its permanence and completeness and to lift the dear relationship out of the ruck of casual and transitory things , that they want to bring it , as it were , into the very presence and assent of God .
There are many who dream and desire that they are as deeply and completely mated as this , many more who would fain be so , and some who are .
And from this comes the earnest desire to make marriage sacramental and the attempt to impose upon all the world the outward appearance , the restrictions , the pretence at least of such a sacramental union .
But between God and the believer there is no other way , there is nothing else , but self-surrender and the ending of self .
This is the personal problem of Sin .
Here prayer avails ; here God can help us .
From God comes the strength to repent and make such reparation as we can , to begin the battle again further back and lower down .
From God comes the power to anticipate the struggle with one 's rebel self , and to resist and prevail over it .
This discussion of the lunatic 's case gives us indeed , usefully coarse and large , the lines for the treatment of every human weakness by the servants of God .
A `` weakness , '' just like the lunatic 's mania , becomes a particular charge under God , a special duty for the person it affects .
He has to minimise it , to isolate it , to keep it out of mischief .
If he can he must adopt preventive measures .
BELIEVE , AND YOU ARE SAVED
For emancipation from the Trinitarian formularies and from a belief in an infinite God means not merely a great revivification of minds trained under the decadence of orthodox Christianity , minds which have hitherto been hopelessly embarrassed by the choice between pseudo-Christian religion or denial , but also it opens the way towards the completest understanding and sympathy and participation with the kindred movements for release and for an intensification of the religious life , that are going on outside the sphere of the Christian tradition and influence altogether .
Allusion has already been made to the sympathetic devotional poetry of Rabindranath Tagore ; he stands for a movement in Brahminism parallel with and assimilable to the worship of the true God of mankind .
All the world over there is this stirring in the dry bones of the old beliefs .
There is scarcely a religion that has not its Bahaism , its Modernists , its Brahmo Somaj , its `` religion without theology , '' its attempts to escape from old forms and hampering associations to that living and world-wide spiritual reality upon which the human mind almost instinctively insists .
Whatever religious congregations men may form henceforth in the name of the true God must be for their own sakes and not to take charge of religion .
That I think states the attitude of the modern spirit towards the idea of a church .
Mankind passes for ever out of the idolatry of altars , away from the obscene rites of circumcision and symbolical cannibalism , beyond the sway of the ceremonial priest .
But if the modern spirit holds that religion can not be organised or any intermediary thrust between God and man , that does not preclude infinite possibilities of organisation and collective action UNDER God and within the compass of religion .
There is no reason why religious men should not band themselves the better to attain specific ends .
To borrow a term from British politics , there is no objection to AD HOC organisations .
The objection lies not against subsidiary organisations for service but against organisations that may claim to be comprehensive .
For example there is no reason why one should not -- and in many cases there are good reasons why one should -- organise or join associations for the criticism of religious ideas , an employment that may pass very readily into propaganda .
The world is God 's and he takes it .
But he himself remains freedom , and we find our freedom in him .
'This little affair , ' said the Time Traveller , resting his elbows upon the table and pressing his hands together above the apparatus , 'is only a model .
It is my plan for a machine to travel through time .
You will notice that it looks singularly askew , and that there is an odd twinkling appearance about this bar , as though it was in some way unreal . '
He pointed to the part with his finger .
'Also , here is one little white lever , and here is another . '
The Medical Man got up out of his chair and peered into the thing .
'It 's beautifully made , ' he said .
'But , ' I said , 'If it travelled into the past it would have been visible when we came first into this room ; and last Thursday when we were here ; and the Thursday before that ; and so forth ! '
'Would you like to see the Time Machine itself ? '
asked the Time Traveller .
And therewith , taking the lamp in his hand , he led the way down the long , draughty corridor to his laboratory .
I remember vividly the flickering light , his queer , broad head in silhouette , the dance of the shadows , how we all followed him , puzzled but incredulous , and how there in the laboratory we beheld a larger edition of the little mechanism which we had seen vanish from before our eyes .
Parts were of nickel , parts of ivory , parts had certainly been filed or sawn out of rock crystal .
The thing was generally complete , but the twisted crystalline bars lay unfinished upon the bench beside some sheets of drawings , and I took one up for a better look at it .
Quartz it seemed to be .
'Upon that machine , ' said the Time Traveller , holding the lamp aloft , 'I intend to explore time .
I was never more serious in my life . '
He was in an amazing plight .
His coat was dusty and dirty , and smeared with green down the sleeves ; his hair disordered , and as it seemed to me greyer -- either with dust and dirt or because its colour had actually faded .
His face was ghastly pale ; his chin had a brown cut on it -- a cut half healed ; his expression was haggard and drawn , as by intense suffering .
For a moment he hesitated in the doorway , as if he had been dazzled by the light .
Then he came into the room .
He walked with just such a limp as I have seen in footsore tramps .
We stared at him in silence , expecting him to speak .
He looked across at the Editor , who was a rare visitor , and hoped he was all right .
The Editor began a question .
'Tell you presently , ' said the Time Traveller .
'I 'm -- funny !
Be all right in a minute . '
'The peculiar risk lay in the possibility of my finding some substance in the space which I , or the machine , occupied .
So long as I travelled at a high velocity through time , this scarcely mattered ; I was , so to speak , attenuated -- was slipping like a vapour through the interstices of intervening substances !
But to come to a stop involved the jamming of myself , molecule by molecule , into whatever lay in my way ; meant bringing my atoms into such intimate contact with those of the obstacle that a profound chemical reaction -- possibly a far-reaching explosion -- would result , and blow myself and my apparatus out of all possible dimensions -- into the Unknown .
This possibility had occurred to me again and again while I was making the machine ; but then I had cheerfully accepted it as an unavoidable risk -- one of the risks a man has got to take !
Now the risk was inevitable , I no longer saw it in the same cheerful light .
The fact is that , insensibly , the absolute strangeness of everything , the sickly jarring and swaying of the machine , above all , the feeling of prolonged falling , had absolutely upset my nerve .
I told myself that I could never stop , and with a gust of petulance I resolved to stop forthwith .
Like an impatient fool , I lugged over the lever , and incontinently the thing went reeling over , and I was flung headlong through the air .
'Then I heard voices approaching me .
Coming through the bushes by the White Sphinx were the heads and shoulders of men running .
One of these emerged in a pathway leading straight to the little lawn upon which I stood with my machine .
He was a slight creature -- perhaps four feet high -- clad in a purple tunic , girdled at the waist with a leather belt .
Sandals or buskins -- I could not clearly distinguish which -- were on his feet ; his legs were bare to the knees , and his head was bare .
Noticing that , I noticed for the first time how warm the air was .
'Between the tables was scattered a great number of cushions .
Upon these my conductors seated themselves , signing for me to do likewise .
With a pretty absence of ceremony they began to eat the fruit with their hands , flinging peel and stalks , and so forth , into the round openings in the sides of the tables .
I was not loath to follow their example , for I felt thirsty and hungry .
As I did so I surveyed the hall at my leisure .
'This adjustment , I say , must have been done , and done well ; done indeed for all Time , in the space of Time across which my machine had leaped .
The air was free from gnats , the earth from weeds or fungi ; everywhere were fruits and sweet and delightful flowers ; brilliant butterflies flew hither and thither .
The ideal of preventive medicine was attained .
Diseases had been stamped out .
I saw no evidence of any contagious diseases during all my stay .
And I shall have to tell you later that even the processes of putrefaction and decay had been profoundly affected by these changes .
'Social triumphs , too , had been effected .
I saw mankind housed in splendid shelters , gloriously clothed , and as yet I had found them engaged in no toil .
There were no signs of struggle , neither social nor economical struggle .
The shop , the advertisement , traffic , all that commerce which constitutes the body of our world , was gone .
It was natural on that golden evening that I should jump at the idea of a social paradise .
The difficulty of increasing population had been met , I guessed , and population had ceased to increase .
'Under the new conditions of perfect comfort and security , that restless energy , that with us is strength , would become weakness .
Even in our own time certain tendencies and desires , once necessary to survival , are a constant source of failure .
Physical courage and the love of battle , for instance , are no great help -- may even be hindrances -- to a civilized man .
And in a state of physical balance and security , power , intellectual as well as physical , would be out of place .
For countless years I judged there had been no danger of war or solitary violence , no danger from wild beasts , no wasting disease to require strength of constitution , no need of toil .
For such a life , what we should call the weak are as well equipped as the strong , are indeed no longer weak .
Better equipped indeed they are , for the strong would be fretted by an energy for which there was no outlet .
No doubt the exquisite beauty of the buildings I saw was the outcome of the last surgings of the now purposeless energy of mankind before it settled down into perfect harmony with the conditions under which it lived -- the flourish of that triumph which began the last great peace .
This has ever been the fate of energy in security ; it takes to art and to eroticism , and then come languor and decay .
'As I stood there in the gathering dark I thought that in this simple explanation I had mastered the problem of the world -- mastered the whole secret of these delicious people .
Possibly the checks they had devised for the increase of population had succeeded too well , and their numbers had rather diminished than kept stationary .
That would account for the abandoned ruins .
Very simple was my explanation , and plausible enough -- as most wrong theories are !
'As I stood there musing over this too perfect triumph of man , the full moon , yellow and gibbous , came up out of an overflow of silver light in the north-east .
The bright little figures ceased to move about below , a noiseless owl flitted by , and I shivered with the chill of the night .
I determined to descend and find where I could sleep .
'Abruptly , I dashed down the match , and , knocking one of the people over in my course , went blundering across the big dining-hall again , out under the moonlight .
I heard cries of terror and their little feet running and stumbling this way and that .
I do not remember all I did as the moon crept up the sky .
I suppose it was the unexpected nature of my loss that maddened me .
I felt hopelessly cut off from my own kind -- a strange animal in an unknown world .
I must have raved to and fro , screaming and crying upon God and Fate .
I have a memory of horrible fatigue , as the long night of despair wore away ; of looking in this impossible place and that ; of groping among moon-lit ruins and touching strange creatures in the black shadows ; at last , of lying on the ground near the sphinx and weeping with absolute wretchedness .
I had nothing left but misery .
Then I slept , and when I woke again it was full day , and a couple of sparrows were hopping round me on the turf within reach of my arm .
'But probably , the machine had only been taken away .
Still , I must be calm and patient , find its hiding-place , and recover it by force or cunning .
And with that I scrambled to my feet and looked about me , wondering where I could bathe .
I felt weary , stiff , and travel-soiled .
The freshness of the morning made me desire an equal freshness .
I had exhausted my emotion .
Indeed , as I went about my business , I found myself wondering at my intense excitement overnight .
I made a careful examination of the ground about the little lawn .
I wasted some time in futile questionings , conveyed , as well as I was able , to such of the little people as came by .
They all failed to understand my gestures ; some were simply stolid , some thought it was a jest and laughed at me .
I had the hardest task in the world to keep my hands off their pretty laughing faces .
It was a foolish impulse , but the devil begotten of fear and blind anger was ill curbed and still eager to take advantage of my perplexity .
The turf gave better counsel .
I found a groove ripped in it , about midway between the pedestal of the sphinx and the marks of my feet where , on arrival , I had struggled with the overturned machine .
There were other signs of removal about , with queer narrow footprints like those I could imagine made by a sloth .
This directed my closer attention to the pedestal .
It was , as I think I have said , of bronze .
It was not a mere block , but highly decorated with deep framed panels on either side .
I went and rapped at these .
The pedestal was hollow .
Examining the panels with care I found them discontinuous with the frames .
There were no handles or keyholes , but possibly the panels , if they were doors , as I supposed , opened from within .
One thing was clear enough to my mind .
It took no very great mental effort to infer that my Time Machine was inside that pedestal .
But how it got there was a different problem .
'I saw the heads of two orange-clad people coming through the bushes and under some blossom-covered apple-trees towards me .
I turned smiling to them and beckoned them to me .
They came , and then , pointing to the bronze pedestal , I tried to intimate my wish to open it .
But at my first gesture towards this they behaved very oddly .
I do n't know how to convey their expression to you .
Suppose you were to use a grossly improper gesture to a delicate-minded woman -- it is how she would look .
They went off as if they had received the last possible insult .
I tried a sweet-looking little chap in white next , with exactly the same result .
Somehow , his manner made me feel ashamed of myself .
But , as you know , I wanted the Time Machine , and I tried him once more .
As he turned off , like the others , my temper got the better of me .
In three strides I was after him , had him by the loose part of his robe round the neck , and began dragging him towards the sphinx .
Then I saw the horror and repugnance of his face , and all of a sudden I let him go .
'In the matter of sepulture , for instance , I could see no signs of crematoria nor anything suggestive of tombs .
But it occurred to me that , possibly , there might be cemeteries ( or crematoria ) somewhere beyond the range of my explorings .
This , again , was a question I deliberately put to myself , and my curiosity was at first entirely defeated upon the point .
The thing puzzled me , and I was led to make a further remark , which puzzled me still more : that aged and infirm among this people there were none .
'As the eastern sky grew brighter , and the light of the day came on and its vivid colouring returned upon the world once more , I scanned the view keenly .
But I saw no vestige of my white figures .
They were mere creatures of the half light .
`` They must have been ghosts , '' I said ; `` I wonder whence they dated . ''
For a queer notion of Grant Allen 's came into my head , and amused me .
If each generation die and leave ghosts , he argued , the world at last will get overcrowded with them .
On that theory they would have grown innumerable some Eight Hundred Thousand Years hence , and it was no great wonder to see four at once .
But the jest was unsatisfying , and I was thinking of these figures all the morning , until Weena 's rescue drove them out of my head .
I associated them in some indefinite way with the white animal I had startled in my first passionate search for the Time Machine .
But Weena was a pleasant substitute .
Yet all the same , they were soon destined to take far deadlier possession of my mind .
'I think I have said how much hotter than our own was the weather of this Golden Age .
I can not account for it .
It may be that the sun was hotter , or the earth nearer the sun .
It is usual to assume that the sun will go on cooling steadily in the future .
But people , unfamiliar with such speculations as those of the younger Darwin , forget that the planets must ultimately fall back one by one into the parent body .
As these catastrophes occur , the sun will blaze with renewed energy ; and it may be that some inner planet had suffered this fate .
Whatever the reason , the fact remains that the sun was very much hotter than we know it .
'Beneath my feet , then , the earth must be tunnelled enormously , and these tunnellings were the habitat of the new race .
The presence of ventilating shafts and wells along the hill slopes -- everywhere , in fact , except along the river valley -- showed how universal were its ramifications .
What so natural , then , as to assume that it was in this artificial Underworld that such work as was necessary to the comfort of the daylight race was done ?
The notion was so plausible that I at once accepted it , and went on to assume the _how_ of this splitting of the human species .
I dare say you will anticipate the shape of my theory ; though , for myself , I very soon felt that it fell far short of the truth .
'At first , proceeding from the problems of our own age , it seemed clear as daylight to me that the gradual widening of the present merely temporary and social difference between the Capitalist and the Labourer , was the key to the whole position .
No doubt it will seem grotesque enough to you -- and wildly incredible !
-- and yet even now there are existing circumstances to point that way .
There is a tendency to utilize underground space for the less ornamental purposes of civilization ; there is the Metropolitan Railway in London , for instance , there are new electric railways , there are subways , there are underground workrooms and restaurants , and they increase and multiply .
Evidently , I thought , this tendency had increased till Industry had gradually lost its birthright in the sky .
I mean that it had gone deeper and deeper into larger and ever larger underground factories , spending a still-increasing amount of its time therein , till , in the end -- !
Even now , does not an East-end worker live in such artificial conditions as practically to be cut off from the natural surface of the earth ?
'Then came troublesome doubts .
Why had the Morlocks taken my Time Machine ?
For I felt sure it was they who had taken it .
Why , too , if the Eloi were masters , could they not restore the machine to me ?
And why were they so terribly afraid of the dark ?
I proceeded , as I have said , to question Weena about this Under-world , but here again I was disappointed .
At first she would not understand my questions , and presently she refused to answer them .
She shivered as though the topic was unendurable .
And when I pressed her , perhaps a little harshly , she burst into tears .
They were the only tears , except my own , I ever saw in that Golden Age .
When I saw them I ceased abruptly to trouble about the Morlocks , and was only concerned in banishing these signs of the human inheritance from Weena 's eyes .
And very soon she was smiling and clapping her hands , while I solemnly burned a match .
'It may seem odd to you , but it was two days before I could follow up the new-found clue in what was manifestly the proper way .
I felt a peculiar shrinking from those pallid bodies .
They were just the half-bleached colour of the worms and things one sees preserved in spirit in a zoological museum .
And they were filthily cold to the touch .
Probably my shrinking was largely due to the sympathetic influence of the Eloi , whose disgust of the Morlocks I now began to appreciate .
'That climb seemed interminable to me .
With the last twenty or thirty feet of it a deadly nausea came upon me .
I had the greatest difficulty in keeping my hold .
The last few yards was a frightful struggle against this faintness .
Several times my head swam , and I felt all the sensations of falling .
At last , however , I got over the well-mouth somehow , and staggered out of the ruin into the blinding sunlight .
I fell upon my face .
Even the soil smelt sweet and clean .
Then I remember Weena kissing my hands and ears , and the voices of others among the Eloi .
Then , for a time , I was insensible .
'Now , indeed , I seemed in a worse case than before .
Hitherto , except during my night 's anguish at the loss of the Time Machine , I had felt a sustaining hope of ultimate escape , but that hope was staggered by these new discoveries .
Hitherto I had merely thought myself impeded by the childish simplicity of the little people , and by some unknown forces which I had only to understand to overcome ; but there was an altogether new element in the sickening quality of the Morlocks -- a something inhuman and malign .
Instinctively I loathed them .
Before , I had felt as a man might feel who had fallen into a pit : my concern was with the pit and how to get out of it .
Now I felt like a beast in a trap , whose enemy would come upon him soon .
'The enemy I dreaded may surprise you .
It was the darkness of the new moon .
Weena had put this into my head by some at first incomprehensible remarks about the Dark Nights .
It was not now such a very difficult problem to guess what the coming Dark Nights might mean .
The moon was on the wane : each night there was a longer interval of darkness .
And I now understood to some slight degree at least the reason of the fear of the little Upper-world people for the dark .
I wondered vaguely what foul villainy it might be that the Morlocks did under the new moon .
I felt pretty sure now that my second hypothesis was all wrong .
The Upper-world people might once have been the favoured aristocracy , and the Morlocks their mechanical servants : but that had long since passed away .
The two species that had resulted from the evolution of man were sliding down towards , or had already arrived at , an altogether new relationship .
The Eloi , like the Carolingian kings , had decayed to a mere beautiful futility .
They still possessed the earth on sufferance : since the Morlocks , subterranean for innumerable generations , had come at last to find the daylit surface intolerable .
And the Morlocks made their garments , I inferred , and maintained them in their habitual needs , perhaps through the survival of an old habit of service .
They did it as a standing horse paws with his foot , or as a man enjoys killing animals in sport : because ancient and departed necessities had impressed it on the organism .
But , clearly , the old order was already in part reversed .
The Nemesis of the delicate ones was creeping on apace .
Ages ago , thousands of generations ago , man had thrust his brother man out of the ease and the sunshine .
And now that brother was coming back changed !
Already the Eloi had begun to learn one old lesson anew .
They were becoming reacquainted with Fear .
And suddenly there came into my head the memory of the meat I had seen in the Under-world .
It seemed odd how it floated into my mind : not stirred up as it were by the current of my meditations , but coming in almost like a question from outside .
I tried to recall the form of it .
I had a vague sense of something familiar , but I could not tell what it was at the time .
'So we went on in the quiet , and the twilight deepened into night .
The clear blue of the distance faded , and one star after another came out .
The ground grew dim and the trees black .
Weena 's fears and her fatigue grew upon her .
I took her in my arms and talked to her and caressed her .
Then , as the darkness grew deeper , she put her arms round my neck , and , closing her eyes , tightly pressed her face against my shoulder .
So we went down a long slope into a valley , and there in the dimness I almost walked into a little river .
This I waded , and went up the opposite side of the valley , past a number of sleeping houses , and by a statue -- a Faun , or some such figure , _minus_ the head .
Here too were acacias .
So far I had seen nothing of the Morlocks , but it was yet early in the night , and the darker hours before the old moon rose were still to come .
'From the brow of the next hill I saw a thick wood spreading wide and black before me .
I hesitated at this .
I could see no end to it , either to the right or the left .
Feeling tired -- my feet , in particular , were very sore -- I carefully lowered Weena from my shoulder as I halted , and sat down upon the turf .
I could no longer see the Palace of Green Porcelain , and I was in doubt of my direction .
I looked into the thickness of the wood and thought of what it might hide .
Under that dense tangle of branches one would be out of sight of the stars .
Even were there no other lurking danger -- a danger I did not care to let my imagination loose upon -- there would still be all the roots to stumble over and the tree-boles to strike against .
'Then I tried to preserve myself from the horror that was coming upon me , by regarding it as a rigorous punishment of human selfishness .
Man had been content to live in ease and delight upon the labours of his fellow-man , had taken Necessity as his watchword and excuse , and in the fullness of time Necessity had come home to him .
I even tried a Carlyle-like scorn of this wretched aristocracy in decay .
But this attitude of mind was impossible .
However great their intellectual degradation , the Eloi had kept too much of the human form not to claim my sympathy , and to make me perforce a sharer in their degradation and their Fear .
'It was after that , I think , that we came to a little open court within the palace .
It was turfed , and had three fruit-trees .
So we rested and refreshed ourselves .
Towards sunset I began to consider our position .
Night was creeping upon us , and my inaccessible hiding-place had still to be found .
But that troubled me very little now .
I had in my possession a thing that was , perhaps , the best of all defences against the Morlocks -- I had matches !
I had the camphor in my pocket , too , if a blaze were needed .
It seemed to me that the best thing we could do would be to pass the night in the open , protected by a fire .
In the morning there was the getting of the Time Machine .
Towards that , as yet , I had only my iron mace .
But now , with my growing knowledge , I felt very differently towards those bronze doors .
Up to this , I had refrained from forcing them , largely because of the mystery on the other side .
They had never impressed me as being very strong , and I hoped to find my bar of iron not altogether inadequate for the work .
'While we hesitated , among the black bushes behind us , and dim against their blackness , I saw three crouching figures .
There was scrub and long grass all about us , and I did not feel safe from their insidious approach .
The forest , I calculated , was rather less than a mile across .
If we could get through it to the bare hill-side , there , as it seemed to me , was an altogether safer resting-place ; I thought that with my matches and my camphor I could contrive to keep my path illuminated through the woods .
Yet it was evident that if I was to flourish matches with my hands I should have to abandon my firewood ; so , rather reluctantly , I put it down .
And then it came into my head that I would amaze our friends behind by lighting it .
I was to discover the atrocious folly of this proceeding , but it came to my mind as an ingenious move for covering our retreat .
'She wanted to run to it and play with it .
I believe she would have cast herself into it had I not restrained her .
But I caught her up , and in spite of her struggles , plunged boldly before me into the wood .
For a little way the glare of my fire lit the path .
Looking back presently , I could see , through the crowded stems , that from my heap of sticks the blaze had spread to some bushes adjacent , and a curved line of fire was creeping up the grass of the hill .
I laughed at that , and turned again to the dark trees before me .
It was very black , and Weena clung to me convulsively , but there was still , as my eyes grew accustomed to the darkness , sufficient light for me to avoid the stems .
Overhead it was simply black , except where a gap of remote blue sky shone down upon us here and there .
I struck none of my matches because I had no hand free .
Upon my left arm I carried my little one , in my right hand I had my iron bar .
'It was time for a match .
But to get one I must put her down .
I did so , and , as I fumbled with my pocket , a struggle began in the darkness about my knees , perfectly silent on her part and with the same peculiar cooing sounds from the Morlocks .
Soft little hands , too , were creeping over my coat and back , touching even my neck .
Then the match scratched and fizzed .
I held it flaring , and saw the white backs of the Morlocks in flight amid the trees .
I hastily took a lump of camphor from my pocket , and prepared to light it as soon as the match should wane .
Then I looked at Weena .
She was lying clutching my feet and quite motionless , with her face to the ground .
With a sudden fright I stooped to her .
She seemed scarcely to breathe .
I lit the block of camphor and flung it to the ground , and as it split and flared up and drove back the Morlocks and the shadows , I knelt down and lifted her .
The wood behind seemed full of the stir and murmur of a great company !
'Now , the smoke of the fire beat over towards me , and it must have made me heavy of a sudden .
Moreover , the vapour of camphor was in the air .
My fire would not need replenishing for an hour or so .
I felt very weary after my exertion , and sat down .
The wood , too , was full of a slumbrous murmur that I did not understand .
I seemed just to nod and open my eyes .
But all was dark , and the Morlocks had their hands upon me .
Flinging off their clinging fingers I hastily felt in my pocket for the match-box , and -- it had gone !
Then they gripped and closed with me again .
In a moment I knew what had happened .
I had slept , and my fire had gone out , and the bitterness of death came over my soul .
The forest seemed full of the smell of burning wood .
I was caught by the neck , by the hair , by the arms , and pulled down .
It was indescribably horrible in the darkness to feel all these soft creatures heaped upon me .
I felt as if I was in a monstrous spider 's web .
I was overpowered , and went down .
I felt little teeth nipping at my neck .
I rolled over , and as I did so my hand came against my iron lever .
It gave me strength .
I struggled up , shaking the human rats from me , and , holding the bar short , I thrust where I judged their faces might be .
I could feel the succulent giving of flesh and bone under my blows , and for a moment I was free .
'I grieved to think how brief the dream of the human intellect had been .
It had committed suicide .
It had set itself steadfastly towards comfort and ease , a balanced society with security and permanency as its watchword , it had attained its hopes -- to come to this at last .
Once , life and property must have reached almost absolute safety .
The rich had been assured of his wealth and comfort , the toiler assured of his life and work .
No doubt in that perfect world there had been no unemployed problem , no social question left unsolved .
And a great quiet had followed .
'Now as I stood and examined it , finding a pleasure in the mere touch of the contrivance , the thing I had expected happened .
The bronze panels suddenly slid up and struck the frame with a clang .
I was in the dark -- trapped .
So the Morlocks thought .
At that I chuckled gleefully .
'So I came back .
For a long time I must have been insensible upon the machine .
The blinking succession of the days and nights was resumed , the sun got golden again , the sky blue .
I breathed with greater freedom .
The fluctuating contours of the land ebbed and flowed .
The hands spun backward upon the dials .
At last I saw again the dim shadows of houses , the evidences of decadent humanity .
These , too , changed and passed , and others came .
Presently , when the million dial was at zero , I slackened speed .
I began to recognize our own pretty and familiar architecture , the thousands hand ran back to the starting-point , the night and day flapped slower and slower .
Then the old walls of the laboratory came round me .
Very gently , now , I slowed the mechanism down .
'Then I stopped the machine , and saw about me again the old familiar laboratory , my tools , my appliances just as I had left them .
I got off the thing very shakily , and sat down upon my bench .
For several minutes I trembled violently .
Then I became calmer .
Around me was my old workshop again , exactly as it had been .
I might have slept there , and the whole thing have been a dream .
'I know , ' he said , after a pause , 'that all this will be absolutely incredible to you .
To me the one incredible thing is that I am here to-night in this old familiar room looking into your friendly faces and telling you these strange adventures . '
'Plenty of cabs at the station , ' said the Psychologist .
'Where did you really get them ? '
said the Medical Man .
No one has come out this way .
I was expecting to find him here . '
At that I understood .
At the risk of disappointing Richardson I stayed on , waiting for the Time Traveller ; waiting for the second , perhaps still stranger story , and the specimens and photographs he would bring with him .
But I am beginning now to fear that I must wait a lifetime .
The Time Traveller vanished three years ago .
And , as everybody knows now , he has never returned .
`` But they take long enough to get well , do n't they ?
There was my sister 's son , Tom , jest cut his arm with a scythe , tumbled on it in the 'ayfield , and , bless me !
he was three months tied up sir .
You 'd hardly believe it .
It 's regular given me a dread of a scythe , sir . ''
`` I can quite understand that , '' said the visitor .
The visitor remained in the parlour until four o'clock , without giving the ghost of an excuse for an intrusion .
For the most part he was quite still during that time ; it would seem he sat in the growing darkness smoking in the firelight -- perhaps dozing .
`` Good afternoon , '' said the stranger , regarding him -- as Mr. Henfrey says , with a vivid sense of the dark spectacles -- '' like a lobster . ''
`` Certainly , '' said the stranger , `` certainly -- but , as a rule , I like to be alone and undisturbed .
`` But I 'm really glad to have the clock seen to , '' he said , seeing a certain hesitation in Mr. Henfrey 's manner .
`` Very glad . ''
Mr. Henfrey had intended to apologise and withdraw , but this anticipation reassured him .
The stranger turned round with his back to the fireplace and put his hands behind his back .
`` And presently , '' he said , `` when the clock-mending is over , I think I should like to have some tea .
But not till the clock-mending is over . ''
`` And my baggage contains apparatus and appliances . ''
`` Very useful things indeed they are , sir , '' said Mrs. Hall .
After Mrs. Hall had left the room , he remained standing in front of the fire , glaring , so Mr. Henfrey puts it , at the clock-mending .
Mr. Henfrey not only took off the hands of the clock , and the face , but extracted the works ; and he tried to work in as slow and quiet and unassuming a manner as possible .
He worked with the lamp close to him , and the green shade threw a brilliant light upon his hands , and upon the frame and wheels , and left the rest of the room shadowy .
When he looked up , coloured patches swam in his eyes .
Being constitutionally of a curious nature , he had removed the works -- a quite unnecessary proceeding -- with the idea of delaying his departure and perhaps falling into conversation with the stranger .
But the stranger stood there , perfectly silent and still .
So still , it got on Henfrey 's nerves .
He felt alone in the room and looked up , and there , grey and dim , was the bandaged head and huge blue lenses staring fixedly , with a mist of green spots drifting in front of them .
It was so uncanny to Henfrey that for a minute they remained staring blankly at one another .
Then Henfrey looked down again .
One would like to say something .
Should he remark that the weather was very cold for the time of year ?
`` Why do n't you finish and go ? ''
said the rigid figure , evidently in a state of painfully suppressed rage .
`` All you 've got to do is to fix the hour-hand on its axle .
You 're simply humbugging -- ''
And again , `` Ca n't a man look at you ?
Hall very sociably pulled up .
`` What 's that ? ''
Teddy trudged on his way with his mind considerably relieved .
A couple of minutes after , he rejoined the little group that had formed outside the `` Coach and Horses . ''
There was Fearenside telling about it all over again for the second time ; there was Mrs. Hall saying his dog did n't have no business to bite her guests ; there was Huxter , the general dealer from over the road , interrogative ; and Sandy Wadgers from the forge , judicial ; besides women and children , all of them saying fatuities : `` Would n't let en bite _me_ , I knows '' ; `` 'Tas n't right _have_ such dargs '' ; `` Whad _'e_ bite 'n for , then ? ''
`` Not a bit , '' said the stranger .
`` Never broke the skin .
Hurry up with those things . ''
And directly the crates were unpacked , the stranger went to the window and set to work , not troubling in the least about the litter of straw , the fire which had gone out , the box of books outside , nor for the trunks and other luggage that had gone upstairs .
`` Perhaps you did .
But in my investigations -- my really very urgent and necessary investigations -- the slightest disturbance , the jar of a door -- I must ask you -- ''
`` This stror , sir , if I might make so bold as to remark -- ''
`` I 'll tell you something , '' said Fearenside , mysteriously .
It was late in the afternoon , and they were in the little beer-shop of Iping Hanger .
Cuss , the general practitioner , was devoured by curiosity .
The bandages excited his professional interest , the report of the thousand and one bottles aroused his jealous regard .
All through April and May he coveted an opportunity of talking to the stranger , and at last , towards Whitsuntide , he could stand it no longer , but hit upon the subscription-list for a village nurse as an excuse .
He was surprised to find that Mr. Hall did not know his guest 's name .
`` He give a name , '' said Mrs. Hall -- an assertion which was quite unfounded -- '' but I did n't rightly hear it . ''
She thought it seemed so silly not to know the man 's name .
Cuss rapped at the parlour door and entered .
There was a fairly audible imprecation from within .
`` Pardon my intrusion , '' said Cuss , and then the door closed and cut Mrs. Hall off from the rest of the conversation .
`` What 's happened ? ''
said the vicar , putting the ammonite on the loose sheets of his forth-coming sermon .
`` Had to say something .
I was beginning to feel frightened .
I could see right down it .
He extended it straight towards me , slowly , slowly -- just like that -- until the cuff was six inches from my face .
Queer thing to see an empty sleeve come at you like that !
`` Something -- exactly like a finger and thumb it felt -- nipped my nose . ''
At that he returned to his bedroom , armed himself with the most obvious weapon , the poker , and descended the staircase as noiselessly as possible .
Mrs. Bunting came out on the landing .
They heard the chink of money , and realised that the robber had found the housekeeping reserve of gold -- two pounds ten in half sovereigns altogether .
At that sound Mr. Bunting was nerved to abrupt action .
Gripping the poker firmly , he rushed into the room , closely followed by Mrs. Bunting .
cried Mr. Bunting , fiercely , and then stooped amazed .
Apparently the room was perfectly empty .
She went hastily to the doorway .
Mrs. Hall was left almost in a fainting condition in Mr. Hall's arms on the landing .
It was with the greatest difficulty that Mr. Hall and Millie , who had been roused by her scream of alarm , succeeded in getting her downstairs , and applying the restoratives customary in such cases .
Mrs. Hall appeared after an interval , a little short of breath , but all the fiercer for that .
Hall was still out .
She had deliberated over this scene , and she came holding a little tray with an unsettled bill upon it .
`` Is it your bill you 're wanting , sir ? ''
`` Why was n't my breakfast laid ?
Why have n't you prepared my meals and answered my bell ?
Do you think I live without eating ? ''
`` You told me three days ago that you had n't anything but a sovereign 's worth of silver upon you . ''
`` That I wonder where you found it , '' said Mrs. Hall .
`` And before I take any bills or get any breakfasts , or do any such things whatsoever , you got to tell me one or two things I do n't understand , and what nobody do n't understand , and what everybody is very anxious to understand .
I want to know what you been doing t'my chair upstairs , and I want to know how 't is your room was empty , and how you got in again .
Them as stops in this house comes in by the doors -- that 's the rule of the house , and that you _didn't_ do , and what I want to know is how you _did_ come in .
And I want to know -- ''
Suddenly the stranger raised his gloved hands clenched , stamped his foot , and said , `` Stop ! ''
with such extraordinary violence that he silenced her instantly .
It was worse than anything .
Mrs. Hall , standing open-mouthed and horror-struck , shrieked at what she saw , and made for the door of the house .
Everyone began to move .
They were prepared for scars , disfigurements , tangible horrors , but nothing !
The bandages and false hair flew across the passage into the bar , making a hobbledehoy jump to avoid them .
Everyone tumbled on everyone else down the steps .
For the man who stood there shouting some incoherent explanation , was a solid gesticulating figure up to the coat-collar of him , and then -- nothingness , no visible thing at all !
It was the strangest thing in the world to hear that voice coming as if out of empty space , but the Sussex peasants are perhaps the most matter-of-fact people under the sun .
Jaffers got up also and produced a pair of handcuffs .
said Huxter , suddenly , `` that 's not a man at all .
It 's just empty clothes .
You can see down his collar and the linings of his clothes .
I could put my arm -- ''
The suit of clothes , now all unbuttoned and hanging loosely upon its unseen supports , stood up , arms akimbo .
`` It 's the regular thing , '' said Jaffers .
`` It 's a beast of a country , '' said the Voice .
`` And pigs for people . ''
`` Peewit , indeed ! ''
said Mr. Thomas Marvel .
`` This ai n't no time for foolery . ''
The down was desolate , east and west , north and south ; the road with its shallow ditches and white bordering stakes , ran smooth and empty north and south , and , save for that peewit , the blue sky was empty too .
`` So help me , '' said Mr. Thomas Marvel , shuffling his coat on to his shoulders again .
`` It 's the drink !
I might ha ' known . ''
`` Neither one thing nor the other , '' said the Voice .
The Voice made no answer .
Whizz came a flint , apparently out of the air , and missed Mr. Marvel 's shoulder by a hair's-breadth .
Mr. Marvel , turning , saw a flint jerk up into the air , trace a complicated path , hang for a moment , and then fling at his feet with almost invisible rapidity .
He was too amazed to dodge .
Whizz it came , and ricochetted from a bare toe into the ditch .
Mr. Thomas Marvel jumped a foot and howled aloud .
Then he started to run , tripped over an unseen obstacle , and came head over heels into a sitting position .
Mr. Marvel by way of reply struggled to his feet , and was immediately rolled over again .
He lay quiet for a moment .
`` If you struggle any more , '' said the Voice , `` I shall throw the flint at your head . ''
`` But whereabouts ? ''
`` I am just a human being -- solid , needing food and drink , needing covering too -- But I 'm invisible .
`` What I want to say at present is this : I need help .
I have come to that -- I came upon you suddenly .
I was wandering , mad with rage , naked , impotent .
I could have murdered .
And I saw you -- ''
`` I 've chosen you , '' said the Voice .
`` You are the only man except some of those fools down there , who knows there is such a thing as an invisible man .
You have to be my helper .
Help me -- and I will do great things for you .
An invisible man is a man of power . ''
He stopped for a moment to sneeze violently .
Haysman 's meadow was gay with a tent , in which Mrs. Bunting and other ladies were preparing tea , while , without , the Sunday-school children ran races and played games under the noisy guidance of the curate and the Misses Cuss and Sackbut .
No doubt there was a slight uneasiness in the air , but people for the most part had the sense to conceal whatever imaginative qualms they experienced .
On the village green an inclined strong [ rope ? ]
, down which , clinging the while to a pulley-swung handle , one could be hurled violently against a sack at the other end , came in for considerable favour among the adolescents , as also did the swings and the cocoanut shies .
There was also promenading , and the steam organ attached to a small roundabout filled the air with a pungent flavour of oil and with equally pungent music .
Members of the club , who had attended church in the morning , were splendid in badges of pink and green , and some of the gayer-minded had also adorned their bowler hats with brilliant-coloured favours of ribbon .
Old Fletcher , whose conceptions of holiday-making were severe , was visible through the jasmine about his window or through the open door ( whichever way you chose to look ) , poised delicately on a plank supported on two chairs , and whitewashing the ceiling of his front room .
All this Mr. Huxter saw over the canisters of the tobacco window , and the singularity of the man 's behaviour prompted him to maintain his observation .
IN THE `` COACH AND HORSES ''
`` A sailor , I should judge , '' said Mr. Bunting .
`` Amusing fellows , they are .
A nautical term , referring to his getting back out of the room , I suppose . ''
`` I daresay so , '' said Cuss .
`` My nerves are all loose to-day .
It quite made me jump -- the door opening like that . ''
Someone sniffed as he did so .
`` One thing is indisputable , '' said Bunting , drawing up a chair next to that of Cuss .
`` There certainly have been very strange things happen in Iping during the last few days -- very strange .
I can not of course believe in this absurd invisibility story -- ''
He pointed to the middle of the page .
Mr. Bunting flushed slightly and brought his face nearer , apparently finding some difficulty with his glasses .
Suddenly he became aware of a strange feeling at the nape of his neck .
He tried to raise his head , and encountered an immovable resistance .
The feeling was a curious pressure , the grip of a heavy , firm hand , and it bore his chin irresistibly to the table .
`` Do n't move , little men , '' whispered a voice , `` or I'll brain you both ! ''
He looked into the face of Cuss , close to his own , and each saw a horrified reflection of his own sickly astonishment .
`` I 'm sorry to handle you so roughly , '' said the Voice , `` but it's unavoidable . ''
It is unavoidable that at this point the narrative should break off again , for a certain very painful reason that will presently be apparent .
While these things were going on in the parlour , and while Mr. Huxter was watching Mr. Marvel smoking his pipe against the gate , not a dozen yards away were Mr. Hall and Teddy Henfrey discussing in a state of cloudy puzzlement the one Iping topic .
`` You all right thur ? ''
asked Hall , rapping .
`` You -- all -- right thur ? ''
asked Mr. Hall , sharply , again .
`` 'Disgraceful , ' '' said Mr. Henfrey .
`` I heard it -- distinct . ''
`` Who 's that speaking now ? ''
Mrs. Hall appeared behind the bar .
Hall made gestures of silence and invitation .
This aroused Mrs. Hall 's wifely opposition .
`` What yer listenin ' there for , Hall ? ''
`` Ai n't you nothin ' better to do -- busy day like this ? ''
At first she refused to see anything in what they had heard at all .
Then she insisted on Hall keeping silence , while Henfrey told her his story .
She was inclined to think the whole business nonsense -- perhaps they were just moving the furniture about .
`` I heerd'n say 'disgraceful ' ; _that_ I did , '' said Hall .
`` 'Tend to him in a minute ! ''
he cried to Henfrey as he passed the prostrate Huxter , and , coming round the corner to join the tumult , was promptly knocked off his feet into an indecorous sprawl .
Somebody in full flight trod heavily on his finger .
He yelled , struggled to regain his feet , was knocked against and thrown on all fours again , and became aware that he was involved not in a capture , but a rout .
Everyone was running back to the village .
He rose again and was hit severely behind the ear .
He staggered and set off back to the `` Coach and Horses '' forthwith , leaping over the deserted Huxter , who was now sitting up , on his way .
In another moment he was out in the yard .
From the moment when the Invisible Man screamed with rage and Mr. Bunting made his memorable flight up the village , it became impossible to give a consecutive account of affairs in Iping .
Possibly the Invisible Man 's original intention was simply to cover Marvel 's retreat with the clothes and books .
But his temper , at no time very good , seems to have gone completely at some chance blow , and forthwith he set to smiting and overthrowing , for the mere satisfaction of hurting .
`` It 's bad enough to let these floundering yokels explode my little secret , without _your_ cutting off with my books .
It 's lucky for some of them they cut and ran when they did !
Here am I ... No one knew I was invisible !
And now what am I to do ? ''
`` You are , '' said the Voice .
`` I wish I was dead , '' said Marvel .
`` What do I make by it ? ''
he began again in a tone of unendurable wrong .
`` I tell you , sir , I 'm not the man for it .
Respectfully -- but it _is_ so -- ''
Ten o'clock the next morning found Mr. Marvel , unshaven , dirty , and travel-stained , sitting with the books beside him and his hands deep in his pockets , looking very weary , nervous , and uncomfortable , and inflating his cheeks at infrequent intervals , on the bench outside a little inn on the outskirts of Port Stowe .
Beside him were the books , but now they were tied with string .
The bundle had been abandoned in the pine-woods beyond Bramblehurst , in accordance with a change in the plans of the Invisible Man .
Mr. Marvel sat on the bench , and although no one took the slightest notice of him , his agitation remained at fever heat .
His hands would go ever and again to his various pockets with a curious nervous fumbling .
`` Just seasonable weather for the time of year , '' said the mariner , taking no denial .
`` Neither , '' said the mariner .
said Mr. Marvel , starting .
`` An Invisible Man ! ''
`` And what 's _he_ been up to ? ''
`` He started there .
And where he came from , nobody do n't seem to know .
Here it is : 'Pe-culiar Story from Iping . '
And it says in this paper that the evidence is extra-ordinary strong -- extra-ordinary . ''
`` But then , it 's an extra-ordinary story .
There is a clergyman and a medical gent witnesses -- saw 'im all right and proper -- or leastways did n't see 'im .
He was staying , it says , at the 'Coach an ' Horses , ' and no one do n't seem to have been aware of his misfortune , it says , aware of his misfortune , until in an Altercation in the inn , it says , his bandages on his head was torn off .
It was then ob-served that his head was invisible .
Attempts were At Once made to secure him , but casting off his garments , it says , he succeeded in escaping , but not until after a desperate struggle , in which he had inflicted serious injuries , it says , on our worthy and able constable , Mr. J .
Pretty straight story , eh ?
Names and everything . ''
He nodded his head slowly .
`` It makes me regular uncomfortable , the bare thought of that chap running about the country !
He is at present At Large , and from certain evidence it is supposed that he has -- taken -- _took_ , I suppose they mean -- the road to Port Stowe .
You see we 're right _in_ it !
None of your American wonders , this time .
And just think of the things he might do !
Where 'd you be , if he took a drop over and above , and had a fancy to go for you ?
Suppose he wants to rob -- who can prevent him ?
He can trespass , he can burgle , he could walk through a cordon of policemen as easy as me or you could give the slip to a blind man !
For these here blind chaps hear uncommon sharp , I 'm told .
And wherever there was liquor he fancied -- ''
`` Yes , '' said Mr. Marvel .
`` The fact is , '' began Mr. Marvel eagerly in a confidential undertone .
Suddenly his expression changed marvellously .
He rose stiffly in his seat .
His face was eloquent of physical suffering .
`` Toothache , '' said Mr. Marvel , and put his hand to his ear .
He caught hold of his books .
`` I must be getting on , I think , '' he said .
He edged in a curious way along the seat away from his interlocutor .
`` But you was just a-going to tell me about this here Invisible Man ! ''
Mr. Marvel seemed to consult with himself .
`` Hoax , '' said a Voice .
`` It 's a hoax , '' said Mr. Marvel .
`` But it 's in the paper , '' said the mariner .
`` I do , '' said Mr. Marvel .
`` Then why did you let me go on and tell you all this blarsted stuff , then ?
What d'yer mean by letting a man make a fool of himself like that for ?
The story of the flying money was true .
And all about that neighbourhood , even from the august London and Country Banking Company , from the tills of shops and inns -- doors standing that sunny weather entirely open -- money had been quietly and dexterously making off that day in handfuls and rouleaux , floating quietly along by walls and shady places , dodging quickly from the approaching eyes of men .
And it had , though no man had traced it , invariably ended its mysterious flight in the pocket of that agitated gentleman in the obsolete silk hat , sitting outside the little inn on the outskirts of Port Stowe .
`` The Invisible Man is coming !
The Invisible Man ! ''
IN THE `` JOLLY CRICKETERS ''
`` Where 's he gone ? ''
cried the man with the beard .
`` This way , '' said the policeman , stepping into the yard and stopping .
Dr. Kemp had continued writing in his study until the shots aroused him .
Crack , crack , crack , they came one after the other .
He looked at his own hand .
It was quite clean , and then he remembered that the door of his room had been open when he came down from his study , and that consequently he had not touched the handle at all .
He went straight into his room , his face quite calm -- perhaps a trifle more resolute than usual .
His glance , wandering inquisitively , fell on the bed .
On the counterpane was a mess of blood , and the sheet had been torn .
He had not noticed this before because he had walked straight to the dressing-table .
On the further side the bedclothes were depressed as if someone had been recently sitting there .
He stared at this in amazement .
It was an empty bandage , a bandage properly tied but quite empty .
He would have advanced to grasp it , but a touch arrested him , and a voice speaking quite close to him .
`` Keep your nerve , '' said the Voice .
`` I 'm an Invisible Man . ''
`` I am an Invisible Man , '' repeated the Voice .
`` Keep steady , Kemp , for God 's sake !
I want help badly .
A frantic desire to free himself took possession of Kemp .
The hand of the bandaged arm gripped his shoulder , and he was suddenly tripped and flung backwards upon the bed .
He opened his mouth to shout , and the corner of the sheet was thrust between his teeth .
The Invisible Man had him down grimly , but his arms were free and he struck and tried to kick savagely .
`` Let me get up , '' said Kemp .
`` I 'll stop where I am .
And let me sit quiet for a minute . ''
He sat up and felt his neck .
Kemp stared at the bandage as it moved across the room , then saw a basket chair dragged across the floor and come to rest near the bed .
It creaked , and the seat was depressed the quarter of an inch or so .
He rubbed his eyes and felt his neck again .
`` This beats ghosts , '' he said , and laughed stupidly .
`` That 's better .
Thank Heaven , you 're getting sensible ! ''
`` Or silly , '' said Kemp , and knuckled his eyes .
`` I demonstrated conclusively this morning , '' began Kemp , `` that invisibility -- ''
But this is the insanest thing I ever was in , in my life ! ''
`` I suppose that wrist is all right , '' said Kemp .
`` I 'll see what there is to eat downstairs , '' said Kemp .
`` Not much , I 'm afraid . ''
`` I 'm sorry , '' said the Invisible Man , `` if I can not tell you all that I have done to-night .
But I am worn out .
It 's grotesque , no doubt .
But believe me , Kemp , in spite of your arguments of this morning , it is quite a possible thing .
I have made a discovery .
I meant to keep it to myself .
I must have a partner .
We can do such things ...
Now , Kemp , I feel as though I must sleep or perish . ''
`` He is invisible ! ''
`` And it reads like rage growing to mania !
The things he may do !
The things he may do !
And he's upstairs free as the air .
What on earth ought I to do ? ''
`` Fit of temper , '' said the Invisible Man .
`` Forgot this arm ; and it's sore . ''
`` Before we can do anything else , '' said Kemp , `` I must understand a little more about this invisibility of yours . ''
He had sat down , after one nervous glance out of the window , with the air of a man who has talking to do .
His doubts of the sanity of the entire business flashed and vanished again as he looked across to where Griffin sat at the breakfast-table -- a headless , handless dressing-gown , wiping unseen lips on a miraculously held serviette .
`` I went there after I left London .
You know I dropped medicine and took up physics ?
No ; well , I did .
_Light_ fascinated me . ''
`` But I went to work -- like a slave .
And I had hardly worked and thought about the matter six months before light came through one of the meshes suddenly -- blindingly !
I found a general principle of pigments and refraction -- a formula , a geometrical expression involving four dimensions .
Fools , common men , even common mathematicians , do not know anything of what some general expression may mean to the student of molecular physics .
In the books -- the books that tramp has hidden -- there are marvels , miracles !
But this was not a method , it was an idea , that might lead to a method by which it would be possible , without changing any other property of matter -- except , in some instances colours -- to lower the refractive index of a substance , solid or liquid , to that of air -- so far as all practical purposes are concerned . ''
`` No , '' said Griffin .
`` He 's more transparent ! ''
Kemp gave a cry of incredulous amazement .
The Invisible Man rose and began pacing the little study .
`` You may well exclaim .
I remember that night .
It was late at night -- in the daytime one was bothered with the gaping , silly students -- and I worked then sometimes till dawn .
It came suddenly , splendid and complete in my mind .
I was alone ; the laboratory was still , with the tall lights burning brightly and silently .
In all my great moments I have been alone .
'One could make an animal -- a tissue -- transparent !
One could make it invisible !
All except the pigments -- I could be invisible ! '
I said , suddenly realising what it meant to be an albino with such knowledge .
I left the filtering I was doing , and went and stared out of the great window at the stars .
'I could be invisible ! '
`` Money , '' said the Invisible Man , and went again to stare out of the window .
AT THE HOUSE IN GREAT PORTLAND STREET
`` I could scarcely believe I had done it .
I put my hand into the emptiness , and there was the thing as solid as ever .
I felt it awkwardly , and threw it on the floor .
I had a little trouble finding it again .
`` In two particulars .
These were the claws and the pigment stuff , what is it ?
-- at the back of the eye in a cat .
`` It was night outside long before the business was over , and nothing was to be seen but the dim eyes and the claws .
I stopped the gas engine , felt for and stroked the beast , which was still insensible , and then , being tired , left it sleeping on the invisible pillow and went to bed .
I found it hard to sleep .
I lay awake thinking weak aimless stuff , going over the experiment over and over again , or dreaming feverishly of things growing misty and vanishing about me , until everything , the ground I stood on , vanished , and so I came to that sickly falling nightmare one gets .
About two , the cat began miaowing about the room .
I tried to hush it by talking to it , and then I decided to turn it out .
I remember the shock I had when striking a light -- there were just the round eyes shining green -- and nothing round them .
I would have given it milk , but I had n't any .
It would n't be quiet , it just sat down and miaowed at the door .
I tried to catch it , with an idea of putting it out of the window , but it would n't be caught , it vanished .
Then it began miaowing in different parts of the room .
At last I opened the window and made a bustle .
I suppose it went out at last .
I never saw any more of it .
`` All I could think clearly was that the thing had to be carried through ; the fixed idea still ruled me .
And soon , for the money I had was almost exhausted .
I looked about me at the hillside , with children playing and girls watching them , and tried to think of all the fantastic advantages an invisible man would have in the world .
After a time I crawled home , took some food and a strong dose of strychnine , and went to sleep in my clothes on my unmade bed .
Strychnine is a grand tonic , Kemp , to take the flabbiness out of a man . ''
`` I awoke vastly invigorated and rather irritable .
`` I know the stuff . ''
`` But this brought matters to a crisis .
I did not know what he would do , nor even what he had the power to do .
To move to fresh apartments would have meant delay ; altogether I had barely twenty pounds left in the world , for the most part in a bank -- and I could not afford that .
Then there would be an inquiry , the sacking of my room .
`` Fired the house .
It was the only way to cover my trail -- and no doubt it was insured .
I slipped the bolts of the front door quietly and went out into the street .
I was invisible , and I was only just beginning to realise the extraordinary advantage my invisibility gave me .
My head was already teeming with plans of all the wild and wonderful things I had now impunity to do . ''
`` I did not feel safe there , however ; people were going to and fro , and I prowled restlessly about until I came upon a huge section in an upper floor containing multitudes of bedsteads , and over these I clambered , and found a resting-place at last among a huge pile of folded flock mattresses .
The place was already lit up and agreeably warm , and I decided to remain where I was , keeping a cautious eye on the two or three sets of shopmen and customers who were meandering through the place , until closing time came .
Then I should be able , I thought , to rob the place for food and clothing , and disguised , prowl through it and examine its resources , perhaps sleep on some of the bedding .
That seemed an acceptable plan .
My idea was to procure clothing to make myself a muffled but acceptable figure , to get money , and then to recover my books and parcels where they awaited me , take a lodging somewhere and elaborate plans for the complete realisation of the advantages my invisibility gave me ( as I still imagined ) over my fellow-men .
`` Closing time arrived quickly enough .
It could not have been more than an hour after I took up my position on the mattresses before I noticed the blinds of the windows being drawn , and customers being marched doorward .
And then a number of brisk young men began with remarkable alacrity to tidy up the goods that remained disturbed .
I left my lair as the crowds diminished , and prowled cautiously out into the less desolate parts of the shop .
I was really surprised to observe how rapidly the young men and women whipped away the goods displayed for sale during the day .
All the boxes of goods , the hanging fabrics , the festoons of lace , the boxes of sweets in the grocery section , the displays of this and that , were being whipped down , folded up , slapped into tidy receptacles , and everything that could not be taken down and put away had sheets of some coarse stuff like sacking flung over them .
Finally all the chairs were turned up on to the counters , leaving the floor clear .
Directly each of these young people had done , he or she made promptly for the door with such an expression of animation as I have rarely observed in a shop assistant before .
Then came a lot of youngsters scattering sawdust and carrying pails and brooms .
I had to dodge to get out of the way , and as it was , my ankle got stung with the sawdust .
For some time , wandering through the swathed and darkened departments , I could hear the brooms at work .
And at last a good hour or more after the shop had been closed , came a noise of locking doors .
Silence came upon the place , and I found myself wandering through the vast and intricate shops , galleries , show-rooms of the place , alone .
It was very still ; in one place I remember passing near one of the Tottenham Court Road entrances and listening to the tapping of boot-heels of the passers-by .
`` Lying on the ground , I felt scared out of my wits .
But -- odd as it may seem -- it did not occur to me at the moment to take off my clothes as I should have done .
I had made up my mind , I suppose , to get away in them , and that ruled me .
And then down the vista of the counters came a bawling of 'Here he is ! '
`` It was a queer little room , poorly furnished and with a number of big masks in the corner .
On the table was his belated breakfast , and it was a confoundedly exasperating thing for me , Kemp , to have to sniff his coffee and stand watching while he came in and resumed his meal .
And his table manners were irritating .
Three doors opened into the little room , one going upstairs and one down , but they were all shut .
I could not get out of the room while he was there ; I could scarcely move because of his alertness , and there was a draught down my back .
Twice I strangled a sneeze just in time .
`` The spectacular quality of my sensations was curious and novel , but for all that I was heartily tired and angry long before he had done his eating .
But at last he made an end and putting his beggarly crockery on the black tin tray upon which he had had his teapot , and gathering all the crumbs up on the mustard stained cloth , he took the whole lot of things after him .
His burden prevented his shutting the door behind him -- as he would have done ; I never saw such a man for shutting doors -- and I followed him into a very dirty underground kitchen and scullery .
I had the pleasure of seeing him begin to wash up , and then , finding no good in keeping down there , and the brick floor being cold on my feet , I returned upstairs and sat in his chair by the fire .
It was burning low , and scarcely thinking , I put on a little coal .
The noise of this brought him up at once , and he stood aglare .
He peered about the room and was within an ace of touching me .
Even after that examination , he scarcely seemed satisfied .
He stopped in the doorway and took a final inspection before he went down .
`` Made a sort of bag of it .
It was rather a good idea to keep the idiot scared and quiet , and a devilish hard thing to get out of -- head away from the string .
My dear Kemp , it 's no good your sitting glaring as though I was a murderer .
It had to be done .
He had his revolver .
If once he saw me he would be able to describe me -- ''
`` I had thought of painting and powdering my face and all that there was to show of me , in order to render myself visible , but the disadvantage of this lay in the fact that I should require turpentine and other appliances and a considerable amount of time before I could vanish again .
Finally I chose a mask of the better type , slightly grotesque but not more so than many human beings , dark glasses , greyish whiskers , and a wig .
I could find no underclothing , but that I could buy subsequently , and for the time I swathed myself in calico dominoes and some white cashmere scarfs .
I could find no socks , but the hunchback 's boots were rather a loose fit and sufficed .
In a desk in the shop were three sovereigns and about thirty shillings ' worth of silver , and in a locked cupboard I burst in the inner room were eight pounds in gold .
I could go forth into the world again , equipped .
He became silent and went to the window and stared out .
`` Not quite so badly , '' said Kemp , `` but I can imagine it . ''
`` I went there to work .
I had one hope .
It was a half idea !
I have it still .
It is a full blown idea now .
A way of getting back !
Of restoring what I have done .
When I have done all I mean to do invisibly .
And that is what I chiefly want to talk to you about now . ''
`` You went straight to Iping ? ''
`` But now , '' said Kemp , with a side glance out of the window , `` what are we to do ? ''
`` I was going to clear out of the country .
But I have altered that plan rather since seeing you .
I thought it would be wise , now the weather is hot and invisibility possible , to make for the South .
Especially as my secret was known , and everyone would be on the lookout for a masked and muffled man .
You have a line of steamers from here to France .
My idea was to get aboard one and run the risks of the passage .
Thence I could go by train into Spain , or else get to Algiers .
It would not be difficult .
There a man might always be invisible -- and yet live .
I was using that tramp as a money box and luggage carrier , until I decided how to get my books and things sent over to meet me . ''
`` No , '' said the Invisible Man , and thought .
`` Blundering into your house , Kemp , '' he said , `` changes all my plans .
For you are a man that can understand .
In spite of all that has happened , in spite of this publicity , of the loss of my books , of what I have suffered , there still remain great possibilities , huge possibilities -- ''
`` Not a soul . ''
Now -- '' The Invisible Man stood up , and sticking his arms akimbo began to pace the study .
`` It is killing we must do , '' repeated Kemp .
`` I 'm listening to your plan , Griffin , but I 'm not agreeing , mind .
`` Not wanton killing , but a judicious slaying .
The point is , they know there is an Invisible Man -- as well as we know there is an Invisible Man .
And that Invisible Man , Kemp , must now establish a Reign of Terror .
Yes ; no doubt it 's startling .
But I mean it .
A Reign of Terror .
He must take some town like your Burdock and terrify and dominate it .
He must issue his orders .
He can do that in a thousand ways -- scraps of paper thrust under doors would suffice .
And all who disobey his orders he must kill , and kill all who would defend them . ''
`` Nonsense , '' said Kemp .
As it opened , there came a sound of hurrying feet downstairs and voices .
Halfway up the staircase was Colonel Adye , the recipient of Kemp's letter , the chief of the Burdock police .
He was staring aghast at the sudden appearance of Kemp , followed by the extraordinary sight of clothing tossing empty in the air .
He saw Kemp felled , and struggling to his feet .
He saw him rush forward , and go down again , felled like an ox .
He rolled over and sat up staring .
He saw , staggering down the staircase , Kemp , dusty and disheveled , one side of his face white from a blow , his lip bleeding , and a pink dressing-gown and some underclothing held in his arms .
In another moment Adye was leading the way downstairs .
They found the front door open and the policemen standing outside staring at empty air .
`` He 's got away , sir , '' said one .
`` We must go to the central station at once , '' said Adye .
`` One of you go on down and get a cab to come up and meet us -- quickly .
And now , Kemp , what else ? ''
If our supposition that the Invisible Man 's refuge was the Hintondean thickets , then we must suppose that in the early afternoon he sallied out again bent upon some project that involved the use of a weapon .
We can not know what the project was , but the evidence that he had the iron rod in hand before he met Wicksteed is to me at least overwhelming .
No doubt the Invisible Man could easily have distanced his middle-aged pursuer under ordinary circumstances , but the position in which Wicksteed 's body was found suggests that he had the ill luck to drive his quarry into a corner between a drift of stinging nettles and the gravel pit .
To those who appreciate the extraordinary irascibility of the Invisible Man , the rest of the encounter will be easy to imagine .
But this is pure hypothesis .
The only undeniable facts -- for stories of children are often unreliable -- are the discovery of Wicksteed's body , done to death , and of the blood-stained iron rod flung among the nettles .
The abandonment of the rod by Griffin , suggests that in the emotional excitement of the affair , the purpose for which he took it -- if he had a purpose -- was abandoned .
He was certainly an intensely egotistical and unfeeling man , but the sight of his victim , his first victim , bloody and pitiful at his feet , may have released some long pent fountain of remorse which for a time may have flooded whatever scheme of action he had contrived .
Kemp read this letter twice , `` It 's no hoax , '' he said .
`` That's his voice !
And he means it . ''
He stood at the window staring at the hot hillside .
`` He must get food every day -- and I do n't envy him .
Did he really sleep last night ?
Out in the open somewhere -- secure from collisions .
I wish we could get some good cold wet weather instead of the heat .
Kemp released the chain , and Adye entered through as narrow an opening as possible .
He stood in the hall , looking with infinite relief at Kemp refastening the door .
`` Note was snatched out of her hand .
She 's down at the station .
He 's close here .
What was it about ? ''
`` Look here ! ''
said Kemp , and led the way into his study .
He handed Adye the Invisible Man 's letter .
Adye read it and whistled softly .
`` And you -- ? ''
`` He 'll clear out , '' said Adye .
Kemp 's hand went to his pocket .
`` I haven't one -- at least to spare . ''
`` Now for the door , '' said Adye .
said Adye , sitting up .
`` Get up , '' said the Voice .
`` I 've got no quarrel with you , '' said the Voice .
For a space Kemp remained staring at the quiet carelessness of Adye 's attitude .
The afternoon was very hot and still , nothing seemed stirring in all the world save a couple of yellow butterflies chasing each other through the shrubbery between the house and the road gate .
Adye lay on the lawn near the gate .
The blinds of all the villas down the hill-road were drawn , but in one little green summer-house was a white figure , apparently an old man asleep .
Kemp scrutinised the surroundings of the house for a glimpse of the revolver , but it had vanished .
His eyes came back to Adye .
The game was opening well .
said one of the policemen .
said one policeman , ducked , and caught the axe on his poker .
The pistol snapped its penultimate shot and ripped a valuable Sidney Cooper .
The second policeman brought his poker down on the little weapon , as one might knock down a wasp , and sent it rattling to the floor .
`` Do n't know .
I 've hit him .
He 's standing somewhere in the hall .
Unless he 's slipped past you .
Doctor Kemp -- sir . ''
The second policeman began struggling to his feet .
Suddenly the faint pad of bare feet on the kitchen stairs could be heard .
cried the first policeman , and incontinently flung his poker .
It smashed a little gas bracket .
Mr. Heelas , Mr. Kemp 's nearest neighbour among the villa holders , was asleep in his summer house when the siege of Kemp 's house began .
Mr. Heelas was one of the sturdy minority who refused to believe `` in all this nonsense '' about an Invisible Man .
His wife , however , as he was subsequently to be reminded , did .
He insisted upon walking about his garden just as if nothing was the matter , and he went to sleep in the afternoon in accordance with the custom of years .
He slept through the smashing of the windows , and then woke up suddenly with a curious persuasion of something wrong .
He looked across at Kemp 's house , rubbed his eyes and looked again .
Then he put his feet to the ground , and sat listening .
He said he was damned , but still the strange thing was visible .
The house looked as though it had been deserted for weeks -- after a violent riot .
Every window was broken , and every window , save those of the belvedere study , was blinded by the internal shutters .
For the first time in his life Kemp discovered that the hill-road was indescribably vast and desolate , and that the beginnings of the town far below at the hill foot were strangely remote .
Never had there been a slower or more painful method of progression than running .
All the gaunt villas , sleeping in the afternoon sun , looked locked and barred ; no doubt they were locked and barred -- by his own orders .
But at any rate they might have kept a lookout for an eventuality like this !
The town was rising up now , the sea had dropped out of sight behind it , and people down below were stirring .
A tram was just arriving at the hill foot .
Beyond that was the police station .
Was that footsteps he heard behind him ?
In another second there was a simultaneous rush upon the struggle , and a stranger coming into the road suddenly might have thought an exceptionally savage game of Rugby football was in progress .
And there was no shouting after Kemp 's cry -- only a sound of blows and feet and heavy breathing .
The education of Mr. Polly did not follow this picture very closely .
He went for some time to a National School , which was run on severely economical lines to keep down the rates by a largely untrained staff , he was set sums to do that he did not understand , and that no one made him understand , he was made to read the catechism and Bible with the utmost industry and an entire disregard of punctuation or significance , and caused to imitate writing copies and drawing copies , and given object lessons upon sealing wax and silk-worms and potato bugs and ginger and iron and such like things , and taught various other subjects his mind refused to entertain , and afterwards , when he was about twelve , he was jerked by his parent to `` finish off '' in a private school of dingy aspect and still dingier pretensions , where there were no object lessons , and the studies of book-keeping and French were pursued ( but never effectually overtaken ) under the guidance of an elderly gentleman who wore a nondescript gown and took snuff , wrote copperplate , explained nothing , and used a cane with remarkable dexterity and gusto .
Mr. Polly went into the National School at six and he left the private school at fourteen , and by that time his mind was in much the same state that you would be in , dear reader , if you were operated upon for appendicitis by a well-meaning , boldly enterprising , but rather over-worked and under-paid butcher boy , who was superseded towards the climax of the operation by a left-handed clerk of high principles but intemperate habits , -- that is to say , it was in a thorough mess .
The nice little curiosities and willingnesses of a child were in a jumbled and thwarted condition , hacked and cut about -- the operators had left , so to speak , all their sponges and ligatures in the mangled confusion -- and Mr. Polly had lost much of his natural confidence , so far as figures and sciences and languages and the possibilities of learning things were concerned .
He thought of the present world no longer as a wonderland of experiences , but as geography and history , as the repeating of names that were hard to pronounce , and lists of products and populations and heights and lengths , and as lists and dates -- oh !
He thought of religion as the recital of more or less incomprehensible words that were hard to remember , and of the Divinity as of a limitless Being having the nature of a schoolmaster and making infinite rules , known and unknown rules , that were always ruthlessly enforced , and with an infinite capacity for punishment and , most horrible of all to think of !
limitless powers of espial .
( So to the best of his ability he did not think of that unrelenting eye . )
He was uncertain about the spelling and pronunciation of most of the words in our beautiful but abundant and perplexing tongue , -- that especially was a pity because words attracted him , and under happier conditions he might have used them well -- he was always doubtful whether it was eight sevens or nine eights that was sixty-three -- ( he knew no method for settling the difficulty ) and he thought the merit of a drawing consisted in the care with which it was `` lined in . ''
`` Lining in '' bored him beyond measure .
But the _indigestions_ of mind and body that were to play so large a part in his subsequent career were still only beginning .
His liver and his gastric juice , his wonder and imagination kept up a fight against the things that threatened to overwhelm soul and body together .
Outside the regions devastated by the school curriculum he was still intensely curious .
He had cheerful phases of enterprise , and about thirteen he suddenly discovered reading and its joys .
He began to read stories voraciously , and books of travel , provided they were also adventurous .
He got these chiefly from the local institute , and he also `` took in , '' irregularly but thoroughly , one of those inspiring weeklies that dull people used to call `` penny dreadfuls , '' admirable weeklies crammed with imagination that the cheap boys ' `` comics '' of to-day have replaced .
At fourteen , when he emerged from the valley of the shadow of education , there survived something , indeed it survived still , obscured and thwarted , at five and thirty , that pointed -- not with a visible and prevailing finger like the finger of that beautiful woman in the picture , but pointed nevertheless -- to the idea that there was interest and happiness in the world .
Deep in the being of Mr. Polly , deep in that darkness , like a creature which has been beaten about the head and left for dead but still lives , crawled a persuasion that over and above the things that are jolly and `` bits of all right , '' there was beauty , there was delight , that somewhere -- magically inaccessible perhaps , but still somewhere , were pure and easy and joyous states of body and mind .
He would read tales about hunters and explorers , and imagine himself riding mustangs as fleet as the wind across the prairies of Western America , or coming as a conquering and adored white man into the swarming villages of Central Africa .
He shot bears with a revolver -- a cigarette in the other hand -- and made a necklace of their teeth and claws for the chief 's beautiful young daughter .
Also he killed a lion with a pointed stake , stabbing through the beast 's heart as it stood over him .
His copy books towards the end foreshadowed his destiny and took the form of commercial documents .
`` _Dear Sir_ , '' they ran , `` _Referring to your esteemed order of the 26th ult.
, we beg to inform you_ , '' and so on .
`` It 's time that dratted boy did something for a living . ''
To Platt and Parsons he affected an attitude of seasoned depravity towards womankind .
Platt and Parsons were his contemporary apprentices in departments of the drapery shop , and the three were drawn together into a close friendship by the fact that all their names began with P. They decided they were the Three Ps , and went about together of an evening with the bearing of desperate dogs .
Sometimes , when they had money , they went into public houses and had drinks .
Then they would become more desperate than ever , and walk along the pavement under the gas lamps arm in arm singing .
Platt had a good tenor voice , and had been in a church choir , and so he led the singing ; Parsons had a serviceable bellow , which roared and faded and roared again very wonderfully ; Mr. Polly 's share was an extraordinary lowing noise , a sort of flat recitative which he called `` singing seconds . ''
They would have sung catches if they had known how to do it , but as it was they sang melancholy music hall songs about dying soldiers and the old folks far away .
For weeks the glory of Shakespeare 's Verona lit Mr. Polly 's life .
He walked as though he carried a sword at his side , and swung a mantle from his shoulders .
He went through the grimy streets of Port Burdock with his eye on the first floor windows -- looking for balconies .
A ladder in the yard flooded his mind with romantic ideas .
Then Parsons discovered an Italian writer , whose name Mr. Polly rendered as `` Bocashieu , '' and after some excursions into that author 's remains the talk of Parsons became infested with the word `` _amours_ , '' and Mr. Polly would stand in front of his hosiery fixtures trifling with paper and string and thinking of perennial picnics under dark olive trees in the everlasting sunshine of Italy .
`` We got a perfect right to do what we like in our corner , '' Platt maintained .
`` You do what you like in yours . ''
`` Oh , _carm_ on , '' said Parsons .
`` Always do it on tuppence for a bitter . ''
If Platt and Parsons and Mr. Polly live to be a hundred , they will none of them forget that girl as she stood with a pink flush upon her , faintly smiling and yet earnest , parting the branches of the hedgerows and reaching down apple in hand .
Which of them was it , had caught her spirit to attend to them ?
`` Sesquippledan , '' he would say .
`` Sesquippledan verboojuice . ''
`` I should laugh if the Governor dropped on him , '' said Platt .
`` He'd never hear him coming . ''
`` Over for good and all , O ' Man . ''
`` The High Egrugious is fairly On , '' he said , and dived down to return by devious subterranean routes to the outfitting department .
Mr. Garvace was a short stout man , with that air of modest pride that so often goes with corpulence , choleric and decisive in manner , and with hands that looked like bunches of fingers .
He was red-haired and ruddy , and after the custom of such _complexions_ , hairs sprang from the tip of his nose .
When he wished to bring the power of the human eye to bear upon an assistant , he projected his chest , knitted one brow and partially closed the left eyelid .
`` Come out of it , '' said Mr. Garvace .
Parsons shut the door with a click that arrested Mr. Garvace .
`` This window 's All Right , '' said the genius in window dressing , and there was a little pause .
`` You -- you -- you -- you annoyed me , '' said Parsons , sobbing for breath .
Platt was doing his best to help Parsons , and inciting public opinion against Morrison .
But Parsons would not hear of anything against Morrison .
`` He was all right , O ' Man -- according to his lights , '' said Parsons .
`` It is n't him I complain of . ''
`` Heated altaclation , '' said Polly .
`` Like a blooming earthquake ! ''
said Parsons , with the notes of a rising wind .
`` You do n't mean 'E ketches cholera . ''
There was a little pause before Polly replied .
He thrust his finger into his mouth and gulped .
Port Burdock was never the same place for Mr. Polly after Parsons had left it .
There were no chest notes in his occasional letters , and little of the `` Joy de Vive '' got through by them .
Parsons had gone , he said , to London , and found a place as warehouseman in a cheap outfitting shop near St. Paul 's Churchyard , where references were not required .
It became apparent as time passed that new interests were absorbing him .
He wrote of socialism and the rights of man , things that had no appeal for Mr. Polly .
He felt strangers had got hold of his Parsons , were at work upon him , making him into someone else , something less picturesque ... .
Port Burdock became a dreariness full of faded memories of Parsons and work a bore .
Platt revealed himself alone as a tiresome companion , obsessed by romantic ideas about intrigues and vices and `` society women . ''
Mr. Polly 's depression manifested itself in a general slackness .
A certain impatience in the manner of Mr. Garvace presently got upon his nerves .
Relations were becoming strained .
He asked for a rise of salary to test his position , and gave notice to leave when it was refused .
He went at first to stay with a married cousin who had a house at Easewood .
His widowed father had recently given up the music and bicycle shop ( with the post of organist at the parish church ) that had sustained his home , and was living upon a small annuity as a guest with this cousin , and growing a little tiresome on account of some mysterious internal discomfort that the local practitioner diagnosed as imagination .
He had aged with mysterious rapidity and become excessively irritable , but the cousin 's wife was a born manager , and contrived to get along with him .
Our Mr. Polly 's status was that of a guest pure and simple , but after a fortnight of congested hospitality in which he wrote nearly a hundred letters beginning :
`` I do n't think you 'd find much slackness about _me_ , sir , '' said Mr. Polly brightly , trying to disregard his deeper self .
`` I want a young man who means getting on . ''
`` Get on or get out , eh ? ''
A man whose brain devotes its hinterland to making odd phrases and nicknames out of ill-conceived words , whose conception of life is a lump of auriferous rock to which all the value is given by rare veins of unbusinesslike joy , who reads Boccaccio and Rabelais and Shakespeare with gusto , and uses `` Stertoraneous Shover '' and `` Smart Junior '' as terms of bitterest opprobrium , is not likely to make a great success under modern business conditions .
Mr. Polly dreamt always of picturesque and mellow things , and had an instinctive hatred of the strenuous life .
He would have resisted the spell of ex-President Roosevelt , or General Baden Powell , or Mr. Peter Keary , or the late Dr. Samuel Smiles , quite easily ; and he loved Falstaff and Hudibras and coarse laughter , and the old England of Washington Irving and the memory of Charles the Second 's courtly days .
His progress was necessarily slow .
He did not get rises ; he lost situations ; there was something in his eye employers did not like ; he would have lost his places oftener if he had not been at times an exceptionally brilliant salesman , rather carefully neat , and a slow but very fair window-dresser .
He left the Canterbury place very regretfully .
He and another commercial gentleman took a boat one Sunday afternoon at Sturry-on-the-Stour , when the wind was in the west , and sailed it very happily eastward for an hour .
They had never sailed a boat before and it seemed simple and wonderful .
When they turned they found the river too narrow for tacking and the tide running out like a sluice .
They battled back to Sturry in the course of six hours ( at a shilling the first hour and six-pence for each hour afterwards ) rowing a mile in an hour and a half or so , until the turn of the tide came to help them , and then they had a night walk to Canterbury , and found themselves remorselessly locked out .
He took counsel with himself .
Should he `` chuck '' the outfitting ?
It was n't any good for him now , and presently when he was older and his youthful smartness had passed into the dulness of middle age it would be worse .
What else could he do ?
He had n't had a particularly good time , poor old chap , and now it was all over .
`` You 'll have a hearse of course , '' said Mrs. Johnson .
`` Not one of them combinations with the driver sitting on the coffin .
Disrespectful I think they are .
I ca n't fancy how people can bring themselves to be buried in combinations . ''
She flattened her voice in a manner she used to intimate aesthetic feeling .
`` I _do_ like them glass hearses , '' she said .
`` So refined and nice they are . ''
`` Podger 's hearse you 'll have , '' said Johnson conclusively .
`` It 's the best in Easewood . ''
`` Everything that 's right and proper , '' said Mr. Polly .
And then Mrs. Johnson went on with the utmost gusto to the details of the `` casket , '' while Mr. Polly sat more and more deeply and droopingly into the armchair , assenting with a note of protest to all they said .
After he had retired for the night he remained for a long time perched on the edge of the sofa which was his bed , staring at the prospect before him .
`` Chasing the O ' Man about up to the last , '' he said .
Bereavement came to Mr. Polly before the realisation of opulence and its anxieties and responsibilities .
That only dawned upon him on the morrow -- which chanced to be Sunday -- as he walked with Johnson before church time about the tangle of struggling building enterprise that constituted the rising urban district of Easewood .
Johnson was off duty that morning , and devoted the time very generously to the admonitory discussion of Mr. Polly 's worldly outlook .
`` Hardly got used to the idea of having it yet , O ' Man . ''
`` It 's getting it out again I should n't feel sure of .
I 'm no sort of Fiancianier .
Sooner back horses . ''
`` Not my style , O ' Man . ''
`` It 's a nest egg , '' said Johnson .
`` There 's building societies , '' Johnson threw out in a speculative tone .
Mr. Polly , with detached brevity , admitted there were .
`` Sha n't think anything about it -- not till the O ' Man 's underground , '' said Mr. Polly with an inspiration .
Greetings were exchanged between Mr. Johnson and this distinguished comestible .
`` Walking across the fields to Little Dorington , '' said Mr. Rymer .
`` Here 's Aunt Larkins , '' said Mrs. Johnson , as an elderly and stouter edition of the three young women appeared in the doorway .
The reception of this remark would have convinced a far more modest character than Mr. Polly that it was extremely witty .
`` Not me , '' said Mrs. Larkins , taking his point , `` _thank_ you , '' and achieved a climax .
`` No , '' he said with infinite meaning , and turned his eye on Mr. Polly .
Things crowded upon Mr. Polly .
Everyone , he noticed , took sherry with a solemn avidity , and a small portion even was administered sacramentally to the Punt boy .
There followed a distribution of black kid gloves , and much trying on and humouring of fingers .
`` _Good_ gloves , '' said one of Mrs. Johnson 's friends .
`` There 's a little pair there for Willie , '' said Mrs. Johnson triumphantly .
Everyone seemed gravely content with the amazing procedure of the occasion .
Presently Mr. Podger was picking Mr. Polly out as Chief Mourner to go with Mrs. Johnson , Mrs. Larkins and Annie in the first mourning carriage .
He decided privately that the proper phrase for the result of that remark was `` Hysterial catechunations . ''
`` You 're wise , '' said Uncle Pentstemon .
He went on to ask how much the funeral might be costing , and seemed pleased to find Mr. Polly did n't know .
Mrs. Punt keeping steadily on : `` The contents of the stummik at any rate _ought_ to be examined . ''
The knives and forks , probably by some secret common agreement , clash and clatter together and drown every other sound .
Loud hiccup from Uncle Pentstemon , momentary consternation followed by giggle from Annie .
The narration on the left was flourishing up to a climax .
`` Ladies , '' she sez , `` dip their pens _in_ their ink and keep their noses out of it ! ''
`` Old scores you may call them , but worth a dozen of them that put them to their rest , poor dears . ''
`` If you choke yourself , my lord , not another mouthful do you '_ave_ .
No nice puddin ' !
`` And then they 'ad it !
They found he 'd swallowed the very key to unlock the drawer -- ''
The general effect upon Mr. Polly at the time was at once confusing and exhilarating ; but it led him to eat copiously and carelessly , and long before the end , when after an hour and a quarter a movement took the party , and it pushed away its cheese plates and rose sighing and stretching from the remains of the repast , little streaks and bands of dyspeptic irritation and melancholy were darkening the serenity of his mind .
Feeling a little disorganized by her hilarity and a shocked expression that had come to the face of cousin Miriam , he made some indistinct excuse and went out through the back room and scullery into the little garden .
The cool air and a very slight drizzle of rain was a relief -- anyhow .
But the black mood of the replete dyspeptic had come upon him .
His soul darkened hopelessly .
He walked with his hands in his pockets down the path between the rows of exceptionally cultured peas and unreasonably , overwhelmingly , he was smitten by sorrow for his father .
The heady noise and muddle and confused excitement of the feast passed from him like a curtain drawn away .
He thought of that hot and angry and struggling creature who had tugged and sworn so foolishly at the sofa upon the twisted staircase , and who was now lying still and hidden , at the bottom of a wall-sided oblong pit beside the heaped gravel that would presently cover him .
The stillness of it !
the wonder of it !
Hatred for all these people -- all of them -- possessed Mr. Polly 's soul .
When at last he reappeared among them his eye was almost grim , but nobody noticed his eye .
They were looking at watches , and Johnson was being omniscient about trains .
They seemed to discover Mr. Polly afresh just at the moment of parting , and said a number of more or less appropriate things .
But Uncle Pentstemon was far too worried about his rush basket , which had been carelessly mislaid , he seemed to think with larcenous intentions , to remember Mr. Polly at all .
Mrs. Johnson had tried to fob him off with a similar but inferior basket , -- his own had one handle mended with string according to a method of peculiar virtue and inimitable distinction known only to himself -- and the old gentleman had taken her attempt as the gravest reflection upon his years and intelligence .
Mr. Polly was left very largely to the Larkins trio .
Cousin Minnie became shameless and kept kissing him good-by -- and then finding out it was n't time to go .
Cousin Miriam seemed to think her silly , and caught Mr. Polly 's eye sympathetically .
Cousin Annie ceased to giggle and lapsed into a nearly sentimental state .
She said with real feeling that she had enjoyed the funeral more than words could tell .
`` You 've merely anti-_separated_ me by a hair , '' he said politely .
Every road he remarked , as freshly as though he had never observed it before , was bordered by inflexible palings or iron fences or severely disciplined hedges .
He wondered if perhaps abroad there might be beautifully careless , unenclosed high roads .
Perhaps after all the best way of taking a holiday is to go abroad .
`` Better get yourself a good book on bookkeeping , '' said Johnson , turning over perplexing pages .
The street was a dingy little street , a _cul-de-sac_ of very small houses in a row , each with an almost flattened bow window and a blistered brown door with a black knocker .
He poised his bright new bicycle against the window , and knocked and stood waiting , and felt himself in his straw hat and black serge suit a very pleasant and prosperous-looking figure .
The door was opened by cousin Miriam .
She was wearing a bluish print dress that brought out a kind of sallow warmth in her skin , and although it was nearly four o'clock in the afternoon , her sleeves were tucked up , as if for some domestic work , above the elbows , showing her rather slender but very shapely yellowish arms .
The loosely pinned bodice confessed a delicately rounded neck .
For a moment she regarded him with suspicion and a faint hostility , and then recognition dawned in her eyes .
`` Thought I 'd look you up , '' he said .
Mr. Polly was aware of a rustling transit along the passage , and of the house suddenly full of hushed but strenuous movement .
`` What do you carry in that little bag thing ? ''
she asked , and then branched off to : `` We 're all in a mess to-day you know .
It 's my cleaning up day to-day .
I 'm not a bit tidy I know , but I _do_ like to '_ave_ a go in at things now and then .
You got to take us as you find us , Elfrid .
Mercy we was n't all out . ''
She was talking against time .
`` I _am_ glad to see you again , '' she repeated .
( Interlude while Minnie is attended to for crumb in the windpipe . )
`` _You_ never run into anything . ''
`` Never , 'E say ! ''
`` Hark at 'im ! ''
and relapsed into a condition that urgently demanded back thumping .
`` Do n't be so silly , '' said Miriam , thumping hard .
`` _Who's_ going to touch yer front room ? ''
said Mrs. Larkins , apparently forgetful for a moment of Mr. Polly .
She had something to say to him .
`` I say , '' she said abruptly .
`` I _did_ get them rings out of a prize packet . ''
`` What rings ? ''
It was past ten when Mr. Polly found himself riding back towards Easewood in a broad moonlight with a little Japanese lantern dangling from his handle bar and making a fiery circle of pinkish light on and round about his front wheel .
He was mightily pleased with himself and the day .
There had been four-ale to drink at supper mixed with gingerbeer , very free and jolly in a jug .
No shadow fell upon the agreeable excitement of his mind until he faced the anxious and reproachful face of Johnson , who had been sitting up for him , smoking and trying to read the odd volume of `` Purchas his Pilgrimes , '' -- about the monk who went into Sarmatia and saw the Tartar carts .
`` Not a bit . ''
Before and after this brief conversation his mind ran on his cousins very warmly and prettily in the vein of high spring .
Mr. Polly had been drinking at the poisoned fountains of English literature , fountains so unsuited to the needs of a decent clerk or shopman , fountains charged with the dangerous suggestion that it becomes a man of gaiety and spirit to make love , gallantly and rather carelessly .
It seemed to him that evening to be handsome and humorous and practicable to make love to all his cousins .
It was n't that he liked any of them particularly , but he liked something about them .
He liked their youth and femininity , their resolute high spirits and their interest in him .
Or to be exact , Romance became audible .
`` I do n't want to actually _break_ the rules , '' she said .
`` Leave them behind you , '' said Mr. Polly with a catch of the breath , `` where they are safe '' ; and marvelling at his own wit and daring , and indeed trembling within himself , he held out a hand for her .
She continued to regard him with eyes that presently joined dancing in an irresistible smile of satisfaction .
Mr. Polly smiled in return .
Her sympathy was very delightful .
He shook his head .
`` The ordinary table of mortality , '' he said .
`` First one and then another . ''
Mr. Polly 's literary proclivities had taught him that under such circumstances a strain of gallantry was demanded .
And something in his blood repeated that lesson .
`` We do n't even know each other 's names , '' she remarked with a descent to matters of fact .
`` Well , Polly . ''
For a moment he was out of tune .
`` I wish it was ! ''
he said , and could have bitten out his tongue at the Larkins sound of it .
cried the girl and flashed a pair of brown legs at him and was gone .
`` At your command .
`` What do you mean ? ''
From first to last their acquaintance lasted ten days , but into that time Mr. Polly packed ten years of dreams .
The girl and Mr. Polly did not meet on every one of those ten days ; one was Sunday and she could not come , and on the eighth the school reassembled and she made vague excuses .
All their meetings amounted to this , that she sat on the wall , more or less in bounds as she expressed it , and let Mr. Polly fall in love with her and try to express it below .
She sat in a state of irresponsible exaltation , watching him and at intervals prodding a vivisecting point of encouragement into him -- with that strange passive cruelty which is natural to her sex and age .
`` Do n't ! ''
she said in an undertone .
Then through a pause they both stared at each other , listening .
He 'll see you .
You 're spoiling everything . ''
The bottom dropped out of Mr. Polly 's world .
He felt as people must feel who are going to faint .
He swore , staggered to the pile of logs and sat down .
`` Fool , '' he said at last ; `` you Blithering Fool ! ''
and began to rub his shin as though he had just discovered its bruises .
It is an illogical consequence of one human being 's ill-treatment that we should fly immediately to another , but that is the way with us .
It seemed to Mr. Polly that only a human touch could assuage the smart of his humiliation .
Moreover it had for some undefined reason to be a feminine touch , and the number of women in his world was limited .
Mrs. Larkins scrutinised it .
`` You ought to '_ave_ someone look after your scrases , '' she said .
`` That 's all red and rough .
It ought to be cold-creamed .
Bring your bicycle into the passage and come in . ''
`` Looking round , '' said Mr. Polly .
`` I shall have my shop all right before long , '' said Mr. Polly .
Canary bird and all . ''
`` Might get 'em together , '' said Mr. Polly , with his sense of a neat thing outrunning his discretion .
`` Shop and cat thrown in , '' said Mr. Polly in spite of himself , and his head swam and he broke out into a cold sweat as he said it .
Minnie appeared at the door of the room looking infinitely perplexed .
`` There ai n't a little dog anywhere , Elfrid , '' she said .
He bent down and pinched his bicycle tire .
`` You was saying something about a cat , Elfrid , '' said Minnie .
When , after imperceptible manoeuvres by Mrs. Larkins , he found himself starting circuitously through the inevitable recreation ground with Miriam to meet Annie , he found himself quite unable to avoid the topic of the shop that had now taken such a grip upon him .
A sense of danger only increased the attraction .
Minnie 's persistent disposition to accompany them had been crushed by a novel and violent and urgently expressed desire on the part of Mrs. Larkins to see her do something in the house sometimes ... .
`` Floriferous corner , '' he added approvingly .
He put an arm over the back of the seat , and assumed a more comfortable attitude .
He glanced at Miriam , who was sitting in a lax , thoughtful pose with her eyes on the flowers .
She was wearing her old dress , she had not had time to change , and the blue tones of her old dress brought out a certain warmth in her skin , and her pose exaggerated whatever was feminine in her rather lean and insufficient body , and rounded her flat chest delusively .
A little line of light lay along her profile .
The afternoon was full of transfiguring sunshine , children were playing noisily in the adjacent sandpit , some Judas trees were brightly abloom in the villa gardens that bordered the Recreation Ground , and all the place was bright with touches of young summer colour .
It all merged with the effect of Miriam in Mr. Polly 's mind .
His sense of effect made him pause .
`` You do n't mean you 've got someone -- ''
`` I 've got someone in my eye , this minute , '' he said .
Well , _did_ he mean ?
`` I do ! ''
He took the conclusive step .
`` It 's like a dream . ''
`` Only mother , '' said Miriam firmly .
It is like the opening of a pit just under your feet !
So , too , Mr. Polly 's happy sense of limitless resources was obliterated suddenly by a vision of this tracery :
`` Funererial baked meats , '' he said , recalling possible items .
He squared himself to the task , and Mr. Polly sat beside him like a pupil , watching the evolution of the grey , distasteful figures that were to dispose of his little hoard .
`` One wants to know where one is . ''
`` I should do it all by double entry , '' said Johnson .
`` A little troublesome at first , but far the best in the end . ''
`` Well , '' said Johnson , rising and stretching .
Better sleep on it , O ' Man . ''
`` Well , O ' Man ? ''
said Johnson , when Mr. Polly came down to breakfast , and Mrs. Johnson looked up brightly .
Mr. Polly had never felt breakfast so unattractive before .
One morning , just after Mr. Johnson had gone to the station , Mr. Polly wheeled his bicycle out into the road , went up to his bedroom , packed his long white nightdress , a comb , and a toothbrush in a manner that was as offhand as he could make it , informed Mrs. Johnson , who was manifestly curious , that he was `` off for a day or two to clear his head , '' and fled forthright into the road , and mounting turned his wheel towards the tropics and the equator and the south coast of England , and indeed more particularly to where the little village of Fishbourne slumbers and sleeps .
`` I 've took a little contraption at Fishbourne , O ' Man , that I fancy suits me better . ''
`` Wedding bells , O ' Man .
He became aware of Mr. Voules as a watchful , blue eye of intense forcefulness .
It was the eye of a man who has got hold of a situation .
He was a fat , short , red-faced man clad in a tight-fitting tail coat of black and white check with a coquettish bow tie under the lowest of a number of crisp little red chins .
He held the bride under his arm with an air of invincible championship , and his free arm flourished a grey top hat of an equestrian type .
Mr. Polly instantly learnt from the eye that Mr. Voules knew all about his longing for flight .
Its azure pupil glowed with disciplined resolution .
It said : `` I 've come to give this girl away , and give her away I will .
I 'm here now and things have to go on all right .
So do n't think of it any more '' -- and Mr. Polly did n't .
A faint phantom of a certain `` lill ' dog '' that had hovered just beneath the threshold of consciousness vanished into black impossibility .
Until the conclusive moment of the service was attained the eye of Mr. Voules watched Mr. Polly relentlessly , and then instantly he relieved guard , and blew his nose into a voluminous and richly patterned handkerchief , and sighed and looked round for the approval and sympathy of Mrs. Voules , and nodded to her brightly like one who has always foretold a successful issue to things .
Mr. Polly felt then like a marionette that has just dropped off its wire .
But it was long before that release arrived .
`` Say 'I will . '
`` Have hold this day ford . ''
`` Have hold this day ford . ''
`` Betworse , richpoo ' -- ''
`` Bet worsh , richpoo ' ... . ''
`` You wo n't be able to help it .
You 'll have to do it -- just to disperse the crowd . ''
Mr. Voules laid his hand on Mr. Polly 's shoulder .
`` The bridegroom gives his arm to the bride .
Hands across and down the middle .
Prump , Perump-pump-pump-pump . ''
`` She did n't think I 'd come , I lay , '' said Uncle Pentstemon , a little foiled , but effecting an auditory lodgment upon Johnson .
`` I goes about seeing wonders , '' he added , and then in a sort of enhanced undertone : `` One of 'er girls gettin ' married .
That 's what I mean by wonders .
`` Got it in the back for a moment .
Going to be a change of weather I suppose , '' said Uncle Pentstemon .
`` I brought 'er a nice present , too , what I got in this passel .
Vallyble old tea caddy that uset ' be my mother 's .
What I kep ' my baccy in for years and years -- till the hinge at the back got broke .
It ai n't been no use to me particular since , so thinks I , drat it !
I may as well give it 'er as not ... . ''
The dog cart swerved violently , and then , evoking a shout of groundless alarm from a cyclist , took a corner , and the rest of the wedding party was hidden from Mr. Polly 's eyes .
`` How about the key ? ''
`` They 're coming , '' he said to Miriam , and put an arm about her and gave her a kiss .
She was kissing him back when they were startled violently by the shying of two empty hampers into the passage .
Then Mr. Voules appeared holding a third .
Miriam took the hampers , and Mr. Polly under compulsion from Mr. Voules went into the little front room .
A profuse pie and a large ham had been added to the modest provision of Mrs. Larkins , and a number of select-looking bottles shouldered the bottle of sherry and the bottle of port she had got to grace the feast .
They certainly went better with the iced wedding cake in the middle .
Mrs. Voules , still impassive , stood by the window regarding these things with a faint approval .
The two friends from Miriam 's place of business came into the room among the first , and then wedged themselves so hopelessly against Johnson in an attempt to get out again and take off their things upstairs that they abandoned the attempt .
Amid the struggle Mr. Polly saw Uncle Pentstemon relieve himself of his parcel by giving it to the bride .
he said and handed it to her .
`` Weddin ' present , '' he explained , and added with a confidential chuckle , `` _I_ never thought I 'd '_ave_ to give you one -- ever . ''
`` Who says steak and kidney pie ? ''
`` Who says steak and kidney pie ?
You '_ave_ a drop of old Tommy , Martha .
That 's what you want to steady you ... .
Sit down everyone and do n't all speak at once .
Who says steak and kidney pie ?
Mr. Polly stood shoulder to shoulder with Johnson for a moment .
`` You sit 'ere and '_ave_ 'am , my lord ! ''
said Mrs. Punt , prevailing .
`` Pie you ca n't '_ave_ and you wo n't . ''
`` Lor bless my heart , Mrs .
protested Mr. Voules , `` let the boy '_ave_ a bit if he wants it -- wedding and all ! ''
`` Here 's Luck ! ''
said Johnson hopelessly but resolutely , and raised his glass .
Everybody murmured : `` Here 's luck . ''
`` The third Toast , ladies and gentlemen , '' he said ; `` fill up , please .
The Mother of the bride .
I -- er ... .
... Ladies and gem , 'Ere 's Luck to 'er !
There seemed a lot of rice upon everybody , in their hats and hair and the folds of their garments .
Presently Mr. Voules was hammering the table for the fourth time in the interests of the Best Man ... .
Mr. Polly remained waving his hat and Mrs. Polly her handkerchief until they were hidden under the bridge .
The dominating figure to the last was Mr. Voules .
He had followed them along the platform waving the equestrian grey hat and kissing his hand to the bride .
They subsided into their seats .
`` Got a compartment to ourselves anyhow , '' said Mrs. Polly after a pause .
Fifteen years ago , and it might have seemed to you that the queer little flower of Mr. Polly 's imagination must be altogether withered and dead , and with no living seed left in any part of him .
But indeed it still lived as an insatiable hunger for bright and delightful experiences , for the gracious aspects of things , for beauty .
He still read books when he had a chance , books that told of glorious places abroad and glorious times , that wrung a rich humour from life and contained the delight of words freshly and expressively grouped .
there are not many such books , and for the newspapers and the cheap fiction that abounded more and more in the world Mr. Polly had little taste .
There was no epithet in them .
And there was no one to talk to , as he loved to talk .
And he had to mind his shop .
`` Zealacious commerciality , '' whispered Mr. Polly to that unfriendly back view ... .
It was soon manifest the shop paid only in the least exacting sense , and Miriam did not conceal her opinion that he ought to bestir himself and `` do things , '' though what he was to do was hard to say .
You see , when you have once sunken your capital in a shop you do not very easily get it out again .
If customers will not come to you cheerfully and freely the law sets limits upon the compulsion you may exercise .
You can not pursue people about the streets of a watering place , compelling them either by threats or importunity to buy flannel trousers .
Additional sources of income for a tradesman are not always easy to find .
Wintershed at the bicycle and gramaphone shop to the right , played the organ in the church , and Clamp of the toy shop was pew opener and so forth , Gambell , the greengrocer , waited at table and his wife cooked , and Carter , the watchmaker , left things to his wife while he went about the world winding clocks , but Mr. Polly had none of these arts , and would n't , in spite of Miriam 's quietly persistent protests , get any other .
And on summer evenings he would ride his bicycle about the country , and if he discovered a sale where there were books he would as often as not waste half the next day in going again to acquire a job lot of them haphazard , and bring them home tied about with a string , and hide them from Miriam under the counter in the shop .
That is a heartbreaking thing for any wife with a serious investigatory turn of mind to discover .
She was always thinking of burning these finds , but her natural turn for economy prevailed with her .
The books he read during those fifteen years !
He read everything he got except theology , and as he read his little unsuccessful circumstances vanished and the wonder of life returned to him , the routine of reluctant getting up , opening shop , pretending to dust it with zest , breakfasting with a shop egg underdone or overdone or a herring raw or charred , and coffee made Miriam 's way and full of little particles , the return to the shop , the morning paper , the standing , standing at the door saying `` How do ! ''
to passers-by , or getting a bit of gossip or watching unusual visitors , all these things vanished as the auditorium of a theatre vanishes when the stage is lit .
He acquired hundreds of books at last , old dusty books , books with torn covers and broken covers , fat books whose backs were naked string and glue , an inimical litter to Miriam .
Meanwhile he got little exercise , indigestion grew with him until it ruled all his moods , he fattened and deteriorated physically , moods of distress invaded and darkened his skies , little things irritated him more and more , and casual laughter ceased in him .
His hair began to come off until he had a large bald space at the back of his head .
Suddenly one day it came to him -- forgetful of those books and all he had lived and seen through them -- that he had been in his shop for exactly fifteen years , that he would soon be forty , and that his life during that time had not been worth living , that it had been in apathetic and feebly hostile and critical company , ugly in detail and mean in scope -- and that it had brought him at last to an outlook utterly hopeless and grey .
I have already had occasion to mention , indeed I have quoted , a certain high-browed gentleman living at Highbury , wearing a _golden_ _pince_-_nez_ and writing for the most part in that beautiful room , the library of the Reform Club .
There he wrestles with what he calls `` social problems '' in a bloodless but at times , I think one must admit , an extremely illuminating manner .
He has a fixed idea that something called a `` collective intelligence '' is wanted in the world , which means in practice that you and I and everyone have to think about things frightfully hard and pool the results , and oblige ourselves to be shamelessly and persistently clear and truthful and support and respect ( I suppose ) a perfect horde of professors and writers and artists and ill-groomed difficult people , instead of using our brains in a moderate , sensible manner to play golf and bridge ( pretending a sense of humour prevents our doing anything else with them ) and generally taking life in a nice , easy , gentlemanly way , confound him !
Well , this dome-headed monster of intellect alleges that Mr. Polly was unhappy entirely through that .
`` That 's it , '' said Polly .
Rumbold scratched his ear with the three strawy jampots he held in his hand .
`` Way the wind blows , I expect , '' he said .
`` But what 's the fuss ? ''
`` No fuss ! ''
I do n't like it , O ' Man , that 's all . ''
`` Got to unpack 'ow it suits me .
Ca n't unpack with the stror blowing into one 's eyes . ''
`` Pig ai n't civil , and you ai n't sober .
You go indoors and _lemme_ _go_ on unpacking .
You -- you 're excited . ''
Mr. Polly had no human intercourse thereafter with Rumbold for fifteen years .
He kept up a Hate .
Mr. Polly waved a hand in a rather belated salutation .
Mr. Polly felt suddenly spiritless .
`` Not that I know of , '' he answered .
`` Not that you know of , be blowed !
You been flapping your mouth . ''
`` Do n't recollect , be blowed !
You flap your mouth a dam sight too much .
This place gets more of your mouth than it wants ... .
And Mr. Hinks , having displayed a freckled fist of extraordinary size and pugginess in an ostentatiously familiar manner to Mr. Polly's close inspection by sight and smell , turned it about this way and that and shaken it gently for a moment or so , replaced it carefully in his pocket as if for future use , receded slowly and watchfully for a pace , and then turned away as if to other matters , and ceased to be even in outward seeming a friend ... .
Among other shopkeepers in the High Street there was Chuffles , the grocer , a small , hairy , silently intent polygamist , who was given rough music by the youth of the neighbourhood because of a scandal about his wife 's sister , and who was nevertheless totally uninteresting , and Tonks , the second grocer , an old man with an older , very enfeebled wife , both submerged by piety .
Tonks went bankrupt , and was succeeded by a branch of the National Provision Company , with a young manager exactly like a fox , except that he barked .
The toy and sweetstuff shop was kept by an old woman of repellent manners , and so was the little fish shop at the end of the street .
The Berlin-wool shop having gone bankrupt , became a newspaper shop , then fell to a haberdasher in consumption , and finally to a stationer ; the three shops at the end of the street wallowed in and out of insolvency in the hands of a bicycle repairer and dealer , a gramaphone dealer , a tobacconist , a sixpenny-halfpenny bazaar-keeper , a shoemaker , a greengrocer , and the exploiter of a cinematograph peep-show -- but none of them supplied friendship to Mr. Polly .
As his internal malady grew upon Mr. Polly and he became more and more a battle-ground of fermenting foods and warring juices , he came to hate the very sight , as people say , of every one of these neighbours .
There they were , every day and all the days , just the same , echoing his own stagnation .
They pained him all round the top and back of his head ; they made his legs and arms weary and spiritless .
The air was tasteless by reason of them .
He lost his human kindliness .
It seemed to that undesirable mind of his that Rusper 's head was the most egg-shaped head he had ever seen ; the similarity weighed upon him ; and when he found an argument growing warm with Rusper he would say : `` Boil it some more , O ' Man ; boil it harder ! ''
or `` Six minutes at least , '' allusions Rusper could never make head or tail of , and got at last to disregard as a part of Mr. Polly 's general eccentricity .
For a long time that little tendency threw no shadow over their intercourse , but it contained within it the seeds of an ultimate disruption .
`` Kik -- jer doing ? ''
he said at last .
`` Dressing all over the pavement as though the blessed town belonged to you !
`` Got to ( kik ) puttem all back ! ''
panted Mr. Rusper in the expert grasp of Hinks .
`` Merely asked him to ( kik ) puttem all back . ''
Mr. Polly was under restraint of little Clamp , of the toy shop , who was holding his hands in a complex and uncomfortable manner that he afterwards explained to Wintershed was a combination of something romantic called `` Ju-jitsu '' and something else still more romantic called the `` Police Grip . ''
`` ( Kik ) Assault ! ''
`` I 'm going , '' said Mr. Polly suddenly , releasing himself from the Anglo-Japanese grip and holding out his hands for his bicycle .
`` Teach you ( kik ) to leave things alone , '' said Mr. Rusper with an air of one who has given a lesson .
`` Er -- ( kik ) , '' said Mr. Rusper .
`` Kill myself , '' he murmured at last .
He was still standing there when Miriam came downstairs dressed for church .
Something in his immobility struck home to her .
`` You 'd better come to church than mope , '' she said .
But Miriam would smell the _paraffine_ !
He drew the blade lightly under one ear .
but it stung like a nettle !
The staircase behind him was crackling now like horsewhips and pistol shots .
bawled Mr. Polly to them .
and struck by a horrible thought , the thought of Rumbold 's deaf mother-in-law upstairs , began to bang and kick and rattle with the utmost fury at Rumbold 's shop door .
That was the beginning of the great Fishbourne fire , which burnt its way sideways into Mr. Rusper 's piles of crates and straw , and backwards to the petrol and stabling of the Royal Fishbourne Hotel , and spread from that basis until it seemed half Fishbourne would be ablaze .
The east wind , which had been gathering in strength all that day , fanned the flame ; everything was dry and ready , and the little shed beyond Rumbold 's in which the local Fire Brigade kept its manual , was alight before the Fishbourne fire hose could be saved from disaster .
In marvellously little time a great column of black smoke , shot with red streamers , rose out of the middle of the High Street , and all Fishbourne was alive with excitement .
Mr. Boomer made some inaudible explanation about his trousers and half a minute .
`` Seen old Rumbold ? ''
cried Mr. Polly , approaching Mr. Gambell .
`` Gone over Downford for a walk , '' said Mr. Gambell .
`` He told me !
We 'ave n't got the key ! ''
A number of willing volunteers started off to the new telephone office in obedience to Mr. Boomer 's request , only to be told with cold official politeness by the young lady at the exchange that all that had been done on her own initiative ten minutes ago .
She parleyed with these heated enthusiasts for a space , and then returned to the window .
`` It 's not what I 'm used to , '' she said .
`` We 've got to hurry . ''
`` Oh , come ON ! ''
cried Mr. Polly , and seized her .
He got her into the attic , but the staircase , he found , was full of suffocating smoke , and he dared not venture below the next floor .
He took her into a long dormitory , shut the door on those pungent and pervasive fumes , and opened the window to discover the fire escape was now against the house , and all Fishbourne boiling with excitement as an immensely helmeted and active and resolute little figure ascended .
In another moment the rescuer stared over the windowsill , heroic , but just a trifle self-conscious and grotesque .
They urged her gently but firmly towards the window .
`` You insured , Mr .
The topic dropped for a time , though manifestly it continued to exercise their minds .
`` 'Ear , 'ear ! ''
said Mr. Wintershed and Mr. Clamp .
`` Goo'night , O ' Man , '' said Mr. Hinks .
It dawned upon Mr. Polly for the first time that he had forgotten something .
He ought to have cut his throat !
And he would go off along the white road that led to Garchester , and on to Crogate and so to Tunbridge Wells , where there was a Toad Rock he had heard of , but never seen .
( It seemed to him this must needs be a marvel . )
And so to other towns and cities .
He would walk and loiter by the way , and sleep in inns at night , and get an odd job here and there and talk to strange people .
Perhaps he would get quite a lot of work and prosper , and if he did not do so he would lie down in front of a train , or wait for a warm night , and then fall into some smooth , broad river .
Not so bad as sitting down to a dentist , not nearly so bad .
And he would never open a shop any more .
One day he found himself going along a road , with a wide space of sprouting bracken and occasional trees on either side , and suddenly this road became strangely , perplexingly familiar .
he said , and turned about and stood .
`` It ca n't be . ''
Had she forgotten altogether ?
`` Itchabod , '' the tramp was saying in the voice of one who reasons on the side of the inevitable .
`` It 's Fair Itchabod , O ' Man .
There 's no going back to it . ''
`` _My_ sort , '' said Mr. Polly , and opened the door very softly , divided between the desire to enter and come nearer and an instinctive indisposition to break slumbers so manifestly sweet and satisfying .
`` I 'm never Jim , '' said Mr. Polly .
Whatever the truth may be about love , there is certainly such a thing as friendship at first sight .
They liked each other 's voices , they liked each other 's way of smiling and speaking .
`` I 've never properly thought that out , '' said Mr. Polly .
`` I 've been looking round -- for Ideas . ''
Mr. Polly had a glimpse of an oaken settle .
`` In the tap will be handier for you , '' he said .
Mr. Polly went out again into the sunshine .
`` I ai n't 'ad such a laugh since Jim come 'ome .
When you 'it 'is 'ed , it 'urt my side . ''
She waved her head .
`` Did you charge him anything ? ''
`` Wax to receive and marble to retain , '' said Mr. Polly .
`` This beef is a Bit of All Right , Ma 'm .
I could have done differently if I had n't been punting on an empty stomach .
There 's a lear feeling as the pole goes in -- ''
`` I 've never held with fasting , '' said the plump woman .
`` That 's about it , '' said the fat woman .
`` Bit of Arson , '' said Mr. Polly , as if he jested .
Do I _look_ reformed ? ''
`` If I might . ''
As he returned , slowly indeed , but now one might almost say surely , to the peg to which the punt was moored , he became aware of a singularly delightful human being awaiting him on the bank .
She stood with her legs very wide apart , her hands behind her back , and her head a little on one side , watching his gestures with an expression of disdainful interest .
She had black hair and brown legs and a buff short frock and very intelligent eyes .
And when he had reached a sufficient proximity she remarked : `` Hello ! ''
`` Silly , '' said the young lady , and Mr. Polly lunged nearer .
You 'll have to punt better . ''
A mysterious shadow seemed to fall athwart the sunshine and pleasantness of the Potwell Inn .
She whistled a little flatly for a moment , and threw small stones at a clump of meadow-sweet that sprang from the bank .
For the first time in his life it seemed to Mr. Polly that he had come across something sheerly dreadful .
He stared at the pretty thing of flesh and spirit in front of him , lightly balanced on its stout little legs and looking at him with eyes that had still to learn the expression of either disgust or fear .
`` Bits of things , '' said Mr. Polly .
`` Well , I suppose I must tell you sooner or later .
He 's the Drorback to this place , that 's what he is .
I hoped you might n't hear so soon ... .
Very likely he 's gone . ''
`` _She_ do n't seem to think so . ''
`` That 's a Bit Thick , '' said Mr. Polly .
`` Biggish sort of man , I expect ? ''
asked Mr. Polly , trying to get the situation in all its bearings .
`` Three golden pounds , '' said the plump woman .
She left the sentence unfinished .
`` What sort of a size is he ? ''
`` I 'm not one of your Herculaceous sort , if you mean that .
Nothing very wonderful bicepitally . ''
`` I could stand even his vi'lence , '' said the plump woman , `` if it wasn't for the child . ''
`` I do n't see that it 's _my_ affair , '' said Mr. Polly .
`` I 'd like to have a look at him before I go , '' said Mr. Polly , thinking aloud .
And added , `` somehow .
Not my business , of course . ''
`` It seems a good sort of Crib , '' he said , and added , `` for a chap who's looking for trouble . ''
Uncle Jim appeared with none of the disruptive violence Mr. Polly had dreaded .
He came quite softly .
Mr. Polly was going down the lane behind the church that led to the Potwell Inn after posting a letter to the lime-juice people at the post-office .
He was walking slowly , after his habit , and thinking discursively .
With a sudden tightening of the muscles he became aware of a figure walking noiselessly beside him .
His first impression was of a face singularly broad above and with a wide empty grin as its chief feature below , of a slouching body and dragging feet .
`` Arf a mo ' , '' said the figure , as if in response to his start , and speaking in a hoarse whisper .
`` Arf a mo ' , mister .
You the noo bloke at the Potwell Inn ? ''
`` Arf a mo ' , '' said Uncle Jim , taking his arm .
`` We ai n't doing a ( sanguinary ) Marathon .
It ai n't a ( decorated ) cinder track .
I want a word with you , mister .
`` I jest want a ( decorated ) word wiv you .
-- just a friendly word or two .
Just to clear up any blooming errors .
That 's all I want .
No need to be so ( richly decorated ) proud , if you _are_ the noo bloke at Potwell Inn .
Not a bit of it .
`` You got to shift . ''
The tone of Uncle Jim 's voice became urgent and confidential .
`` You got no right , '' began Mr. Polly .
`` I 'll be round to-morrer -- 'bout eleven .
And if I finds you -- ''
He produced a blood-curdling oath .
`` You better , '' said Uncle Jim , and suddenly , noiselessly , was going .
Why not listen to the call of duty and go back to Miriam now ?
When he thought of Uncle Jim the inside feeling of his body faded away rapidly to a blank discomfort ... .
`` If I had a chance against him -- '' protested Mr. Polly .
There lay the road before him going this way to the east and that to the west .
Westward , one hour away now , was the Potwell Inn .
Already things might be happening there ... .
`` You come back ! ''
`` He 's -- he 's mad drunk and looking for her . ''
Uncle Jim stood swaying with wrathful astonishment and then darted forward with clutching hands .
Mr. Polly felt that if his antagonist closed he was lost , and smote with all his force at the ugly head before him .
Smash went the bottle , and Uncle Jim staggered , half-stunned by the blow and blinded with beer .
The lapses and leaps of the human mind are for ever mysterious .
Mr. Polly had never expected that bottle to break .
In the instant he felt disarmed and helpless .
Before him was Uncle Jim , infuriated and evidently still coming on , and for defence was nothing but the neck of a bottle .
Mr. Polly , freed from the sense of urgent pursuit , had halted beyond the raspberry canes and rallied his courage .
The sense of Uncle Jim victorious in the house restored his manhood .
He went round by the outhouses to the riverside , seeking a weapon , and found an old paddle boat hook .
With this he smote Uncle Jim as he emerged by the door of the tap .
Uncle Jim , blaspheming dreadfully and with dire stabbing intimations in either hand , came through the splintering paddle like a circus rider through a paper hoop , and once more Mr. Polly dropped his weapon and fled .
Up came Uncle Jim spluttering and dripping .
`` You ( unprofitable matter , and printing it would lead to a censorship of novels ) !
You know I got a weak _chess_ ! ''
Down he fell backwards into a frothing mass of water with Mr. Polly jabbing at him .
Under water he turned round and came up again as if in flight towards the middle of the river .
Directly his head reappeared Mr. Polly had him between the shoulders and under again , bubbling thickly .
A hand clutched and disappeared .
Mr. Polly returned slowly and thoughtfully to the inn , and suddenly his mind began to bubble with phrases .
The plump woman stood at the top of the steps that led up to the inn door to greet him .
`` Not a bit of it ! ''
`` Then what 's all that blood beside your ear ? ''
He turned round and listened for the words that drifted across from the little figure on the opposite bank .
So far as he could judge , Uncle Jim was making an appointment for the morrow .
He replied with a defiant movement of the punt pole .
The little figure was convulsed for a moment and then went on its way upstream -- fiercely .
`` Where 's that muddy-faced mongrel ? ''
`` Let 'im come out to me !
Where 's that blighted whisp with the punt pole -- I got a word to say to 'im .
Come out of it , you pot-bellied chunk of dirtiness , you !
Come out and '_ave_ your ugly face wiped .
I got a Thing for you ... .
`` I say , '' he said with quiet earnestness .
`` There 's a chap out here seems to want someone . ''
The manner of the spectacled young man intensified .
`` I wish you 'd come out and persuade him to go away , '' he said .
`` His language -- is n't quite the thing -- ladies . ''
Uncle Jim gave ground suddenly , and trod upon the foot of a young man in a blue shirt , who immediately thrust at him violently with both hands .
`` Suffragettes , '' gasped Uncle Jim with the ferule at his throat .
and aimed a second more successful blow at Mr. Polly .
One of the apprentices ran .
For suddenly Uncle Jim 's arms and legs flew out like springs released .
Mr. Polly was tumbled backwards and fell over the broken teapot and into the arms of the father in mourning .
Something struck his head -- dazzingly .
In another second Uncle Jim was on his feet and the tablecloth enshrouded the head of the man in checks .
Uncle Jim manifestly considered he had done all that honour required of him , and against overwhelming numbers and the possibility of reiterated duckings , flight is no disgrace .
He did not speak for some moments , and then he replied to Mr. Polly's enquiries : `` Yes , a 'atchet .
Down Lammam way -- night before last . ''
And at last came that night in October whose happenings it is so difficult for a sympathetic historian to drag out of their proper nocturnal indistinctness into the clear , hard light of positive statement .
A novelist should present characters , not vivisect them publicly ... .
`` That must have been his third go , '' said Mr. Polly .
`` It sounded a bit funny . ''
The sight inspirited him greatly , and he explained further that he had fled to the churchyard on account of the cover afforded by tombstones from the flight of small shot .
He expressed anxiety for the fate of the landlady of the Potwell Inn and her grandchild , and led the way with enhanced alacrity along the lane to that establishment .
He did not return for some days .
That perhaps was not very wonderful .
But the days lengthened to weeks and the weeks to months and still Uncle Jim did not recur .
A year passed , and the anxiety of him became less acute ; a second healing year followed the first .
One afternoon about thirty months after the Night Surprise the plump woman spoke of him .
One summer afternoon about five years after his first coming to the Potwell Inn Mr. Polly found himself sitting under the pollard willow fishing for dace .
It was a plumper , browner and healthier Mr. Polly altogether than the miserable bankrupt with whose dyspeptic portrait our novel opened .
He was fat , but with a fatness more generally diffused , and the lower part of his face was touched to gravity by a small square beard .
Also he was balder .
It is disagreeable to think one has committed Arson , because it is an action that leads to jail .
Otherwise I do not think there was a grain of regret for that in Mr. Polly 's composition .
But deserting Miriam was in a different category .
Deserting Miriam was mean .
said Mr. Polly , and down went his float and he flicked up a victim to destruction and took it off the hook .
Feeling recklessly secure behind his beard Mr. Polly surveyed the Fishbourne High Street once again .
The north side was much as he had known it except that Rusper had vanished .
A row of new shops replaced the destruction of the great fire .
Mantell and Throbson 's had risen again upon a more flamboyant pattern , and the new fire station was in the Swiss-Teutonic style and with much red paint .
Next door in the place of Rumbold 's was a branch of the Colonial Tea Company , and then a Salmon and Gluckstein Tobacco Shop , and then a little shop that displayed sweets and professed a `` Tea Room Upstairs . ''
He considered this as a possible place in which to prosecute enquiries about his lost wife , wavering a little between it and the God 's Providence Inn down the street .
Then his eye caught a name over the window , `` Polly , '' he read , `` & Larkins !
Well , I 'm -- astonished ! ''
`` Well , '' said Annie , `` you _can_ .
But our Tea Room 's upstairs ... .
My sister 's been cleaning it out -- and it 's a bit upset . ''
`` Widow I presume ? ''
said Mr. Polly in unfeigned surprise .
Why , if things were like this , had remorse and anxiety for Miriam been implanted in his soul ?
No shadow of an answer appeared .
`` He was a _wearing_ husband , '' said Annie .
`` I 've often pitied my sister .
He was one of that sort -- ''
`` No , '' said Annie judiciously ; `` not exactly dissolute .
Feeble 's more the word .
Weak , 'E was .
'Ow long do you like your eggs boiled ? ''
he said , reaching out hastily for the pepper .
`` One of Miriam 's !
I have n't tasted such an egg for five years ... .
Wonder where she gets them !
Picks them out , I suppose ! ''
He abandoned it for its fellow .
`` No , '' said Mr. Polly very earnestly .
`` It is n't .
It just looks like me .
That 's all . ''
`` Look here , Miriam , '' said Mr. Polly .
`` I have n't come back and I 'm not coming back .
I 'm -- I 'm a Visitant from Another World .
You shut up about me and I 'll shut up about myself .
I came back because I thought you might be hard up or in trouble or some silly thing like that .
Now I see you again -- I 'm satisfied .
I 'm satisfied completely .
I 'm going to absquatulate , see ?
Hey Presto right away . ''
`` Do n't you think you 're going to see me again , '' he said , `` for you ai n't . ''
`` That _was_ a tasty egg , '' he said , hovered for a second and vanished .
Mr. Polly sat beside the fat woman at one of the little green tables at the back of the Potwell Inn , and struggled with the mystery of life .
It was one of those evenings , serenely luminous , amply and atmospherically still , when the river bend was at its best .
A swan floated against the dark green masses of the further bank , the stream flowed broad and shining to its destiny , with scarce a ripple -- except where the reeds came out from the headland -- the three poplars rose clear and harmonious against a sky of green and yellow .
And it was as if it was all securely within a great warm friendly globe of crystal sky .
It was as safe and enclosed and fearless as a child that has still to be born .
It was an evening full of the quality of tranquil , unqualified assurance .
Mr. Polly 's mind was filled with the persuasion that indeed all things whatsoever must needs be satisfying and complete .
It was incredible that life has ever done more than seemed to jar , that there could be any shadow in life save such velvet softnesses as made the setting for that silent swan , or any murmur but the ripple of the water as it swirled round the chained and gently swaying punt .
And the mind of Mr. Polly , exalted and made tender by this atmosphere , sought gently , but sought , to draw together the varied memories that came drifting , half submerged , across the circle of his mind .
asked the fat woman , surprised .
`` I went to my home . ''
`` It do n't matter .
I 'm not going back to them . ''
She added mildly : `` I ca n't 'ardly say I 'm sorry . ''
`` I suppose there were things that were good to him , '' Mr. Polly speculated .
`` They were n't _our_ things . ''
`` I set fire to a house -- once . ''
`` There 's something that does n't mind us , '' he resumed presently .
`` It is n't what we try to get that we get , it is n't the good we think we do is good .
What makes us happy is n't our trying , what makes others happy is n't our trying .
There 's a sort of character people like and stand up for and a sort they wo n't .
You got to work it out and take the consequences ... .
Miriam was always trying . ''
`` No one you know .
But she used to go about with her brows knit trying not to do whatever she wanted to do -- if ever she did want to do anything -- ''
`` It helps and it hinders . ''
`` If I was a nigger or an Italian I should come out here and sing .
I whistle sometimes , but bless you , it 's singing I 've got in my mind .
Sometimes I think I live for sunsets . ''
A deeper strain had come to the fat woman .
`` You got to die some day , '' she said .
The fat woman 's voice sank nearly to the inaudible .
`` Spoil the place for others , '' said the fat woman , abandoning her moral solicitudes for a more congenial point of view .
For in all this enormous vacancy of space we know certainly of life only upon the surface of our earth .
It does not penetrate much more than three miles down into the 4,000 miles that separate us from the centre of our globe , and it does not reach more than five miles above its surface .
Apparently all the limitlessness of space is otherwise empty and dead .
Slowly by degrees as one million of years followed another , this { 8 } fiery scene would lose its eruptive incandescence .
The vapours in the sky would rain down and become less dense overhead ; great slaggy cakes of solidifying rock would appear upon the surface of the molten sea , and sink under it , to be replaced by other floating masses .
The sun and moon growing now each more distant and each smaller , would rush with diminishing swiftness across the heavens .
The moon now , because of its smaller size , would be already cooled far below incandescence , and would be alternately obstructing and reflecting the sunlight in a series of eclipses and full moons .
At last a condition of things must have been attained in which a man might have stood up on earth and looked about him and lived .
If we could have visited the earth at that time we should have stood on great lava-like masses of rock without a trace of soil or touch of living vegetation , under a storm-rent sky .
Hot and violent winds , exceeding the fiercest tornado that ever blows , and downpours of rain such as our milder , slower earth to-day knows nothing of , might have assailed us .
The water of the downpour would have rushed by us , muddy with the spoils of the rocks , coming together into torrents , cutting deep gorges and canyons as they hurried past to deposit their sediment in the earliest seas .
Through the clouds we should have glimpsed a great sun moving visibly across the sky , and in its wake and in the wake of the moon would have come a diurnal tide of earthquake and upheaval .
And { 10 } the moon , which nowadays keeps one constant face to earth , would then have been rotating visibly and showing the side it now hides so inexorably .
[ Illustration : FOSSILIZED FOOTPRINTS OF A LABYRINTHODONT CHEIROTHERIUM ]
In various ways these new orders and genera had adapted themselves to breathing air .
Hitherto all animals had breathed air dissolved in water , and that indeed is what all animals still have to do .
But now in divers fashions the animal kingdom was acquiring the power of supplying its own moisture where it was needed .
A man with a perfectly dry lung would suffocate to-day ; { 24 } his lung surfaces must be moist in order that air may pass through them into his blood .
The adaptation to air breathing consists in all cases either in the development of a cover to the old-fashioned gills to stop evaporation , or in the development of tubes or other new breathing organs lying deep inside the body and moistened by a watery secretion .
The old gills with which the ancestral fish of the vertebrated line had breathed were inadaptable to breathing upon land , and in the case of this division of the animal kingdom it is the swimming bladder of the fish which becomes a new , deep-seated breathing organ , the lung .
The kind of animals known as amphibia , the frogs and newts of to-day , begin their lives in the water and breathe by gills ; and subsequently the lung , developing in the same way as the swimming bladder of many fishes do , as a baglike outgrowth from the throat , takes over the business of breathing , the animal comes out on land , and the gills dwindle and the gill slits disappear .
( All except an outgrowth of one gill slit , which becomes the passage of the ear and ear-drum . )
The animal can now live only in the air , but it must return at least to the edge of the water to lay its eggs and reproduce its kind .
Moreover some of the reptiles were returning to the sea waters .
Three groups of big swimming beings had invaded the sea from which their ancestors had come : the Mososaurs , the Plesiosaurs , and Ichthyosaurs .
Some of these again approached the proportions of our present whales .
The Ichthyosaurs seem to have been quite seagoing creatures , but the Plesiosaurs were a type of animal that has no cognate form to-day .
The body was stout and big with paddles , adapted either for swimming or crawling through marshes , or along the bottom of shallow waters .
The comparatively small { 30 } head was poised on a vast snake of neck , altogether outdoing the neck of the swan .
Either the Plesiosaur swam and searched for food under the water and fed as the swan will do , or it lurked under water and snatched at passing fish or beast .
In a few paragraphs a picture of the lush vegetation and swarming reptiles of that first great summer of life , the Mesozoic period , has been sketched .
But while the Dinosaurs lorded it over the hot selvas and marshy plains and the Pterodactyls filled the forests with their flutterings and possibly with shrieks and croakings as they pursued the humming insect life of the still flowerless shrubs and trees , some less conspicuous and less abundant forms upon the margins of this abounding life were acquiring certain powers and learning certain lessons of endurance , that were to be of the utmost value to their race when at last the smiling generosity of sun and earth began to fade .
[ Illustration : FOSSIL OF THE ARCHEOPTERYX ; ONE OF THE EARLIEST BIRDS ]
The Age of Reptiles lasted , it is now guessed , eighty million years .
Had any quasi-human intelligence been watching the world through that inconceivable length of time , how safe and eternal the sunshine and abundance must have seemed , how assured the wallowing prosperity of the dinosaurs and the flapping abundance of the flying lizards !
And then the mysterious rhythms and accumulating forces of the universe began to turn against that quasi-eternal stability .
That run of luck { 36 } for life was running out .
Age by age , myriad of years after myriad of years , with halts no doubt and retrogressions , came a change towards hardship and extreme conditions , came great alterations of level and great redistributions of mountain and sea .
We find one thing in the Record of the Rocks during the decadence of the long Mesozoic age of prosperity that is very significant of steadily sustained changes of condition , and that is a violent fluctuation of living forms and the appearance of new and strange species .
Under the gathering threat of extinction the older orders and genera are displaying their utmost capacity for variation and adaptation .
The Ammonites for example in these last pages of the Mesozoic chapter exhibit a multitude of fantastic forms .
Under settled conditions there is no encouragement for novelties ; they do not develop , they are suppressed ; what is best adapted is already there .
Under novel conditions it is the ordinary type that suffers , and the novelty that may have a better chance to survive and establish itself ... .
But we do not know sufficient of the causes of climatic change at present to forecast the possible fluctuations of climatic conditions that lie before us .
We may be moving towards increasing sunshine or lapsing towards another glacial age ; volcanic activity and the upheaval of mountain masses may be increasing or diminishing ; we do not know ; we lack sufficient science .
With the opening of this period the grasses appear ; for the first time there is pasture in the world ; and with the full development of the once obscure mammalian type , appear a number of interesting grazing animals and of carnivorous types which prey upon these .
[ Illustration : SKELETON OF PROTOHIPPUS VENTICOLUS -- EARLY HORSE ]
This difference between the reptile world and the world of our human minds is one our sympathies seem unable to pass .
We can not conceive in ourselves the swift uncomplicated urgency of a reptile 's instinctive motives , its appetites , fears and hates .
We { 41 } can not understand them in their simplicity because all our motives are complicated ; our 's are balances and resultants and not simple urgencies .
But the mammals and birds have self-restraint and consideration for other individuals , a social appeal , a self-control that is , at its lower level , after our own fashion .
We can in consequence establish relations with almost all sorts of them .
When they suffer they utter cries and make movements that rouse our feelings .
We can make understanding pets of them with a mutual recognition .
They can be tamed to self-restraint towards us , domesticated and taught .
That unusual growth of brain which is the central fact of Cainozoic times marks a new communication and interdependence of individuals .
It foreshadows the development of human societies of which we shall soon be telling .
The great world summer of the middle Cainozoic period drew at last to an end .
It was to follow those other two great summers in the history of life , the summer of the Coal Swamps and the vast summer of the Age of Reptiles .
Once more the earth spun towards an ice age .
The world chilled , grew milder for a time and chilled again .
In the warm past hippopotami had wallowed through a lush sub-tropical vegetation , and a tremendous tiger with fangs like sabres , the sabre-toothed tiger , had hunted its prey where now the journalists of Fleet Street go to and fro .
Now came a bleaker age and still bleaker ages .
A great weeding and extinction of species occurred .
A woolly rhinoceros , adapted to a cold climate , and the mammoth , a big woolly cousin of the elephants , the Arctic musk ox and the reindeer passed across the scene .
Then century by century the Arctic ice cap , the wintry death of the great Ice Age , crept { 44 } southward .
In England it came almost down to the Thames , in America it reached Ohio .
There would be warmer spells of a few thousand years and relapses towards a bitterer cold .
It is not until we come to sands that are almost a quarter of a million years old that we find any other particle of a sub-human being .
But there are plenty of implements , and they are steadily improving in quality as we read on through the record .
They are no longer clumsy Eoliths ; they are now shapely instruments made with considerable skill .
_And they are much bigger than the similar implements afterwards made by true man._ Then , in a sandpit at Heidelberg , appears a single quasi-human jaw-bone , a clumsy jaw-bone , absolutely chinless , far heavier than a true human jaw-bone and narrower , so that it is improbable the creature 's tongue could have moved about for articulate speech .
On the strength of this jaw-bone , scientific men suppose this creature to have been a heavy , almost human monster , possibly with huge limbs and hands , possibly with a thick felt of hair , and they call it the Heidelberg Man .
[ Illustration : THE HEIDELBERG MAN ]
These first real human beings we know of in Europe appear already to have belonged to one or other of at least two very distinct races .
One of these races was of a very high type indeed ; it was tall and big brained .
One of the women 's skulls found exceeds in capacity that of the average man of to-day .
One of the men's skeletons is over six feet in height .
The physical type resembled that of the North American Indian .
From the Cro-Magnon cave in which the first skeletons were found these people have been called Cro-Magnards .
They were savages , but savages of a high order .
The second race , the race of the Grimaldi cave remains , was distinctly negroid in its characters .
Its nearest living affinities are the Bushmen and Hottentots of South Africa .
It is interesting to find at the very outset of the known human story , that mankind was already racially divided into at least two main varieties ; and one is tempted to such unwarrantable guesses as that the former race was probably brownish rather than black and that it came from the East or North , and that the latter was blackish rather than brown and came from the equatorial south .
They do not seem to have erected any buildings though they may have had tents of skins , and though they made clay figures they never rose to the making of pottery .
Since they had no cooking implements their cookery must have been rudimentary or nonexistent .
They knew nothing of cultivation and nothing of any sort of basket work or woven cloth .
Except for their robes of skin or fur they were naked painted savages .
These earliest known men hunted the open steppes of Europe for a hundred centuries perhaps , and then slowly drifted and changed before a change of climate .
Europe , century by century , was growing milder and damper .
Reindeer receded northward and eastward , and bison and horse followed .
The steppes gave way to forests , and red deer took the place of horse and bison .
There is a { 57 } change in the character of the implements with this change in their application .
River and lake fishing becomes of great importance to men , and fine implements of bone increased .
`` The bone needles of this age , '' says de Mortillet , `` are much superior to those of later , even historical times , down to the Renaissance .
The Romans , for example , never had needles comparable to those of this epoch . ''
Primitive man probably thought very much as a child thinks , that is to say in a series of imaginative pictures .
He conjured up images or images presented themselves to his mind , and he acted in accordance with the emotions they aroused .
So a child or an uneducated person does to-day .
Systematic thinking is apparently a comparatively late development in human experience ; it has not { 61 } played any great part in human life until within the last three thousand years .
And even to-day those who really control and order their thoughts are but a small minority of mankind .
Most of the world still lives by imagination and passion .
[ Illustration : RELICS OF THE STONE AGE ]
[ Illustration : WIDESPREAD SIMILARITY OF MEN OF THE STONE AGE ]
We are still very ignorant about the beginnings of cultivation and settlement in the world although a vast amount of research and speculation has been given to these matters in the last fifty years .
All that we can say with any confidence at present is that somewhen about 15,000 and 12,000 B.C .
while the Azilian people were in the south of Spain and while the remnants of the earlier hunters were drifting northward and eastward , somewhere in North Africa or Western Asia or in that great Mediterranean valley that is now submerged under the waters of the Mediterranean sea , there were people who , age by age , were working out two vitally important things ; they were beginning cultivation and they were domesticating animals .
They were also beginning to make , in addition to the chipped implements of their hunter forebears , implements of polished stone .
They had discovered the possibility of basketwork and roughly woven textiles of plant fibre , and they were beginning to make a rudely modelled pottery .
[ Illustration : NEOLITHIC FLINT IMPLEMENTS ]
If we were to make a map of the world with dots to show how far these group practices have left their traces , we should make a belt along the temperate and sub-tropical coasts of the world from Stonehenge and Spain across the world to Mexico and Peru .
But Africa below the equator , north central Europe , and north Asia would show none of these dottings ; there lived races who were developing along practically independent lines .
[ Illustration : NEOLITHIC WARRIOR ]
The invention of writing was of very great importance in the development of human societies .
It put agreements , laws , commandments on record .
It made the growth of states larger than the old city states possible .
It made a continuous historical consciousness possible .
The command of the priest or king and his seal could go far beyond his sight and voice and could survive his death .
It is interesting to note that in ancient Sumeria seals were greatly used .
A king or a nobleman or a merchant would have his seal often very artistically carved , and would impress it on any clay document he wished to authorize .
So close had civilization got to printing six thousand years ago .
Then the clay was dried hard and became permanent .
For the reader must remember that in the land of Mesopotamia for countless years , letters , records and accounts were all written on comparatively indestructible tiles .
To that fact we owe a great wealth of recovered knowledge .
[ Illustration : VIEW FROM THE SUMMIT OF THE GREAT PYRAMID OF CHEOPS ]
Moving over large stretches of country the nomad took a wider view of life .
He touched on the confines of this settled land and that .
He was used to the sight of strange faces .
He had to scheme and treat for pasture with competing tribes .
He knew more of minerals than the folk upon the plough lands because he went over mountain passes and into rocky places .
He may have been a better metallurgist .
Possibly bronze and much more probably iron smelting were nomadic discoveries .
Some of the earliest implements of iron reduced from its ores have been found in Central Europe far away from the early civilizations .
Cnossos was not so much a town as a great palace for the Cretan monarch and his people .
It was not even fortified .
It was only fortified later as the Phoenicians grew strong , and as a new and more terrible breed of pirates , the Greeks , came upon the sea from the north .
The monarch was called Minos , as the Egyptian monarch was called Pharaoh ; and he kept his state in a palace fitted with running water , with bathrooms and the like conveniences such as we know of in no other ancient remains .
There he held great festivals and shows .
There was bull-fighting , singularly like the bull-fighting that { 93 } still survives in Spain ; there was resemblance even in the costumes of the bull-fighters ; and there were gymnastic displays .
The women 's clothes were remarkably modern in spirit ; they wore corsets and flounced dresses .
The pottery , the textile manufactures , the sculpture , painting , jewellery , ivory , metal and inlay work of these { 94 } Cretans was often astonishingly beautiful .
And they had a system of writing , but that still remains to be deciphered .
The Aryans raised crops of wheat , ploughing with oxen , but they did not settle down by their crops ; they would reap and move on .
They had bronze , and somewhen about 1500 B.C .
They may have been the discoverers of iron smelting .
And somewhen vaguely about that time they also got the horse -- which to begin with they used only for draught purposes .
Their social life did not centre upon a temple like that of the more settled people round the Mediterranean , and their chief men were leaders rather than priests .
They had an aristocratic social order rather than a { 106 } divine and regal order ; from a very early stage they distinguished certain families as leaderly and noble .
There was a division of the spoils of Assyria .
A Median Empire was set up in the north under Cyaxares .
It included Nineveh , and its capital was Ecbatana .
Eastward it reached to the borders of India .
To the south of this in a great crescent was a new Chaldean Empire , the Second Babylonian Empire , which rose to a very great degree of wealth and power under the rule of Nebuchadnezzar the Great ( the Nebuchadnezzar of the Bible ) .
The last great days , the { 110 } greatest days of all , for Babylon began .
For a time the two Empires remained at peace , and the daughter of Nebuchadnezzar was married to Cyaxares .
Thus it was the Babylonian and Median empires were united .
Cambyses , the son of Cyrus , subjugated Egypt .
Cambyses went mad and was accidentally killed , and was presently succeeded by Darius the Mede , Darius I , the son of Hystaspes , one of the chief councillors of Cyrus .
There they remained until Cyrus took Babylon ( 538 B.C. )
He then collected them together and sent them back to resettle their country and rebuild the walls and temple of Jerusalem .
As troubles thicken round the divided Hebrews the importance of these Prophets increases .
[ Illustration : RUINS OF THE GREAT TEMPLE OF ZEUS AT OLYMPIA ]
THE WARS OF THE GREEKS AND PERSIANS
It was on account of the Scythians that Darius I invaded Europe .
He wanted to reach South Russia , the homeland of the Scythian horsemen .
He crossed the Bosphorus with a great army and marched through Bulgaria to the Danube , crossed this by a bridge of boats and pushed far northward .
His army suffered terribly .
It was largely an infantry force and the mounted Scythians rode all round it , cut off its supplies , destroyed any stragglers and never came to a pitched battle .
Darius was forced into an inglorious retreat .
For many centuries Athens retained her prestige as a centre of art and culture ; her schools went on indeed to 529 A.D. , that is to say for nearly a thousand years ; but the leadership in the intellectual activity of the world passed presently across the Mediterranean to Alexandria , the new trading city that Alexander had founded .
Here the Macedonian general Ptolemy had become Pharaoh , with a court that spoke Greek .
He had become an intimate of Alexander before he became king , and he was deeply saturated with the ideas of Aristotle .
He set himself , with great energy and capacity , to organize knowledge and investigation .
He also wrote a history of Alexander 's campaigns which , unhappily , is lost to the world .
Here then we have the definite first opening up of the intellectual process in which we live to-day ; here we have the systematic gathering and distribution of knowledge .
The foundation of this Museum and Library marks one of the great epochs in the history of mankind .
It is the true beginning of Modern History .
[ Illustration : STATUETTE OF MAITREYA : THE BUDDHA TO COME ]
Nor did the Library produce any improvements in book making .
That ancient world had no paper made in definite sizes from rag pulp .
Paper was a Chinese invention and it did not reach the western world until the ninth century A.D .
The only book materials were parchment and strips of the papyrus reed joined edge to edge .
These strips were kept on rolls which were very unwieldy to wind to and fro and read , and very inconvenient for reference .
It was these things that prevented the development of paged and printed books .
Printing itself was known in the world it would seem as early as the Old Stone Age ; there were seals in ancient Sumeria ; but without abundant paper there was little advantage in printing books , an improvement that may further have been resisted by trades unionism on the part of the copyists employed .
Alexandria produced abundant books but not cheap books , and it never spread knowledge into the population of the ancient world below the level of a wealthy and influential class .
[ Illustration : THE DEATH OF BUDDHA ]
He was meditating upon this project , says the story , when the news was brought to him that his wife had been delivered of his first-born son .
`` This is another tie to break , '' said Gautama .
He returned to the village amidst the rejoicings of his fellow clansmen .
There was a great feast and a Nautch dance to celebrate the birth of this new tie , and in the night Gautama awoke in a great agony of spirit , `` like a man who is told that his house is on fire . ''
He resolved to leave his happy aimless life forthwith .
He went softly to the threshold of his wife 's chamber , and saw her by the light of a little oil lamp , sleeping sweetly , surrounded by flowers , with his infant son in her arms .
He felt a great craving to take up the child in one first and last embrace before he departed , but the fear of waking his wife prevented him , and at last he turned away and went out into the bright Indian moonshine and mounted his horse and rode off into the world .
[ Illustration : A BURMESE BUDDHA ]
When the mind grapples with a great and intricate problem , it makes its advances step by step , with but little realization of the gains it has made , until suddenly , with an effect of abrupt illumination , it realizes its victory .
So it happened to Gautama .
He had seated himself under a great tree by the side of a river to eat , when this sense of clear vision came to him .
It seemed to him that he saw life plain .
He is said to have sat all day and all night in profound thought , and then he rose up to impart his vision to the world .
[ Illustration : A LOHAN OR BUDDHIST APOSTLE ( Tang Dynasty ) ]
[ Illustration : THE PILLAR OF LIONS ]
If there were human sacrifices they had long given way to animal sacrifices before the dawn of history .
And a form of picture writing was growing up long before a thousand years B.C .
North China , the China of the Hwang-ho River , became Confucian in thought and spirit ; south China , Yang-tse-Kiang China , became Taoist .
Since those days a conflict has always been traceable in Chinese affairs between these two spirits , the spirit of the north and the spirit of the south , between ( in latter times ) Pekin and Nankin , between the official-minded , upright and conservative north , and the sceptical , artistic , lax and experimental south .
But this brought against him a more formidable enemy than were the Romans at that time , the Phoenician trading city of Carthage , which was probably then the greatest city in the world .
Sicily was too near Carthage for a new Alexander to be welcome there , and Carthage was mindful of the fate that had befallen her mother city Tyre half a century before .
So she sent a fleet to encourage or compel Rome to continue the struggle , and she cut the overseas communications of Pyrrhus .
Pyrrhus found himself freshly assailed by the Romans , and suffered a disastrous repulse in an attack he had made upon their camp at Beneventum between Naples and Rome .
So ended the Third Punic War .
Of all the Semitic states and cities that had flourished in the world five centuries before only one little country remained free under native rulers .
This was Judea , which had liberated itself from the Seleucids and was under the rule { 184 } of the native Maccabean princes .
By this time it had its Bible almost complete , and was developing the distinctive traditions of the Jewish world as we know it now .
It was natural that the Carthaginians , Phoenicians and kindred peoples dispersed about the world should find a common link in their practically identical language and in this literature of hope and courage .
To a large extent they were still the traders and bankers of the world .
The Semitic world had been submerged rather than replaced .
For two hundred years the Roman soldier farmers had struggled for freedom and a share in the government of their state ; for a hundred years they had enjoyed their privileges .
The First Punic War wasted them and robbed them of all they had won .
To the north of both these great empires were barbaric wildernesses .
What is now Germany was largely forest lands ; the forests extended far into Russia and made a home for the gigantic aurochs , a bull of almost elephantine size .
Then to the north of the great mountain masses of Asia stretched a band of deserts , steppes and then forests and frozen lands .
In the eastward lap of the elevated part of Asia was the great triangle of Manchuria .
Large parts of these regions , stretching between South Russia and Turkestan into Manchuria , were and are regions of exceptional climatic insecurity .
Their rainfall has varied greatly in the course of a few centuries They are lands treacherous to man .
For years they will carry pasture and sustain cultivation , and then will come an age of decline in humidity and a cycle of killing droughts .
In the second century A.D. a great misfortune came upon the Roman and Chinese empires that probably weakened the resistance of both to barbarian pressure .
This was a pestilence of unexampled virulence .
It raged for eleven years in China and disorganized the social framework profoundly .
The Han dynasty fell , and a new age of division and confusion began from which China did not fairly recover until the seventh century A.D. with the coming of the great Tang dynasty .
RELIGIOUS DEVELOPMENTS UNDER THE ROMAN EMPIRE
Both these religions , and the same is true of many other of the numerous parallel cults that sought the allegiance of the slaves and citizens under the earlier Roman emperors , are personal religions .
They aim at personal salvation and personal immortality .
The older religions were not personal like that ; they were social .
The older fashion of divinity was god or goddess of the city first or of the state , and only secondarily of the individual .
The sacrifices were a public and not a private function .
They concerned collective practical needs in this world in which we live .
But the Greeks first and now the Romans had pushed religion out of politics .
Guided by the Egyptian tradition religion had retreated to the other world .
In the East long before the time of Buddha there had been ascetics , men and women who gave up most of the delights of life , who repudiated marriage and property and sought spiritual powers and an escape from the stresses and mortifications of the world in abstinence , pain and solitude .
Buddha himself set his face against ascetic extravagances , but many of his disciples followed a monkish life of great severity .
Obscure Greek cults practised similar disciplines even to the extent of self-mutilation .
Asceticism appeared in the Jewish communities of Judea and Alexandria also in the first century B.C .
Communities of men abandoned the world and gave themselves to austerities and mystical contemplation .
Such was the sect of the Essenes .
Throughout the first and second centuries A.D. there was an almost world-wide resort to such repudiations of life , a universal search for `` salvation '' from the distresses of the time .
The old sense of an established order , the old confidence in priest and temple and law and custom , had gone .
Amidst the prevailing slavery , cruelty , fear , anxiety , waste , display and hectic self-indulgence , went this epidemic of self-disgust and mental insecurity , this agonized search for peace even at the price of renunciation and voluntary suffering .
This it was that filled the Serapeum with weeping penitents and brought the converts into the gloom and gore of the Mithraic cave .
The doctrine of the Kingdom of Heaven , which was the main teaching of Jesus , is certainly one of the most revolutionary doctrines that ever stirred and changed human thought .
It is small wonder if the world of that time failed to grasp its full significance , and recoiled in dismay from even a half apprehension of its tremendous challenges to the established habits and institutions of mankind .
For the doctrine of the Kingdom of Heaven , as Jesus seems to have preached it , was no less than a bold and uncompromising demand for a complete change and cleansing of the life of our struggling race , an utter cleansing , without and within .
To the gospels the reader must go for all that is preserved of this tremendous teaching ; here we are only concerned with the jar of its impact upon established ideas .
The opening half of the fifth century saw the whole of the Roman Empire in Europe the prey of robber armies of barbarians .
It is difficult to visualize the state of affairs in the world at that time .
Over France , Spain , Italy and the Balkan peninsula , the great cities that had flourished under the early empire still stood , impoverished , partly depopulated and falling into decay .
Life in them must have been shallow , mean and full of uncertainty .
Local officials asserted their authority and went on with their work with such conscience as they had , no doubt in the name of a now remote and inaccessible emperor .
The churches went on , but usually with illiterate priests .
There was little reading and much superstition and fear .
But everywhere except where looters had destroyed them , books and pictures and statuary and such-like works of art were still to be found .
It is impossible in the space at our disposal to trace the movements of all the various German and Slavonic tribes as they went to and fro in the disorganized empire in search of plunder and a pleasant home .
But let the Vandals serve as an example .
They came into { 232 } history in east Germany .
They settled as we have told in Pannonia .
Thence they moved somewhen about 425 A.D. through the intervening provinces to Spain .
There they found Visigoths from South Russia and other German tribes setting up dukes and kings .
From Spain the Vandals under Genseric sailed for North Africa ( 429 ) , captured Carthage ( 439 ) , and built a fleet .
They secured the mastery of the sea and captured and pillaged Rome ( 455 ) , which had recovered very imperfectly from her capture and looting by Alaric half a century earlier .
Then the Vandals made themselves masters of Sicily , Corsica , Sardinia and most of the other islands of the western Mediterranean .
They made , in fact , a sea empire very similar in its extent to the sea empire of Carthage seven hundred odd years before .
They were at the climax of their power about 477 .
They were a mere handful of conquerors holding all this country .
In the next century almost all their territory had been reconquered for the empire of Constantinople during a transitory blaze of energy under Justinian I .
THE HUNS AND THE END OF THE WESTERN EMPIRE
War , the bitterest theology , and the usual vices of mankind constituted Byzantine life of those days .
It was picturesque , it was romantic ; it had little sweetness or light .
When Byzantium and Persia were not fighting the barbarians from the north , they wasted Asia Minor and Syria in dreary and destructive hostilities .
Even in close alliance these two empires would have found it a hard task to turn back the barbarians and recover their prosperity .
The Turks or Tartars first come into history as the allies first of one power and then of another .
In the sixth century the two chief antagonists were Justinian and Chosroes I ; in the opening of the seventh the Emperor Heraclius was pitted against Chosroes II ( 580 ) .
In Central Asia the Turkish peoples had taken root in what is now Western Turkestan , and Persia already employed many Turkish officials and Turkish mercenaries .
The Parthians had gone out of history , absorbed into the general population of Persia .
There were no more Aryan nomads in the history of Central Asia ; Mongolian people had replaced them .
The Turks became masters of Asia from China to the Caspian .
The same great pestilence at the end of the second century A.D. that had shattered the Roman Empire had overthrown the Han dynasty in China .
Then came a period of division and of Hunnish conquests from which China arose refreshed , more rapidly and more completely than Europe was destined to do .
Before the end of the sixth century China was reunited under the Suy dynasty , and this by the time of Heraclius gave place to the Tang dynasty , whose reign marks another great period of prosperity for China .
Throughout the seventh , eighth and ninth centuries China was the most secure and civilized country in the world .
The Han dynasty had extended her boundaries in the north ; the Suy and Tang dynasties now spread her civilization to the south , and China { 247 } began to assume the proportions she has to-day .
In Central Asia indeed she reached much further , extending at last , through tributary Turkish tribes , to Persia and the Caspian Sea .
The man who fired this Arab flame appears first in history as the young husband of the widow of a rich merchant of the town of Mecca , named Muhammad .
Until he was forty he did very little to distinguish himself in the world .
He seems to have taken considerable interest in religious discussion .
Mecca was a pagan city at that time worshipping in particular a black stone , the Kaaba , of great repute throughout all Arabia and a centre of pilgrimages ; but there were great numbers of Jews in the country -- indeed all the southern portion of Arabia professed the Jewish faith -- and there were Christian churches in Syria .
[ Illustration : LOOKING ACROSS THE SEA OF SAND ]
Yet when the manifest defects of Muhammad 's life and writings have been allowed for , there remains in Islam , this faith he imposed upon the Arabs , much power and inspiration .
One is its uncompromising monotheism ; its simple enthusiastic faith in the rule and fatherhood of God and its freedom from theological complications .
Another is its complete detachment from the sacrificial priest and the temple .
It is an entirely prophetic religion , proof against any possibility of relapse towards blood sacrifices .
In the Koran the limited { 252 } and ceremonial nature of the pilgrimage to Mecca is stated beyond the possibility of dispute , and every precaution was taken by Muhammad to prevent the deification of himself after his death .
And a third element of strength lay in the insistence of Islam upon the perfect brotherhood and equality before God of all believers , whatever their colour , origin or status .
These are the things that made Islam a power in human affairs .
It has been said that the true founder of the Empire of Islam was not so much Muhammad as his friend and helper , Abu Bekr .
If Muhammad , with his shifty character , was the mind and imagination of primitive Islam , Abu Bekr was its conscience and its will .
Whenever Muhammad wavered Abu Bekr sustained him .
And when Muhammad died , Abu Bekr became Caliph ( = successor ) , and with that faith that moves mountains , he set himself simply and sanely to organize the subjugation of the whole world to Allah -- with little armies of 3,000 or 4,000 Arabs -- according to those letters the prophet had written from Medina in 628 to all the monarchs of the world .
There follows the most amazing story of conquest in the whole history of our race .
The Byzantine army was smashed at the battle of the Yarmuk ( a tributary of the Jordan ) in 634 ; and the Emperor Heraclius , his energy sapped by dropsy and his resources exhausted by the Persian war , saw his new conquests in Syria , Damascus , Palmyra , Antioch , Jerusalem and the rest fall almost without resistance to the Moslim .
Large elements in the population went over to Islam .
Then the Moslim turned east .
The Persians had found an able general in Rustam ; they had a great host with a force of elephants ; and for three days they fought the Arabs at Kadessia ( 637 ) and broke at last in headlong rout .
[ Map : the Moslem Empire , 750 A.D . ]
Very speedily the intolerant self-sufficiency of the early days of faith , which made the Koran seem the only possible book , was dropped .
Learning sprang up everywhere in the footsteps of the Arab conquerors .
By the eighth century there was an educational { 256 } organization throughout the whole `` Arabized '' world .
In the ninth learned men in the schools of Cordoba in Spain were corresponding with learned men in Cairo , Bagdad , Bokhara and Samarkand .
The Jewish mind assimilated very readily with the Arab , and for a time the two Semitic races worked together through the medium of Arabic .
Long after the political break-up and enfeeblement of the Arabs , this intellectual community of the Arab-speaking world endured .
It was still producing very considerable results in the thirteenth century .
In 1066 England was attacked almost simultaneously by an invasion of the Norwegian Northmen under King Harold Hardrada and by the Latinized Northmen under the Duke of Normandy .
Harold King of England defeated the former at the battle of Stamford Bridge , and was defeated by the latter at Hastings .
England was conquered by the Normans , and so cut off from Scandinavian , Teutonic and Russian affairs , and brought into the most intimate relations and conflicts with the French .
For the next four centuries the English were entangled in the conflicts of the French feudal princes and wasted upon the fields of France .
[ Illustration : THE HORSES OF S. MARK , VENICE ]
Immediately the hostility of Latin and Greek broke out again .
The Crusaders were the servants of the Latin Church , and the Greek patriarch of Jerusalem found himself in a far worse case under the triumphant Latins than under the Turks .
The Crusaders discovered themselves between Byzantine and Turk and fighting both .
Much of Asia Minor was recovered by the Byzantine Empire , and the Latin princes were left , a buffer between Turk and Greek , with Jerusalem and a few small principalities , of which Edessa was one of the chief , in Syria .
Their grip even on these possessions was precarious , and in 1144 Edessa fell to the Moslim , leading to an ineffective Second Crusade , which failed to recover Edessa but saved Antioch from a similar fate .
The kings and princes disliked this alienation of property very greatly .
In the place of feudal lords capable of military support , they found their land supporting abbeys and monks and nuns .
And these lands were really under foreign dominion .
Even before the time of Pope Gregory VII there had been a struggle between the princes and the papacy over the question of `` investitures , '' the question that is of who should appoint the bishops .
If that power rested with the Pope and not the King , then the latter lost control not only of the consciences of his subjects but of a considerable part of his dominions .
For also the clergy claimed exemption from taxation .
They paid their taxes to Rome .
And not only that , but the church also claimed the right to levy a tax of one-tenth upon the property of the layman in addition to the taxes he paid his prince .
One very great weakness of the Roman Church in its struggle to secure the headship of all Christendom was the manner in which the Pope was chosen .
Having secured the imperial crown Frederick II stayed in Sicily , which he greatly preferred to Germany as a residence , and did nothing to redeem any of his promises to Innocent III , who died baffled in 1216 .
[ Illustration : COSTUMES OF THE BURGUNDIAN NOBILITY : FLEMISH WORK OF THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY ]
Throughout the fourteenth century the papacy did nothing to recover its moral sway .
The next Pope elected , Clement V , was a Frenchman , the choice of King Philip of France .
He never came to Rome .
He set up his court in the town of Avignon , which then belonged not to France but to the papal See , though embedded in French territory , and there his successors remained until 1377 , when Pope Gregory XI returned to the Vatican palace in Rome .
But Gregory XI did not take the sympathies of the whole church with him .
Many of the cardinals were of French origin and their habits and associations were rooted deep at Avignon .
When in 1378 Gregory XI died , and an Italian , Urban VI , was elected , these dissentient cardinals declared the election invalid , and elected another Pope , the anti-Pope , Clement VII .
This split is called the Great Schism .
The Popes remained in Rome , and all the anti-French powers , the Emperor , the King of England , Hungary , Poland and the North of Europe were loyal to them .
The anti-Popes , on the other hand , continued in Avignon , and were supported by the King of France , his ally the King of Scotland , Spain , Portugal and various German princes .
Each Pope excommunicated and cursed the adherents of his rival ( 1378-1417 ) .
Is it any wonder that presently all over Europe people began to think for themselves in matters of religion ?
His successor , Ogdai Khan , continued this astonishing career of conquest .
His armies were organized to a very high level of efficiency ; and they had with them a new Chinese invention , gunpowder , which they used in small field guns .
He completed the conquest of the Kin Empire and then swept his hosts right across Asia to Russia ( 1235 ) , an altogether amazing march .
Kieff was { 288 } destroyed in 1240 , and nearly all Russia became tributary to the Mongols .
Poland was ravaged , and a mixed army of Poles and Germans was annihilated at the battle of Liegnitz in Lower Silesia in 1241 .
The Emperor Frederick II does not seem to have made any great efforts to stay the advancing tide .
After that disaster the tide of Mongol victory ebbed .
The dominions of the Great Khan fell into a number of separate states .
The eastern Mongols became Buddhists , like the Chinese ; the western became Moslim .
The Chinese threw off the rule of the Yuan dynasty in 1368 , and set up the native Ming dynasty which flourished from 1368 to 1644 .
The Russians remained tributary to the Tartar hordes upon the south-east steppes until 1480 , when the Grand Duke of Moscow repudiated his allegiance and laid the foundation of modern Russia .
In the fourteenth century there was a brief revival of Mongol vigour under Timurlane , a descendant of Jengis Khan .
He established himself in Western Turkestan , assumed the title of Grand Khan in 1369 , and conquered from Syria to Delhi .
He was the most savage and destructive of all the Mongol conquerors .
He established an empire of desolation that did not survive his death .
In 1505 , however , a descendant of this Timur , an adventurer named Baber , got together an army with guns and swept down upon the { 292 } plains of India .
His grandson Akbar ( 1556-1605 ) completed his conquests , and this Mongol ( or `` Mogul '' as the Arabs called it ) dynasty ruled in Delhi over the greater part of India until the eighteenth century .
One immediate result of this achievement of printing was the appearance of an abundance of Bibles in the world .
Another was a cheapening of school-books .
The knowledge of reading spread swiftly .
There was not only a great increase of books in the world , but the books that were now made were plainer to read and so easier to understand .
Instead of toiling at a crabbed text arid then thinking over its significance , readers now could think unimpeded as they read .
With this increase in the facility of reading , the reading public grew .
The book ceased to be a highly decorated toy or a scholar 's mystery .
People began to write books to be read as well as looked at by ordinary people .
They wrote in the ordinary language and not in Latin .
With the fourteenth century the real history of the European literature begins .
Marco particularly pleased Kublai ; he was young and clever , and it is clear he had mastered the Tartar language very thoroughly .
He was given an official position and sent on several missions , chiefly in south-west China .
The tale he had to tell of vast stretches of smiling and prosperous country , `` all the way excellent hostelries for travellers , '' and `` fine vineyards , fields , and gardens , '' of `` many abbeys '' of Buddhist monks , of manufactures of `` cloth of silk and gold and many fine taffetas , '' a `` constant succession of cities and boroughs , '' and so on , first roused the incredulity and then fired the imagination of all Europe .
He told of Burmah , and of its great armies with hundreds of elephants , and how these animals were defeated by the Mongol bowmen , and also of the Mongol conquest of Pegu .
He told of Japan , and greatly exaggerated the amount of gold in that country .
For three years Marco ruled the city of Yang-chow as governor , and he probably impressed the Chinese inhabitants as being little more of a foreigner than any Tartar would have been .
He may also have been sent on a mission to India .
Chinese records mention a certain Polo attached to the imperial council in 1277 , a very valuable confirmation of the general truth of the Polo story .
[ Illustration : EARLY ITALIAN ENGRAVING OF A SAILING SHIP ]
The teachings of the Englishman Wycliffe spread widely throughout Europe .
In 1398 a learned Czech , John Huss , delivered a series of lectures upon Wycliffe 's teachings in the university of Prague .
This teaching spread rapidly beyond the educated class and aroused great popular enthusiasm .
In 1414-18 a Council of the whole church was held at Constance to settle the Great Schism .
Huss was invited to this Council under promise of a safe conduct from the emperor , seized , put on trial for heresy and burnt alive ( 1415 ) .
So far from tranquillizing the Bohemian people , this led to an insurrection of the Hussites in that country , the first of a series of religious wars that inaugurated the break-up of Latin Christendom .
Against this insurrection Pope Martin V , the Pope specially elected at Constance as the head of a reunited Christendom , preached a Crusade .
Such is the brief outline of the politics of the Empire for thirty-two years .
It is interesting to note how entirely the European mind was concentrated upon the struggle for European ascendancy .
Neither Turks , French , English nor Germans had yet discovered any political interest in the great continent of America , nor any significance in the new sea routes to Asia .
Great things were happening in America ; Cortez with a mere handful of men had conquered the great Neolithic empire of Mexico for Spain , Pizarro had crossed the Isthmus of Panama ( 1530 ) and subjugated another wonder-land , Peru .
But as yet these events meant no more to Europe than a useful and stimulating influx of silver to the Spanish treasury .
`` The chapel was hung with black , and the blaze of hundreds of wax-lights was scarcely sufficient to dispel the darkness .
The brethren in their conventual dress , and all the Emperor's household clad in deep mourning , gathered round a huge catafalque , shrouded also in black , which had been raised in the centre of the chapel .
The service for the burial of the dead was then performed ; and , amidst the dismal wail of the monks , the prayers ascended for the departed spirit , that it might be received into the mansions of the blessed .
The sorrowful attendants were melted to tears , as the image of their master 's death was presented to their minds -- or they were touched , it may be , with compassion by this pitiable display of weakness .
Charles , muffled in a dark mantle , and bearing a lighted candle in his hand , mingled with his household , the spectator of his own obsequies ; and the doleful ceremony was concluded by his placing the taper in the hands of the priest , in sign of his surrendering up his soul to the Almighty . ''
What are these changes in the conditions of human life that have disorganized that balance of empire , priest , peasant and trader , with { 319 } periodic refreshment by barbaric conquest , that has held human affairs in the Old World in a sort of working rhythm for more than a hundred centuries ?
For a time the scientific process which began so brilliantly in Greece and Alexandria was interrupted .
The raids of the Teutonic barbarians , the westward drive of the Mongolian peoples , convulsive religious reconstruction and great pestilences put enormous strains upon political and social order .
When civilization emerged again from this phase of conflict and confusion , slavery was no longer the basis of economic life ; and the first paper-mills were preparing a new medium for collective information and co-operation in printed matter .
Gradually at this point and that , the search for knowledge , the systematic scientific process , was resumed .
He provoked a universal imitation .
Every king and princelet in Europe was building his own Versailles as much beyond his means as his subjects and credits would permit .
Everywhere the nobility rebuilt or extended their chateaux to the new pattern .
A great industry of beautiful and elaborate fabrics and furnishings developed .
The luxurious arts flourished everywhere ; sculpture in alabaster , faience , gilt woodwork , metal work , stamped leather , much music , magnificent painting , beautiful printing and bindings , fine crockery , fine vintages .
Amidst the mirrors and fine furniture went a strange race of `` gentlemen '' in tall powdered wigs , silks and laces , poised upon high red heels , supported by amazing canes ; and still more wonderful `` ladies , '' under towers of powdered hair and wearing vast expansions of silk and satin sustained on wire .
Through it all postured the great Louis , the sun of his world , unaware of the meagre and sulky and bitter faces that watched him from those lower darknesses to which his sunshine did not penetrate .
Unhappily placed between Austria , Prussia and Russia was the Polish kingdom , an ill-organized state of great landed proprietors too jealous of their own individual grandeur to permit more than a nominal kingship to the monarch they elected .
Her fate was division among these three neighbours , in spite of the efforts of France to retain her as an independent ally .
Switzerland at this time was a group of republican cantons ; Venice was a republic ; Italy like so much of Germany was divided among minor dukes and princes .
The Pope ruled like a prince in the papal states , too fearful now of losing the allegiance of the remaining Catholic princes to interfere between them and their subjects or to remind the world of the commonweal of Christendom .
There remained indeed no common { 328 } political idea in Europe at all ; Europe was given over altogether to division and diversity .
In the long run the English were the most successful in this scramble for overseas possessions .
The Danes and Swedes were too { 331 } deeply entangled in the complicated affairs of Germany to sustain effective expeditions abroad .
Sweden was wasted upon the German battlefields by a picturesque king , Gustavus Adolphus , the Protestant `` Lion of the North . ''
The Dutch were the heirs of such small settlements as Sweden made in America , and the Dutch were too near French aggressions to hold their own against the British .
In the far East the chief rivals for empire were the British , Dutch and French , and in America the British , French and Spanish .
The British had the supreme advantage of a water frontier , the `` silver streak '' of the English Channel , against Europe .
The tradition of the Latin Empire entangled them least .
All through the seventeenth century the Cossacks were spreading eastward from European Russia , and settling wherever they found agricultural conditions .
Cordons of forts and stations formed a moving frontier to these settlements to the south , where the Turkomans were still strong and active ; to the north-east , however , Russia had no frontier until she reached right to the Pacific ... .
The inherent disposition of monarchy to march back towards past conditions was first and most particularly manifest in Spain .
Here even the Inquisition was restored .
Across the Atlantic the Spanish colonies had followed the example of the United States and revolted against the European Great Power System , when Napoleon set his brother Joseph on the Spanish throne in 1810 .
The George Washington of South America was General Bolivar .
Spain was unable to suppress this revolt , it dragged on much as the United States War of Independence had dragged on , and at last the suggestion was made by Austria , in accordance with the spirit of the Holy Alliance , that the European monarch should assist Spain in this struggle .
This was opposed by Britain in Europe , but it was the prompt action of President Monroe of the United States in 1823 which conclusively warned off this projected monarchist restoration .
He announced that the United States would regard any extension of the European system in the Western Hemisphere as a hostile act .
Thus arose the Monroe Doctrine , the doctrine that there must be no extension of extra-American government in America , which has kept the Great Power system out of America for nearly a hundred years and permitted the new states of Spanish America to work out their destinies along their own lines .
In 1824 Louis XVIII died , and was succeeded by Charles X. Charles set himself to destroy the liberty of the press and universities , and to restore absolute government ; the sum of a billion francs was voted to compensate the nobles for the chateau burnings and sequestrations of 1789 .
In 1830 Paris rose against this embodiment of the ancient regime , and replaced him by Louis Philippe , the son of that Philip , Duke of Orleans , who was executed during the Terror .
The other continental monarchies , in face of the open approval of the revolution by Great Britain and a strong liberal ferment in Germany and Austria , did not interfere in this affair .
After all , France was still a monarchy .
This man Louis Philippe ( 1830-48 ) remained the constitutional King of France for eighteen years .
Such were the uneasy swayings of the peace of the Congress of Vienna , which were provoked by the reactionary proceedings of the monarchists .
The stresses that arose from the unscientific boundaries planned by the diplomatists at Vienna gathered force more deliberately , but they were even more dangerous to the peace of mankind .
It is extraordinarily inconvenient to administer together the affairs of peoples speaking different languages and so reading different literatures and having different general ideas , especially if those differences are exacerbated by religious disputes .
Only some strong mutual interest , such as the common defensive needs of the Swiss mountaineers , can justify a close linking of peoples of dissimilar languages and faiths ; and even in Switzerland there is the utmost local autonomy .
When , as in Macedonia , populations are mixed in a patchwork of villages and districts , the cantonal system is imperatively needed .
But if the reader will look at the map of Europe as the Congress of Vienna drew it , he will see that this gathering seems almost as if it had planned the maximum of local exasperation .
[ Illustration : PORTRAIT OF NAPOLEON ( CORONATION ) ]
These things , the steam railway and the electric telegraph , were to the popular imagination of the middle nineteenth century the most striking and revolutionary of inventions , but they were only the most conspicuous and clumsy first fruits of a far more extensive process .
Technical knowledge and skill were developing with an extraordinary rapidity , and to an extraordinary extent measured by the progress of any previous age .
Far less conspicuous at first in everyday life , but finally far more important , was the extension of man 's power over various structural materials .
Before the middle of the eighteenth century iron was reduced from its ores by { 359 } means of wood charcoal , was handled in small pieces , and hammered and wrought into shape .
It was material for a craftsman .
Quality and treatment were enormously dependent upon the experience and sagacity of the individual iron-worker .
The largest masses of iron that could be dealt with under those conditions amounted at most ( in the sixteenth century ) to two or three tons .
( There was a very definite upward limit , therefore , to the size of cannon . )
The blast-furnace rose in the eighteenth century and developed with the use of coke .
Not before the eighteenth century do we find rolled sheet iron ( 1728 ) and rolled rods and bars ( 1783 ) .
Nasmyth 's steam hammer came as late as 1838 .
The ancient world , because of its metallurgical inferiority , could not use steam .
The steam engine , even the primitive pumping engine , could not develop before sheet iron was available .
The early engines seem to the modern eye very pitiful and clumsy bits of ironmongery , but they were the utmost that the metallurgical science of the time could do .
As late as 1856 came the Bessemer process , and presently ( 1864 ) the open-hearth process , in which steel and every sort of iron could be melted , purified and cast in a manner and upon a scale hitherto unheard of .
To-day in the electric furnace one may see tons of incandescent steel swirling about like boiling milk in a saucepan .
Nothing in the previous practical advances of mankind is comparable in its consequences to the complete mastery over enormous masses of steel and iron and over their texture and quality which man has now achieved .
The railways and early engines of all sorts were the mere first triumphs of the new metallurgical methods .
Presently came ships of iron and steel , vast bridges , and a new way of building with steel upon a gigantic scale .
Men realized too late that they had planned their railways with far too timid a gauge , that they could have organized their travelling with far more steadiness and comfort upon a much bigger scale .
We have given these particulars of the advance in man 's knowledge of the metallurgy of steel and its results by way of illustration .
A parallel story could be told of the metallurgy of copper and tin , and of a multitude of metals , nickel and aluminium to name but two , unknown before the nineteenth century dawned .
It is in this great and growing mastery over substances , over different sorts of glass , over rocks and plasters and the like , over colours and textures , that the main triumphs of the mechanical revolution have thus far been achieved .
Yet we are still in the stage of the first fruits in the matter .
We have the power , but we have still to learn how to use our power .
Many of the first employments of these gifts of science have been vulgar , tawdry , stupid or horrible .
The artist and the adaptor have still hardly begun to work with the endless variety of substances now at their disposal .
The universities of Britain were at this time in a state of educational retrogression , largely given over to a pedantic conning of the Latin and Greek classics .
French education , too , was dominated by the classical tradition of the Jesuit schools , and consequently it was not difficult for the Germans to organize a body of investigators , small indeed in relation to the possibilities of the case , but large in proportion to the little band of British and French inventors and experimentalists .
And though this work of research and experiment was making Britain and France the most rich and { 362 } powerful countries in the world , it was not making scientific and inventive men rich and powerful .
There is a necessary unworldliness about a sincere scientific man ; he is too preoccupied with his research to plan and scheme how to make money out of it .
The economic exploitation of his discoveries falls very easily and naturally , therefore , into the hands of a more acquisitive type ; and so we find that the crops of rich men which every fresh phase of scientific and technical progress has produced in Great Britain , though they have not displayed quite the same passionate desire to insult and kill the goose that laid the national golden eggs as the scholastic and clerical professions , have been quite content to let that profitable creature starve .
Inventors and discoverers came by nature , they thought , for cleverer people to profit by .
[ Illustration : AN EARLY WEAVING MACHINE ]
The economic revolution of the Roman Republic had never been clearly apprehended by the common people of Rome .
The ordinary Roman citizen never saw the changes through which he lived , clearly and comprehensively as we see them .
But the industrial revolution , as it went on towards the end of the nineteenth century , was more and more distinctly _seen_ as one whole process by the common people it was affecting , because presently they could read and discuss and communicate , and because they went about and saw things as no commonalty had ever done before .
But it does not follow that the solution of these problems lies in some super-government of all the world arising by conquest or by the coalescence of existing governments .
By analogy with existing institutions men have thought of the Parliament of Mankind , of a World Congress , of a President or Emperor of the Earth .
Our first natural reaction is towards some such conclusion , but the discussion and experiences of half a century of suggestions and attempts has on the whole discouraged belief in that first obvious idea .
Along that line to world unity the resistances are too great .
The drift of thought seems now to be in the direction of a number of special committees or organizations , with world-wide power delegated to them by existing governments in this group of matters or that , bodies concerned with the waste or development of natural wealth , with the equalization of labour conditions , with world peace , with currency , population and health , and so forth .
THE EXPANSION OF THE UNITED STATES
For two hundred years the reader would see that stippling creeping slowly along the coastal districts and navigable waters , spreading still more gradually into Indiana , Kentucky and so forth .
Then somewhere about 1810 would come a change .
Things would get more lively along the river courses .
The dots would be multiplying and spreading .
That would be the steamboat .
The pioneer dots would be spreading soon over Kansas and Nebraska from a number of jumping-off places along the great rivers .
But on the way to this present greatness and security the American people passed through one phase of dire conflict .
The river steamboats , the railways , the telegraph , and their associate facilities , did not come soon enough to avert a deepening conflict of interests and ideas between the southern and northern states of the Union .
The former were slave-holding states ; the latter , states in which all men were free .
The railways and steamboats at first did but bring into sharper conflict an already established difference between the two sections of the United States .
The increasing unification due to the new means of transport made the question whether the southern spirit or the northern should prevail an ever more urgent one .
There was little possibility of compromise .
The northern spirit was free and individualistic ; the southern made for great estates and a conscious gentility ruling over a dusky subject multitude .
THE NEW OVERSEAS EMPIRES OF STEAMSHIP AND RAILWAY
The end of the eighteenth century was a period of disrupting empires and disillusioned expansionists .
The long and tedious journey between Britain and Spain and their colonies in America prevented any really free coming and going between the home land and the daughter lands , and so the colonies separated into new and distinct communities , with distinctive ideas and interests and even modes of speech .
As they grew they strained more and more at the feeble and uncertain link of shipping that had joined them .
Weak trading-posts in the wilderness , like those of France in Canada , or trading establishments in great alien communities , like those of Britain in India , might well cling for bare existence to the nation which gave them support and a reason for their existence .
That much and no more seemed to many thinkers in the early part of the nineteenth century to be the limit set to overseas rule .
In 1820 the sketchy great European `` empires '' outside of Europe that had figured so bravely in the maps of the middle eighteenth century , had shrunken to very small dimensions .
Only the Russian sprawled as large as ever across Asia .
In 1859 , following upon a serious mutiny of the native troops in India , this empire of the East India Company was annexed to the British Crown .
By an Act entitled _An Act for the Better Government of India_ , the Governor-General became a Viceroy representing the Sovereign , and the place of the Company was taken by a Secretary of State for India responsible to the British Parliament .
In 1877 , Lord Beaconsfield , to complete the work , caused Queen Victoria to be proclaimed Empress of India .
In 1898 Germany seized Kiau Chau in China .
Britain responded by seizing Wei-hai-wei , and the next year the Russians took possession of Port Arthur .
A flame of hatred for the Europeans swept through China .
There were massacres of Europeans and Christian converts , and in 1900 an attack upon and siege of the European legations in Pekin .
A combined force of Europeans made a punitive expedition to Pekin , rescued the legations , and stole an enormous amount of valuable property .
The Russians then seized Manchuria , and in 1904 , the British invaded Tibet ... .
Then the Crown colonies , in which the rule of the British Home Government ( through the Colonial Office ) verged on autocracy , as in Ceylon , Trinidad and Fiji ( where there was an appointed council ) , and Gibraltar and St. Helena ( where there was a governor ) ;
It will be manifest , therefore , that no single office and no single brain had ever comprehended the British Empire as a whole .
It was a mixture of growths and accumulations entirely different from anything that has ever been called an empire before .
It guaranteed a wide peace and security ; that is why it was endured and sustained by many men of the `` subject '' races -- in spite of official tyrannies { 408 } and insufficiencies , and of much negligence on the part of the `` home '' public .
Like the Athenian Empire , it was an overseas empire ; its ways were sea ways , and its common link was the British Navy .
Like all empires , its cohesion was dependent physically upon a method of communication ; the development of seamanship , ship-building and steamships between the sixteenth and nineteenth centuries had made it a possible and convenient Pax -- the `` Pax Britannica , '' and fresh developments of air or swift land transport might at any time make it inconvenient .
All these nations armed .
Year after year the proportion of national production devoted to the making of guns , equipment , battleships and the like , increased .
Year after year the balance { 411 } of things seemed trembling towards war , and then war would be averted .
At last it came .
Germany and Austria struck at France and Russia and Serbia ; the German armies marching through Belgium , Britain immediately came into the war on the side of Belgium , bringing in Japan as her ally , and very soon Turkey followed on the German side .
Italy entered the war against Austria in 1915 , and Bulgaria joined the Central Powers in the October of that year .
In 1916 Rumania , and in 1917 the United States and China were forced into war against Germany .
It is not within the scope of this history to define the exact share of blame for this vast catastrophe .
The more interesting question is not why the Great War was begun but why the Great War was not anticipated and prevented .
It is a far graver thing for mankind that scores of millions of people were too `` patriotic , '' stupid , or apathetic to prevent this disaster by a movement towards European unity upon frank and generous lines , than that a small number of people may have been active in bringing it about .
The phase of military deadlock passed slowly into one of aggression upon the combatant populations behind the fronts by the destruction of food supplies and by attacks through the air .
And also there was a steady improvement in the size and range of the guns employed and of such ingenious devices as poison-gas shells and the small mobile forts known as tanks , to break down the resistance of troops in the trenches .
The air offensive was the most revolutionary of all the new methods .
It carried warfare from two dimensions into three .
Hitherto in the history of mankind war had gone on only where the armies marched and met .
Now it went on everywhere .
First the Zeppelin and then the bombing aeroplane carried war over and past the front to an ever-increasing area of civilian activities beyond .
The old distinction maintained in civilized warfare between the civilian and combatant population disappeared .
Everyone who grew food , or who sewed a garment , everyone who felled a tree or repaired a house , every railway station and every warehouse was held to be fair game for destruction .
The air offensive increased in range and terror with every month in the war .
At last great areas of Europe were in a state of siege and subject to nightly raids .
Such exposed cities as London and Paris passed sleepless night after sleepless night while the bombs burst , the anti-aircraft guns maintained an intolerable racket , and the fire engines and ambulances rattled headlong through the darkened and deserted streets .
The effects upon the minds and health of old people and of young children were particularly distressing and destructive .
It speedily became evident that these Bolshevik socialists were men of a very different quality from the rhetorical constitutionalists and revolutionaries of the Kerensky phase .
They were fanatical Marxist communists .
They believed that their accession to power in Russia was only the opening of a world-wide social revolution , and they set about changing the social and economic order with the thoroughness of perfect faith and absolute inexperience .
The western European and the American governments were themselves much too ill-informed and incapable to guide or help this extraordinary experiment , and the press set itself to discredit and the ruling classes to wreck these usurpers upon any terms and at any cost to themselves or to Russia .
A propaganda of abominable and disgusting inventions went on unchecked in the press of the { 419 } world ; the Bolshevik leaders were represented as incredible monsters glutted with blood and plunder and living lives of sensuality before which the realities of the Tsarist court during the Rasputin regime paled to a white purity .
Expeditions were launched at the exhausted country , insurgents and raiders were encouraged , armed and subsidized , and no method of attack was too mean or too monstrous for the frightened enemies of the Bolshevik regime .
In 1919 , the Russian Bolsheviks , ruling a country already exhausted and disorganized by five years of intensive warfare , were fighting a British Expedition at Archangel , Japanese invaders in Eastern Siberia , Roumanians with French and Greek contingents in the south , the Russian Admiral Koltchak in Siberia and General Deniken , supported by the French fleet , in the Crimea .
In July of that year an Esthonian army , under General Yudenitch , almost got to Petersburg .
In 1920 the Poles , incited by the French , made a new attack on Russia ; and a new reactionary raider , General Wrangel , took over the task of General Deniken in invading and devastating his own country .
In March , 1921 , the sailors at Cronstadt revolted .
The Russian Government under its president , Lenin , survived all these various attacks .
It showed an amazing tenacity , and the common people of Russia sustained it unswervingly under conditions of extreme hardship .
By the end of 1921 both Britain and Italy had made a sort of recognition of the communist rule .
But the question of the distresses and the possible recuperation of Russia brings us too close to current controversies to be discussed here .
The Peace Conference at Versailles was a gathering very ill adapted to do more than carry out the conflicts and defeats of the war to their logical conclusions .
The Germans , Austrians , Turks and Bulgarians were permitted no share in its deliberations ; they were only to accept the decisions it dictated to them .
From the point of view of human welfare the choice of the place of meeting was particularly unfortunate .
It was at Versailles in 1871 that , with every circumstance of triumphant vulgarity , the new German { 422 } Empire had been proclaimed .
The suggestion of a melodramatic reversal of that scene , in the same Hall of Mirrors , was overpowering .
About the year 1000 B.C .
the Aryan peoples were establishing themselves in the peninsulas of Spain , Italy and the Balkans , and they were established in North India ; Cnossos was already destroyed and the spacious times of Egypt , of Thothmes III , Amenophis III and Rameses II were three or four centuries away .
Weak monarchs of the XXIst Dynasty were ruling in the Nile Valley .
Israel was united under her early kings ; Saul or David or possibly even Solomon may have been reigning .
Sargon I ( 2750 B.C . )
of the Akkadian Sumerian Empire was a remote memory in Babylonian history , more remote than is Constantine the Great from the world of the present day .
Hammurabi had been dead a thousand years .
The Assyrians were already dominating the less military Babylonians .
Tiglath Pileser I had taken Babylon .
But there was no permanent conquest ; Assyria and Babylonia were still separate empires .
In China the new Chow dynasty was flourishing .
Stonehenge in England was already some hundreds of years old .
Yang-Chow , 300 Yang-tse-Kiang , 173 Yangtse valley , 173 Yarmuk , battle of , the , 253 , 431 Yedo Bay , 401 Yorktown , 338 Yuan dynasty , 290 , 433 Yucatan , 74 Yudenitch , General , 419 Yuste , 314 , 317
`` I see , '' said Isbister .
`` And this is the price ? ''
`` You have seen things go down an eddy ?
Out of the light of the day , out of this sweet world of sanity -- down -- ''
Isbister stopped short and looked at the sufferer doubtfully .
He turned his head and showed a ghastly face , bloodshot pallid eyes and bloodless lips .
He spoke almost in a whisper .
`` It is the garment of my misery .
The whole world ... is the garment of my misery . ''
The man dropped his hand and turned again .
They went over the brow and to the headland beyond Penally , with the sleepless man gesticulating ever and again , and speaking fragmentary things concerning his whirling brain .
At the headland they stood by the seat that looks into the dark mysteries of Blackapit , and then he sat down .
Isbister had resumed his talk whenever the path had widened sufficiently for them to walk abreast .
He was enlarging upon the complex difficulty of making Boscastle Harbour in bad weather , when suddenly and quite irrelevantly his companion interrupted him again .
The seated man made no answer .
Isbister stopped , match in hand , regarding him .
A conviction took possession of his mind that this man was dead .
He became active and noisy , strode across the room , blundering against the table as he did so , and rang the bell .
The state of cataleptic rigour into which this man had fallen , lasted for an unprecedented length of time , and then he passed slowly to the flaccid state , to a lax attitude suggestive of profound repose .
Then it was his eyes could be closed .
It was the Isbister of the last chapter , but he was no longer a young man .
The hair that had been brown and a trifle in excess of the fashionable length , was iron grey and clipped close , and the face that had been pink and white was buff and ruddy .
He had a pointed beard shot with grey .
He talked to an elderly man who wore a summer suit of drill ( the summer of that year was unusually hot ) .
This was Warming , a London solicitor and next of kin to Graham , the man who had fallen into the trance .
And the two men stood side by side in a room in a house in London regarding his recumbent figure .
`` The Diamond Jubilee , it was , '' said Warming ; `` the second one . ''
`` And while he has been lying here , '' said Isbister , with the zest of a life freely spent , `` I have changed my plans in life ; married , raised a family , my eldest lad -- I had n't begun to think of sons then -- is an American citizen , and looking forward to leaving Harvard .
There 's a touch of grey in my hair .
And this man , not a day older nor wiser ( practically ) than I was in my downy days .
It 's curious to think of . ''
`` I doubt if he would have premeditated as much , '' said Warming .
`` He was not a far-sighted man .
`` I got their address from the cheque book in his pocket , '' said Isbister .
There was another pause , and then Isbister gave way to an unavoidable curiosity .
`` He may go on for years yet , '' he said , and had a moment of hesitation .
`` We have to consider that .
His affairs , you know , may fall some day into the hands of -- someone else , you know . ''
`` Red tape , I suppose ? ''
`` He was a man of considerable gifts , but spasmodic , emotional .
He had grave domestic troubles , divorced his wife , in fact , and it was as a relief from that , I think , that he took up politics of the rabid sort .
He was a fanatical Radical -- a Socialist -- or typical Liberal , as they used to call themselves , of the advanced school .
Energetic -- flighty -- undisciplined .
Overwork upon a controversy did this for him .
I remember the pamphlet he wrote -- a curious production .
Wild , whirling stuff .
There were one or two prophecies .
Some of them are already exploded , some of them are established facts .
But for the most part to read such a thesis is to realise how full the world is of unanticipated things .
He will have much to learn , much to unlearn , when he wakes .
If ever a waking comes . ''
He stood looking thoughtfully at the waxen figure .
`` He will never awake , '' he said at last .
`` He will never awake again . ''
But Warming was wrong in that .
He rubbed his eyes .
The riddle of his surroundings was confusing but his mind was quite clear -- evidently his sleep had benefited him .
He was not in a bed at all as he understood the word , but lying naked on a very soft and yielding mattress , in a trough of dark glass .
The mattress was partly transparent , a fact he observed with a sense of insecurity , and below it was a mirror reflecting him greyly .
About his arm -- and he saw with a shock that his skin was strangely dry and yellow -- was bound a curious apparatus of rubber , bound so cunningly that it seemed to pass into his skin above and below .
And this bed was placed in a case of greenish coloured glass ( as it seemed to him ) , a bar in the white framework of which had first arrested his attention .
In the corner of the case was a stand of glittering and delicately made apparatus , for the most part quite strange appliances , though a maximum and minimum thermometer was recognisable .
His mind was still a surging perplexity .
Clearly he had slept , and had been removed in his sleep .
And who were those people , the distant crowd beyond the deep blue pillars ?
He poured out and partially drank another glass of the colourless fluid .
Graham 's last impression before he fainted was of the ringing of bells .
He learnt afterwards that he was insensible , hanging between life and death , for the better part of an hour .
When he recovered his senses , he was back on his translucent couch , and there was a stirring warmth at heart and throat .
The dark apparatus , he perceived , had been removed from his arm , which was bandaged .
The white framework was still about him , but the greenish transparent substance that had filled it was altogether gone .
A man in a deep violet robe , one of those who had been on the balcony , was looking keenly into his face .
`` Yes , '' said Graham .
A matter that had been in his mind during his last waking moments at Boscastle recurred , a thing resolved upon and somehow neglected .
He cleared his throat .
They gave him some pink fluid with a greenish fluorescence and a meaty taste , and the assurance of returning strength grew .
He looked at them and it seemed as though imps were twitching the muscles of his face .
He looked his question .
Graham struggled into a sitting position .
He wiped a rheumy tear from his face with a lean hand .
`` Many years ! ''
He shut his eyes tight , opened them , and sat looking about him from one unfamiliar thing to another .
He was irritated at the strange word .
`` More than a _what_ ? ''
`` How long did you say ? ''
Do n't look like that .
`` But it ca n't be , '' he said querulously .
`` I am dreaming .
Trances -- trances do n't last .
That is not right -- this is a joke you have played upon me !
Tell me -- some days ago , perhaps , I was walking along the coast of Cornwall -- ? ''
Presently he looked at their faces , suddenly laughed through his tears , a little foolishly .
`` But -- two -- hun -- dred -- years ! ''
He grimaced hysterically and covered his face again .
After a space he grew calm .
He sat up , his hands hanging over his knees in almost precisely the same attitude in which Isbister had found him on the cliff at Pentargen .
His attention was attracted by a thick domineering voice , the footsteps of an advancing personage .
`` What are you doing ?
Why was I not warned ?
Surely you could tell ?
Someone will suffer for this .
The man must be kept quiet .
Are the doorways closed ?
He must be kept perfectly quiet .
He must not be told .
Has he been told anything ? ''
`` Certainly -- go now .
But see the doorways are closed as you go . ''
For a space the thickset man took not the slightest notice of Graham , but proceeded to interrogate the other -- obviously his subordinate -- -upon the treatment of their charge .
He spoke clearly , but in phrases only partially intelligible to Graham .
The awakening seemed not only a matter of surprise but of consternation and annoyance to him .
He was evidently profoundly excited .
`` You must not confuse his mind by telling him things , '' he repeated again and again .
`` You must not confuse his mind . ''
`` In the first place , had n't I better have some clothes ? ''
`` What is that shouting ? ''
There was perhaps an answer .
There was an inaudible reply .
Graham lifted his arm and was astonished to find what strength the restoratives had given him .
He thrust one leg over the side of the couch and then the other .
His head no longer swam .
He could scarcely credit his rapid recovery .
He sat feeling his limbs .
He opened the roller with a quick movement , and a confusion of brilliant fabrics poured out over his knees .
`` You lived , Sire , in a period essentially cylindrical -- the Victorian .
With a tendency to the hemisphere in hats .
Now -- '' He flicked out a little appliance the size and appearance of a keyless watch , whirled the knob , and behold -- a little figure in white appeared kinetoscope fashion on the dial , walking and turning .
The tailor caught up a pattern of bluish white satin .
`` That is my conception of your immediate treatment , '' he said .
`` What is that doing ? ''
asked Graham , pointing with the empty glass to the busy figures and trying to ignore the scrutiny of the new comer .
`` Is that -- some sort of force -- laid on ? ''
It sounded sheer nonsense .
Graham snatched at the last phrase with an unsteady mind .
`` Sixdoz lions ? ''
`` Did n't you have lions ?
You had the old pounds ?
They are our monetary units . ''
Suddenly a loud voice shouted -- it seemed from a piece of machinery in the corner -- '' At once -- at once .
The people know all over the city .
Work is being stopped .
Work is being stopped .
Wait for nothing , but come . ''
`` It is the Sleeper .
Verily it is the Sleeper , '' shouted voices .
`` That is never the Sleeper , '' shouted others .
More and more faces were turned to him .
At the intervals along this central area Graham noted openings , pits , apparently the heads of staircases going down with people ascending out of them and descending into them .
The struggle it seemed centred about the one of these nearest to him .
People were running down the moving platforms to this , leaping dexterously from platform to platform .
The clustering people on the higher platforms seemed to divide their interest between this point and the balcony .
A number of sturdy little figures clad in a uniform of bright red , and working methodically together , were employed it seemed in preventing access to this descending staircase .
About them a crowd was rapidly accumulating .
Their brilliant colour contrasted vividly with the whitish-blue of their antagonists , for the struggle was indisputable .
`` I do n't understand , '' said Graham .
Howard led him along the end gallery until they were opposite this mighty labouring figure .
The two men in red who had followed them into the gallery came and stood on either hand of Graham .
`` But , _why_ -- ? ''
`` Orders , Sire . ''
Howard opened another door , and they were in the first of two contiguous chambers furnished in white and green .
`` What Council was that ? ''
`` What were they discussing ?
What have they to do with me ? ''
Howard closed the door carefully , heaved a huge sigh , and said something in an undertone .
He walked slantingways across the room and turned , blowing out his cheeks again .
he grunted , a man relieved .
`` Well -- to ask you to keep in seclusion . ''
`` All in good time , Sire , '' said Howard .
`` But not crudely , not crudely .
This is one of those flimsy times when no man has a settled mind .
Your awakening -- no one expected your awakening .
The Council is consulting . ''
`` You must wait .
Really you must wait . ''
`` That is better , '' said Howard .
`` Yes , that is much better .
And I must leave you alone .
While I attend the discussion in the Council ... .
I am sorry . ''
In a long oval panel of mirror he saw himself and stopped astonished .
He was clad in a graceful costume of purple and bluish white , with a little greyshot beard trimmed to a point , and his hair , its blackness streaked now with bands of grey , arranged over his forehead in an unfamiliar but pleasing manner .
He seemed a man of five-and-forty perhaps .
For a moment he did not perceive this was himself .
Presently Graham resumed his examination of his apartments .
Curiosity kept him moving in spite of his fatigue .
The inner room , he perceived , was high , and its ceiling dome shaped , with an oblong aperture in the centre , opening into a funnel in which a wheel of broad vanes seemed to be rotating , apparently driving the air up the shaft .
The faint humming note of its easy motion was the only clear sound in that quiet place .
As these vanes sprang up one after the other , Graham could get transient glimpses of the sky .
He was surprised to see a star .
The lettering on the cylinders puzzled him .
At first sight it seemed like Russian .
Then he noticed a suggestion of mutilated English about certain of the words .
`` Phonetic spelling , '' he said .
He remembered reading a story with that title , then he recalled the story vividly , one of the best stories in the world .
But this thing before him was not a book as he understood it .
He puzzled out the titles of two adjacent cylinders .
`` The Heart of Darkness '' he had never heard of before nor `` The Madonna of the Future '' -- no doubt if they were indeed stories , they were by post-Victorian authors .
Howard 's bearing went far to deepen Graham 's impression of his own strange importance ; the door between its opening and closing seemed to admit with him a breath of momentous happening .
His enquiries became more definite and searching .
Howard retreated through protests and difficulties .
The awakening was unforeseen , he repeated ; it happened to have fallen in with the trend of a social convulsion .
`` To explain it I must tell you the history of a gross and a half of years , '' protested Howard .
Howard raised his eyes and shrugged his shoulders .
`` Human beings , '' he said , with a curious smile on his heavy face .
`` Our social ideas , '' he said , `` have a certain increased liberality , perhaps , in comparison with your times .
If a man wishes to relieve such a tedium as this -- by feminine society , for instance .
We think it no scandal .
We have cleared our minds of formulae .
There is in our city a class , a necessary class , no longer despised -- discreet -- ''
`` I take it this is a message to the Council , '' said Howard .
He thought of the tumult , the great social trouble of which he was so unaccountably the axis .
A text , irrelevant enough , and yet curiously insistent , came floating up out of the darkness of his memory .
This also a Council had said :
As the fans in the circular aperture of the inner room rotated and permitted glimpses of the night , dim sounds drifted in thereby .
And Graham , standing underneath , was startled by the sound of a voice .
Graham looked down , and there were spots of blood at his feet .
He looked up again in a strange excitement .
The figure had gone .
He remained motionless -- his every sense intent upon the flickering patch of darkness .
He became aware of some faint , remote , dark specks floating lightly through the outer air .
They came down towards him , fitfully , eddyingly , and passed aside out of the uprush from the fan .
A gleam of light flickered , the specks flashed white , and then the darkness came again .
Warmed and lit as he was , he perceived that it was snowing within a few feet of him .
`` I come from Ostrog , Sire . ''
It was perhaps a quarter of an hour before anything returned to the ventilator .
But at last came the same metallic interference again ; the fans stopped and the face reappeared .
Graham had remained all this time in the same place , alert and tremulously excited .
`` We want to speak to you , Sire , '' said the intruder .
`` We want -- I ca n't hold the thing .
We have been trying to find a way to you -- these three days . ''
`` Yes , Sire .
If you will . ''
There was a struggle .
The stranger 's arm appeared , and his hand was bleeding .
His knees came into view over the edge of the funnel .
`` Stand away from me , '' he said , and he dropped rather heavily on his hands and one shoulder at Graham 's feet .
The released ventilator whirled noisily .
The stranger rolled over , sprang up nimbly and stood panting , hand to a bruised shoulder , and with his bright eyes on Graham .
Graham felt for the ladder with extended hands , put his foot on the lower rung , and , turning his head , saw over the shoulder of the nearest man , in the yellow flicker of the light , the first-comer astride over Howard and still working at the door .
Graham turned to the ladder again , and was thrust by his conductor and helped up by those above , and then he was standing on something hard and cold and slippery outside the ventilating funnel .
He saw he had come out upon the roof of the vast city structure which had replaced the miscellaneous houses , streets and open spaces of Victorian London .
The place upon which he stood was level , with huge serpentine cables lying athwart it in every direction .
The circular wheels of a number of windmills loomed indistinct and gigantic through the darkness and snowfall , and roared with a varying loudness as the fitful wind rose and fell .
Some way off an intermittent white light smote up from below , touched the snow eddies with a transient glitter , and made an evanescent spectre in the night ; and here and there , low down , some vaguely outlined wind-driven mechanism flickered with livid sparks .
`` Come on ! ''
Running now , they drew near a little windmill spinning high in the air .
`` Stoop , '' said Graham 's guide , and they avoided an endless band running roaring up to the shaft of the vane .
`` This way ! ''
and they were ankle deep in a gutter full of drifted thawing snow , between two low walls of metal that presently rose waist high .
`` I will go first , '' said the guide .
Graham drew his cloak about him and followed .
Then suddenly came a narrow abyss across which the gutter leapt to the snowy darkness of the further side .
Graham peeped over the side once and the gulf was black .
For a moment he regretted his flight .
He dared not look again , and his brain spun as he waded through the half liquid snow .
`` Get on this , '' cried Graham 's conductor , and thrust him forward to a long grating of snowless metal that ran like a band between two slightly sloping expanses of snow .
It felt warm to Graham 's benumbed feet , and a faint eddy of steam rose from it .
`` Come on ! ''
shouted his guide ten yards off , and , without waiting , ran swiftly through the incandescent glare towards the iron supports of the next range of wind-wheels .
Graham , recovering from his astonishment , followed as fast , convinced of his imminent capture ... .
`` What is that ? ''
For one momentous second Graham could not speak .
He was glad afterwards that darkness hid his face .
He began to tremble violently .
He looked sideways at the swift shadow that swallowed up the sky as it rushed upon him .
Jump -- in God 's name !
Or they will have us , '' cried Graham 's guide , and in the violence of his passion thrust him forward .
The others came nearer to hear his words .
`` Who am I ? ''
His eyes searched their faces .
`` Tell me , tell me ! ''
He did not believe he heard aright .
He resisted the persuasion .
He pretended not to understand , not to hear .
He lifted his voice again .
`` I have been awake three days -- a prisoner three days .
I judge there is some struggle between a number of people in this city -- it is London ? ''
`` Because _you_ are the Atlas , Sire , '' said the man in yellow .
`` The world is on your shoulders .
They rule it in your name . ''
`` In my name ?
Why is he not here ? ''
The younger man suddenly became audible in a pause of the outer thunder , indignant and vociferous , a high penetrating voice under his red aquiline nose and bushy moustache .
`` No one expected you to wake .
No one expected you to wake .
But they were taken by surprise .
They did not know whether to drug you , hypnotise you , kill you . ''
The door opened , Lincoln 's voice was swept away and drowned , and a rash of people followed on the heels of the tumult .
These intruders came towards him and Lincoln gesticulating .
The voices without explained their soundless lips .
`` Show us the Sleeper , show us the Sleeper ! ''
was the burden of the uproar .
Men were bawling for `` Order !
Abruptly he noted a contrast .
The buildings on the opposite side of the way seemed deserted , the cables and bridges that laced across the aisle were empty and shadowy .
It came into Graham 's mind that these also should have swarmed with people .
Suddenly the cable-hung star-holder appeared again , and the whole scene was white and dazzling .
The band of red-coats seemed broader and nearer ; its apex was half-way down the ways towards the central aisle .
And raising his eyes Graham saw that a number of these men had also appeared now in the darkened lower galleries of the opposite building , and were firing over the heads of their fellows below at the boiling confusion of people on the lower ways .
The meaning of these things dawned upon him .
The march of the people had come upon an ambush at the very outset .
Thrown into confusion by the extinction of the lights they were now being attacked by the red police .
Then he became aware that he was standing alone , that his guards and Lincoln were along the gallery in the direction along which he had come before the darkness fell .
He saw they were gesticulating to him wildly , running back towards him .
A great shouting came from across the ways .
Then it seemed as though the whole face of the darkened building opposite was lined and speckled with red-clad men .
And they were pointing over to him and shouting .
Save the Sleeper ! ''
shouted a multitude of throats .
In a moment he had thrown off the great cloak that not only impeded his movements but made him conspicuous , and had slipped it from his shoulders .
He heard someone trip in its folds .
In another he was scaling the barrier and had dropped into the blackness on the further side .
Then feeling his way he came to the lower end of an ascending gangway .
In the darkness the sound of firing ceased and the roar of feet and voices lulled .
Then suddenly he came to an unexpected step and tripped and fell .
As he did so pools and islands amidst the darkness about him leapt to vivid light again , the uproar surged louder and the glare of the fifth white star shone through the vast fenestrations of the theatre walls .
So he thought , sitting blinded , and then he looked again , half hoping in spite of his ears to see some familiar aspect of the life of the nineteenth century , to see , perhaps , the little harbour of Boscastle about him , the cliffs of Pentargen , or the bedroom of his home .
But fact takes no heed of human hopes .
A squad of men with a black banner tramped athwart the nearer shadows , intent on conflict , and beyond rose that giddy wall of frontage , vast and dark , with the dim incomprehensible lettering showing faintly on its face .
THE OLD MAN WHO KNEW EVERYTHING
Graham stood revolving a question that should not betray his ignorance .
Again the old man 's voice ended the pause .
He was silent for a little while .
`` This Sleeper , '' he said , and stopped .
`` Yes , '' said Graham .
I do say so .
This Sleeper who 's woke up -- they changed in the night .
A poor , drugged insensible creature .
But I must n't tell all I know .
I must n't tell all I know . ''
`` Old , are you ?
You do n't sound so very old !
But it 's not everyone keeps his memory to my time of life -- truly .
But these notorious things !
But you 're not so old as me -- not nearly so old as me .
I ought not to judge other men by myself , perhaps .
I 'm young -- for so old a man .
Maybe you 're old for so young . ''
`` That 's it , '' said Graham .
`` And I 've a queer history .
I know very little .
Practically I know no history .
The Sleeper and Julius Caesar are all the same to me .
It 's interesting to hear you talk of these things . ''
but how things work together ! ''
said the old man .
`` This Sleeper that all the fools put their trust in !
I 've the whole history of it -- I was always a good one for histories .
When I was a boy -- I 'm that old -- I used to read printed books .
You 'd hardly think it .
Likely you 've seen none -- they rot and dust so -- and the Sanitary Company burns them to make ashlarite .
But they were convenient in their dirty way .
One learnt a lot .
These new-fangled Babble Machines -- they do n't seem new-fangled to you , eh ?
-- they 're easy to hear , easy to forget .
But I 've traced all the Sleeper business from the first . ''
said the old man .
`` I know , I know .
He was a poor nobody , and set on a playful woman , poor soul !
And he fell into a trance .
There 's the old things they had , those brown things -- silver photographs -- still showing him as he lay , a gross and a half years ago -- a gross and a half of years . ''
`` Set on a playful woman , poor soul , '' said Graham softly to himself , and then aloud , `` Yes -- well go on . ''
`` Of course not , '' said the old man .
`` Of course not .
People do n't learn much in the schools nowadays .
But I know all about him .
He was a rich American who went from England , and he left the Sleeper even more than Warming .
How he made it ?
That I do n't know .
Something about pictures by machinery .
But he made it and left it , and so the Council had its start .
It was just a council of trustees at first . ''
`` Changed , '' said the old man .
`` And now this Ostrog -- has suddenly revolutionised the world by waking the Sleeper -- whom no one but the superstitious , common people had ever dreamt would wake again -- raising the Sleeper to claim his property from the Council , after all these years . ''
The old man endorsed this statement with a cough .
`` It 's strange , '' he said , `` to meet a man who learns these things for the first time to-night . ''
`` I had heard the Sleeper was rescued , '' said Graham .
`` But -- to come back a minute .
Are you sure Ostrog has him ? ''
`` But you do n't know that the Sleeper died , '' said Graham , suddenly .
The old man made him repeat his words .
`` I _am_ the Sleeper . ''
`` Four days since !
But they 've _got_ the Sleeper .
They have him and they wo n't let him go .
You 've been talking sensibly enough up to now .
I can see it as though I was there .
There will be Lincoln like a keeper just behind him ; they wo n't let him go about alone .
You 're a queer fellow .
One of these fun pokers .
I see now why you have been clipping your words so oddly , but -- ''
`` My brother is waiting , '' explained Lincoln .
`` He is alone in the wind-vane offices .
We feared you had been killed in the theatre .
He doubted -- and things are very urgent still in spite of what we are telling them _there_ -- or he would have come to you . ''
They ascended a lift , passed along a narrow passage , crossed a great hall , empty save for two hurrying messengers , and entered a comparatively little room , whose only furniture was a long settee and a large oval disc of cloudy , shifting grey , hung by cables from the wall .
There Lincoln left Graham for a space , and he remained alone without understanding the smoky shapes that drove slowly across this disc .
`` Yes , '' said Graham .
`` Now , '' said Ostrog , `` comes the Council House , '' and slowly a black edge crept into view and gathered Graham 's attention .
Soon it was no longer an edge but a cavity , a huge blackened space amidst the clustering edifices , and from it thin spires of smoke rose into the pallid winter sky .
Gaunt ruinous masses of the building , mighty truncated piers and girders , rose dismally out of this cavernous darkness .
And over these vestiges of some splendid place , countless minute men were clambering , leaping , swarming .
And not ten hours ago he had stood beneath the ventilating fans in a little chamber within that remote building wondering what was happening in the world !
`` More than thirty-three millions . ''
`` 'I am awakened and my heart is with you . '
And bow -- bow royally .
But first we must get you black robes -- for black is your colour .
And then they will disperse to their homes . ''
So far as Graham was able to judge , it was near midday when the white banner of the Council fell .
But some hours had to elapse before it was possible to effect the formal capitulation , and so after he had spoken his `` Word '' he retired to his new apartments in the wind-vane offices .
The continuous excitement of the last twelve hours had left him inordinately fatigued , even his curiosity was exhausted ; for a space he sat inert and passive with open eyes , and for a space he slept .
He was roused by two medical attendants , come prepared with stimulants to sustain him through the next occasion .
After he had taken their drugs and bathed by their advice in cold water , he felt a rapid return of interest and energy , and was presently able and willing to accompany Ostrog through several miles ( as it seemed ) of passages , lifts , and slides to the closing scene of the White Council 's rule .
Wherever there was space and foothold , people swarmed , little people , small and minutely clear , except where the sunset touched them to indistinguishable gold .
They clambered up the tottering walls , they clung in wreaths and groups about the high-standing pillars .
They swarmed along the edges of the circle of ruins .
The air was full of their shouting , and they were pressing and swaying towards the central space .
The upper storeys of the Council House seemed deserted , not a human being was visible .
Only the drooping banner of the surrender hung heavily against the light .
The dead were within the Council House , or hidden by the swarming people , or carried away .
Graham could see only a few neglected bodies in gaps and corners of the ruins , and amidst the flowing water .
An obsequious valet assisted him to dress under the direction of a dignified chief attendant , a little man whose face proclaimed him Japanese , albeit he spoke English like an Englishman .
From the latter he learnt something of the state of affairs .
Already the revolution was an accepted fact ; already business was being resumed throughout the city .
Abroad the downfall of the Council had been received for the most part with delight .
Nowhere was the Council popular , and the thousand cities of Western America , after two hundred years still jealous of New York , London , and the East , had risen almost unanimously two days before at the news of Graham 's imprisonment .
Paris was fighting within itself .
The rest of the world hung in suspense .
While he was breaking his fast , the sound of a telephone bell jetted from a corner , and his chief attendant called his attention to the voice of Ostrog making polite enquiries .
Graham interrupted his refreshment to reply .
Very shortly Lincoln arrived , and Graham at once expressed a strong desire to talk to people and to be shown more of the new life that was opening before him .
Lincoln informed him that in three hours ' time a representative gathering of officials and their wives would be held in the state apartments of the wind-vane Chief .
Graham 's desire to traverse the ways of the city was , however , at present impossible , because of the enormous excitement of the people .
It was , however , quite possible for him to take a bird's-eye view of the city from the crow 's nest of the wind-vane keeper .
To this accordingly Graham was conducted by his attendant .
Lincoln ; with a graceful compliment to the attendant , apologised for not accompanying them , on account of the present pressure of administrative work .
He had a vision of city beyond city ; cities on great plains , cities beside great rivers , vast cities along the sea margin , cities girdled by snowy mountains .
Over a great part of the earth the English tongue was spoken ; taken together with its Spanish American and Hindoo and Negro and `` Pidgin '' dialects , it was the everyday-language of two-thirds of humanity .
On the Continent , save as remote and curious survivals , three other languages alone held sway -- German , which reached to Antioch and Genoa and jostled Spanish-English at Cadiz ; a Gallicised Russian which met the Indian English in Persia and Kurdistan and the `` Pidgin '' English in Pekin ; and French still clear and brilliant , the language of lucidity , which shared the Mediterranean with the Indian English and German and reached through a negro dialect to the Congo .
Fierce he knew it was .
How fierce he could judge from the fact that these latter-day people referred back to the England of the nineteenth century as the figure of an idyllic easy-going life .
He turned his eyes to the scene immediately before him again , trying to conceive the big factories of that intricate maze ... .
`` Asano told me there was a King . ''
`` The King does n't belong .
They had to expel him .
It 's the Stuart blood , I suppose ; but really -- ''
The Surveyor-General of schools gesticulated himself away .
`` Perhaps , '' said Lincoln , intercepting a casual glance , `` you would like to know some of these ladies ? ''
`` The old life was not a happy one , '' said Graham .
`` I do not regret that . ''
`` A myriad myriad .
No wonder he looks proud , '' said Graham .
What a wonderful time it is !
That man in purple ? ''
The lady to whom he talked repeated her remark , and Graham recalled himself to the quasi-regal flirtation upon which he was engaged .
The lady in trouble about the Eadhamite saw the change in his expression , and grasped her opportunity to escape .
`` Would you care to know that girl , Sire ? ''
`` She is Helen Wotton -- a niece of Ostrog 's .
She knows a great many serious things .
She is one of the most serious persons alive .
I am sure you will like her . ''
`` I remember you quite well , '' said Graham .
`` You were in that little room .
When all the people were singing and beating time with their feet .
Before I walked across the Hall . ''
Her momentary embarrassment passed .
She looked up at him , and her face was steady .
`` It was wonderful , '' she said , hesitated , and spoke with a sudden effort .
`` All those people would have died for you , Sire .
Countless people did die for you that night . ''
`` I know nothing -- '' began Graham .
Lincoln 's face appeared close to them .
He bowed an apology to the girl .
For a moment physical terror possessed him , a passionate sense of insecurity .
For a second or so he could not lift his eyes .
Some hundred feet or more sheer below him was one of the big wind-vanes of south-west London , and beyond it the southernmost flying stage crowded with little black dots .
These things seemed to be falling away from him .
For a second he had an impulse to pursue the earth .
He set his teeth , he lifted his eyes by a muscular effort , and the moment of panic passed .
The whole expanse of the Downs escarpment , so far as the grey haze permitted him to see , was set with wind-wheels to which the largest of the city was but a younger brother .
They stirred with a stately motion before the south-west wind .
And here and there were patches dotted with the sheep of the British Food Trust , and here and there a mounted shepherd made a spot of black .
Then rushing under the stern of the monoplane came the Wealden Heights , the line of Hindhead , Pitch Hill , and Leith Hill , with a second row of wind-wheels that seemed striving to rob the downland whirlers of their share of breeze .
The purple heather was speckled with yellow gorse , and on the further side a drove of black oxen stampeded before a couple of mounted men .
Swiftly these swept behind , and dwindled and lost colour , and became scarce moving specks that were swallowed up in haze .
`` Not yet , '' bawled Graham , laughing .
`` Not land yet .
I want to learn more of this machine . ''
`` I do n't mind , '' shouted Graham .
`` I do n't mind . ''
`` Sire , there are rules -- ''
`` Then if you will watch me -- ''
If I have to burn London .
`` Back , Sire !
The aeronaut made no answer , and Graham saw little drops upon his forehead .
Lincoln awaited Graham in an apartment beneath the flying stages .
He seemed curious to learn all that had happened , pleased to hear of the extraordinary delight and interest which Graham took in flying .
Graham was in a mood of enthusiasm .
`` I must learn to fly , '' he cried .
`` I must master that .
I pity all poor souls who have died without this opportunity .
The sweet swift air !
It is the most wonderful experience in the world . ''
`` For the present , '' said Graham , `` flying holds me .
Let me learn more of that .
Your aeronaut was saying there is some trades union objection to one 's learning . ''
During those three days Graham was so occupied with these distractions that the vast political movements in progress outside his quarters had but a small share of his attention .
Those about him told him little .
Daily came Ostrog , the Boss , his Grand Vizier , his mayor of the palace , to report in vague terms the steady establishment of his rule ; `` a little trouble '' soon to be settled in this city , `` a slight disturbance '' in that .
The song of the social revolt came to him no more ; he never learned that it had been forbidden in the municipal limits ; and all the great emotions of the crow 's nest slumbered in his mind .
`` You said the people were unhappy ? ''
`` It was an impulse . ''
`` Not clearly , perhaps .
But -- tell me . ''
She turned upon him and surveyed his face with a curious scrutiny .
`` That is what we have begun to fear . ''
For a moment she said no more .
`` No , '' she said slowly .
`` _You_ will take the responsibility .
You will take the responsibility .
The people look to you . ''
For at least half the years of your sleep -- in every generation -- multitudes of people , in every generation greater multitudes of people , have prayed that you might awake -- _prayed_ . ''
`` I suppose the imagination of the people -- ''
`` That is what we thought of you , '' she said .
`` That is how you seemed to us . ''
Graham looked at her in surprise , at her face lit with emotion .
She seemed at first to have spoken with an effort , and to have fired herself by speaking .
`` Speaking a horrible dialect , coarse and weak . ''
`` The Labour Department !
In some way -- that is familiar .
I saw it when I was wandering about the city , after the lights returned , great fronts of buildings coloured pale blue .
Do you really mean -- ? ''
Yes -- there was something .
In our history lessons .
The Labour Department ousted the workhouse .
It grew -- partly -- out of something -- you , perhaps , may remember it -- an emotional religious organisation called the Salvation Army -- that became a business company .
In the first place it was almost a charity .
To save people from workhouse rigours .
There had been a great agitation against the workhouse .
Now I come to think of it , it was one of the earliest properties your Trustees acquired .
They bought the Salvation Army and reconstructed it as this .
The idea in the first place was to organise the labour of starving homeless people . ''
`` If they will not work ? ''
He perceived a way of asserting himself .
But he spoke with restraint .
`` They are useful , '' said Ostrog .
`` They are fine loyal brutes , with no wash of ideas in their heads -- such as our rabble has .
The Council should have had them as police of the ways , and things might have been different .
Of course , there is nothing to fear except rioting and wreckage .
You can manage your own wings now , and you can soar away to Capri if there is any smoke or fuss .
We have the pull of all the great things ; the aeronauts are privileged and rich , the closest trades union in the world , and so are the engineers of the wind-vanes .
We have the air , and the mastery of the air is the mastery of the earth .
No one of any ability is organising against us .
They have no leaders -- only the sectional leaders of the secret society we organised before your very opportune awakening .
Mere busybodies and sentimentalists they are and bitterly jealous of each other .
None of them is man enough for a central figure .
The only trouble will be a disorganised upheaval .
To be frank -- that may happen .
But it wo n't interrupt your aeronautics .
The days when the People could make revolutions are past . ''
`` No , '' said Ostrog .
`` The day of the common man is past .
On the open countryside one man is as good as another , or nearly as good .
The earlier aristocracy had a precarious tenure of strength and audacity .
They were tempered -- tempered .
There were insurrections , duels , riots .
The first real aristocracy , the first permanent aristocracy , came in with castles and armour , and vanished before the musket and bow .
But this is the second aristocracy .
Those days of gunpowder and democracy were only an eddy in the stream .
The common man now is a helpless unit .
In these days we have this great machine of the city , and an organisation complex beyond his understanding . ''
`` _Must_ the world go this way ? ''
said Graham with his emotions at the speaking point .
`` Must it indeed go in this way ?
Have all our hopes been vain ? ''
`` Well , -- but you are the chief tyrant . ''
`` Do n't trouble about these things , '' he said .
`` Everything will be settled in a few days now .
The Crowd is a huge foolish beast .
What if it does not die out ?
Even if it does not die , it can still be tamed and driven .
I have no sympathy with servile men .
You heard those people shouting and singing two nights ago .
They were _taught_ that song .
If you had taken any man there in cold blood and asked why he shouted , he could not have told you .
They think they are shouting for you , that they are loyal and devoted to you .
Just then they were ready to slaughter the Council .
To-day -- they are already murmuring against those who have overthrown the Council . ''
`` And what was their hope ?
What is their hope ?
What right have they to hope ?
They work ill and they want the reward of those who work well .
The hope of mankind -- what is it ?
That some day the Over-man may come , that some day the inferior , the weak and the bestial may be subdued or eliminated .
Subdued if not eliminated .
The world is no place for the bad , the stupid , the enervated .
Their duty -- it 's a fine duty too !
-- is to die .
The death of the failure !
That is the path by which the beast rose to manhood , by which man goes on to higher things . ''
Ostrog took a pace , seemed to think , and turned on Graham .
`` I can imagine how this great world state of ours seems to a Victorian Englishman .
You regret all the old forms of representative government -- their spectres still haunt the world , the voting councils , and parliaments and all that eighteenth century tomfoolery .
You feel moved against our Pleasure Cities .
I might have thought of that , -- had I not been busy .
But you will learn better .
The people are mad with envy -- they would be in sympathy with you .
Even in the streets now , they clamour to destroy the Pleasure Cities .
But the Pleasure Cities are the excretory organs of the State , attractive places that year after year draw together all that is weak and vicious , all that is lascivious and lazy , all the easy roguery of the world , to a graceful destruction .
They go there , they have their time , they die childless , all the pretty silly lascivious women die childless , and mankind is the better .
If the people were sane they would not envy the rich their way of death .
And you would emancipate the silly brainless workers that we have enslaved , and try to make their lives easy and pleasant again .
Just as they have sunk to what they are fit for . ''
He smiled a smile that irritated Graham oddly .
`` You will learn better .
I know those ideas ; in my boyhood I read your Shelley and dreamt of Liberty .
There is no liberty , save wisdom and self-control .
Liberty is within -- not without .
It is each man 's own affair .
Suppose -- which is impossible -- that these swarming yelping fools in blue get the upper hand of us , what then ?
They will only fall to other masters .
So long as there are sheep Nature will insist on beasts of prey .
It would mean but a few hundred years ' delay .
The coming of the aristocrat is fatal and assured .
The end will be the Over-man -- for all the mad protests of humanity .
Let them revolt , let them win and kill me and my like .
Others will arise -- other masters .
The end will be the same . ''
`` But I must see these things for myself , '' he said , suddenly assuming a tone of confident mastery .
`` Only by seeing can I understand .
That is what I want to tell you , Ostrog .
I do not want to be King in a Pleasure City ; that is not my pleasure .
I have spent enough time with aeronautics -- and those other things .
I must learn how people live now , how the common life has developed .
Then I shall understand these things better .
I must learn how common people live -- the labour people more especially -- how they work , marry , bear children , die -- ''
`` There is no fighting likely to happen soon ? ''
`` I have been thinking about these negroes .
I do n't believe the people intend any hostility to me , and , after all , I am the Master .
I do not want any negroes brought to London .
It is an archaic prejudice perhaps , but I have peculiar feelings about Europeans and the subject races .
Even about Paris -- ''
Presently Asano made a detour to avoid the congested crowd that gaped upon the occasional passage of dead bodies from hospital to a mortuary , the gleanings after death 's harvest of the first revolt .
These people below him belonged , he learnt , to the lower middle class , the class just above the blue labourers , a class so accustomed in the Victorian period to feed with every precaution of privacy that its members , when occasion confronted them with a public meal , would usually hide their embarrassment under horseplay or a markedly militant demeanour .
But these gaily , if lightly dressed people below , albeit vivacious , hurried and uncommunicative , were dexterously mannered and certainly quite at their ease with regard to one another .
In a sort of recess before each diner was a complex apparatus of porcelain and metal .
There was one plate of white porcelain , and by means of taps for hot and cold volatile fluids the diner washed this himself between the courses ; he also washed his elegant white metal knife and fork and spoon as occasion required .
Beyond this place they came into a crowded hall , and he discovered the cause of the noise that had perplexed him .
They paused at a turnstile at which a payment was made .
Asano touched his arm and gave him a warning look , and forthwith another of these mechanisms screamed deafeningly and gave tongue in a shrill voice .
`` Yahaha , Yahah , Yap !
Hear a live paper yelp !
Shocking outrage in Paris .
The Parisians exasperated by the black police to the pitch of assassination .
Savage times come again .
The nearer Babble Machine hooted stupendously , `` Galloop , Galloop , '' drowned the end of the sentence , and proceeded in a rather flatter note than before with novel comments on the horrors of disorder .
`` Law and order must be maintained , '' said the nearer Babble Machine .
As he and his companion pushed their way through the excited crowd that swarmed beneath these voices , towards the exit , Graham conceived more clearly the proportion and features of this room .
Altogether , great and small , there must have been nearly a thousand of these erections , piping , hooting , bawling and gabbling in that great space , each with its crowd of excited listeners , the majority of them men dressed in blue canvas .
There were all sizes of machines , from the little gossiping mechanisms that chuckled out mechanical sarcasm in odd corners , through a number of grades to such fifty-foot giants as that which had first hooted over Graham .
`` And every consideration has been shown .
It is their own negroes -- French speaking negroes .
Senegal regiments , and Niger and Timbuctoo . ''
Along one of the many passages of the place they presently came upon a young couple in the usual blue canvas peering through the transparency and laughing hysterically at the bald head of their first-born .
Graham's face must have showed his estimate of them , for their merriment ceased and they looked abashed .
But this little incident accentuated his sudden realisation of the gulf between his habits of thought and the ways of the new age .
He passed on to the crawling rooms and the Kindergarten , perplexed and distressed .
He found the endless long playrooms were empty !
the latter-day children at least still spent their nights in sleep .
As they went through these , the little officer pointed out the nature of the toys , developments of those devised by that inspired sentimentalist Froebel .
There were nurses here , but much was done by machines that sang and danced and dandled .
`` Along here we shall come to the dancing place , '' said Asano by way of reply .
`` It is sure to be crowded .
In spite of all the political unrest it will be crowded .
The women take no great interest in politics -- except a few here and there .
You will see the mothers -- most young women in London are mothers .
In that class it is considered a creditable thing to have one child -- a proof of animation .
Few middle class people have more than one .
With the Labour Department it is different .
They still take an immense pride in the children .
They come here to look at them quite often . ''
They ascended a certain height in a swift lift , and changed to a slower one .
As they went on the music grew upon them , until it was near and full and splendid , and , moving with its glorious intricacies they could distinguish the beat of innumerable dancing feet .
They made a payment at a turnstile , and emerged upon the wide gallery that overlooked the dancing place , and upon the full enchantment of sound and sight .
Graham walked to the parapet and stood leaning over , looking down at the dancers .
Save for two or three remote whispering couples , who had stolen apart , he and his guide had the gallery to themselves .
A warm breath of scent and vitality came up to him .
Both men and women below were lightly clad , bare-armed , open-necked , as the universal warmth of the city permitted .
The hair of the men was often a mass of effeminate curls , their chins were always shaven , and many of them had flushed or coloured cheeks .
Many of the women were very pretty , and all were dressed with elaborate coquetry .
As they swept by beneath , he saw ecstatic faces with eyes half closed in pleasure .
`` What sort of people are these ? ''
`` Workers -- prosperous workers .
What you would have called the middle class .
Independent tradesmen with little separate businesses have vanished long ago , but there are store servers , managers , engineers of a hundred sorts .
To-night is a holiday of course , and every dancing place in the city will be crowded , and every place of worship . ''
There 's a thousand forms of work for women now .
But you had the beginning of the independent working-woman in your days .
Most women are independent now .
Most of these are married more or less -- there are a number of methods of contract -- and that gives them more money , and enables them to enjoy themselves . ''
`` Most of them . ''
`` The more I see of these things the more complex I find your problems .
This , for instance , is a surprise .
That news from Paris was a surprise . ''
In a little while he spoke again :
He stopped and repeated , `` A sort of worship . ''
`` There is a lot left for me to understand , '' said Graham after a pause .
`` Yet I see the logic of it all .
Our array of angry virtues and sour restraints was the consequence of danger and insecurity .
The Stoic , the Puritan , even in my time , were vanishing types .
In the old days man was armed against Pain , now he is eager for Pleasure .
There lies the difference .
Civilisation has driven pain and danger so far off -- for well-to-do people .
And only well-to-do people matter now .
I have been asleep two hundred years . ''
There was a moment 's silence .
`` Who 's the proprietor ? ''
`` But what do they assure me ? ''
`` What do they assure me ? ''
He found himself wedged into a straggling mass of people .
And so they went through these factories and places of toil , seeing many painful and grim things .
That walk left on Graham 's mind a maze of memories , fluctuating pictures of swathed halls , and crowded vaults seen through clouds of dust , of intricate machines , the racing threads of looms , the heavy beat of stamping machinery , the roar and rattle of belt and armature , of ill-lit subterranean aisles of sleeping places , illimitable vistas of pin-point lights .
Here was the smell of tanning , and here the reek of a brewery , and here unprecedented reeks .
Everywhere were pillars and cross archings of such a massiveness as Graham had never before seen , thick Titans of greasy , shining brickwork crushed beneath the vast weight of that complex city world , even as these anemic millions were crushed by its complexity .
And everywhere were pale features , lean limbs , disfigurement and degradation .
`` What am I to do ? ''
`` Let us have the facts , '' said Graham .
They went up the stepped platforms to the swiftest one , and there Asano accosted a labourer .
The answers to his questions were in the thick , vulgar speech .
`` He knows little , but he told me that the Black Police would have arrived here before the people knew -- had not someone in the Wind-Vane Offices learnt .
He said a girl . ''
It was already high day and the sun was shining brightly .
Out of their tall caverns of blue electric light came the swift ways crowded with multitudes of people , who poured off them and gathered ever denser over the wreckage and confusion of the ruins .
The air was full of their shouting , and they were pressing and swaying towards the central building .
For the most part that shouting mass consisted of shapeless swarms , but here and there Graham could see that a rude discipline struggled to establish itself .
And every voice clamoured for order in the chaos .
`` To your wards !
Every man to his ward ! ''
`` White men must be mastered by white men .
`` I forbid it , '' said Graham .
`` They have started . ''
`` You -- are -- a prisoner , '' panted Ostrog , exulting .
`` You -- were rather a fool -- to come back . ''
Graham turned his head about and perceived through the irregular green window in the walls of the hall the men who had been working the building cranes gesticulating excitedly to the people below them .
He was lugged a dozen yards before he realised that they were not friends -- that they were dragging him towards the open panel .
When he saw this he pulled back , he tried to fling himself down , he shouted for help with all his strength .
And this time there were answering cries .
He perceived men working with a sort of rude discipline to keep the crowd off him , to make a space clear about him .
He passed out of the hall , and saw a crude , new wall rising blankly before him topped by blue sky .
He was swung down to his feet ; someone gripped his arm and guided him .
He found the man in yellow close at hand .
They were taking him up a narrow stairway of brick , and close at hand rose the great red painted masses , the cranes and levers and the still engines of the big building machine .
And then a shadow came between Graham and the sun .
He looked up and the sky was clear , but he knew the little monoplane had passed .
The man in yellow thrust before him , zealous and perspiring , pointing and blatant .
Suddenly he saw the prow of the monoplane come gliding over the edge of the ruins and stop with a jerk .
In a moment Graham understood that the thing had grounded in order that Ostrog might escape by it .
He saw a blue haze climbing out of the gulf , perceived that the people below him were now firing up at the projecting stem .
A man beside him cheered hoarsely , and he saw that the blue rebels had gained the archway that had been contested by the men in black and yellow a moment before , and were running in a continual stream along the open passage .
The suspense of the moment gave place to a fury of exasperation as the swarming people realised that Ostrog had escaped them .
With belated activity they renewed their fire , until the rattling wove into a roar , until the whole area became dim and blue and the air pungent with the thin smoke of their weapons .
For a while a confused babblement arose from the ruins , and then the universal attention came back to Graham , perched high among the scaffolding .
He saw the faces of the people turned towards him , heard their shouts at his rescue .
From the throat of the ways came the song of the revolt spreading like a breeze across that swaying sea of men .
He was very intent to do the thing that was expected of him .
His nerves and muscles were quivering , his mind was perhaps a little confused , but he felt neither fear nor anger .
His hand that had been trodden upon throbbed and was hot .
He was a little nervous about his bearing .
He knew he was not afraid , but he was anxious not to seem afraid .
In his former life he had often been more excited in playing games of skill .
He was desirous of immediate action , he knew he must not think too much in detail of the huge complexity of the struggle about him lest be should be paralysed by the sense of its intricacy .
This room was grotesquely latter-day in its appointments .
In the centre was a bright oval lit by shaded electric lights from above .
The rest was in shadow , and the double finely fitting doors through which he came from the swarming Hall of the Atlas made the place very still .
The dead thud of these as they closed behind him , the sudden cessation of the tumult in which he had been living for hours , the quivering circle of light , the whispers and quick noiseless movements of vaguely visible attendants in the shadows , had a strange effect upon Graham .
The huge ears of a phonographic mechanism gaped in a battery for his words , the black eyes of great photographic cameras awaited his beginning , beyond metal rods and coils glittered dimly , and something whirled about with a droning hum .
He walked into the centre of the light , and his shadow drew together black and sharp to a little blot at his feet .
The vague shape of the thing he meant to say was already in his mind .
But this silence , this isolation , the withdrawal from that contagious crowd , this audience of gaping , glaring machines , had not been in his anticipation .
All his supports seemed withdrawn together ; he seemed to have dropped into this suddenly , suddenly to have discovered himself .
In a moment he was changed .
He found that he now feared to be inadequate , he feared to be theatrical , he feared the quality of his voice , the quality of his wit ; astonished , he turned to the man in yellow with a propitiatory gesture .
`` For a moment , '' he said , `` I must wait .
I did not think it would be like this .
I must think of the thing I have to say . ''
While he was still hesitating there came an agitated messenger with news that the foremost aeroplanes were passing over Madrid .
`` Charity and mercy , '' he floundered ; `` beauty and the love of beautiful things -- effort and devotion !
Give yourselves as I would give myself -- as Christ gave Himself upon the Cross .
It does not matter if you understand .
It does not matter if you seem to fail .
You _know_ -- in the core of your hearts you _know_ .
There is no promise , there is no security -- nothing to go upon but Faith .
There is no faith but faith -- faith which is courage ... . ''
He found the light of his present exaltation reflected in the face of the girl .
Their eyes met ; her eyes were swimming with tears of enthusiasm .
`` I have said what I could , '' he answered lamely and grasped and clung to her outstretched hands .
A picture had drifted through his mind of such a vast dramatic struggle as the masses in the ruins had suggested .
But here was no spectacular battle-field such as he imagined .
Instead was seclusion -- and suspense .
It was only as the afternoon wore on that he pieced together a truer picture of the fight that was raging , inaudibly and invisibly , within four miles of him , beneath the Roehampton stage .
A strange and unprecedented contest it was , a battle that was a hundred thousand little battles , a battle in a sponge of ways and channels , fought out of sight of sky or sun under the electric glare , fought out in a vast confusion by multitudes untrained in arms , led chiefly by acclamation , multitudes dulled by mindless labour and enervated by the tradition of two hundred years of servile security against multitudes demoralised by lives of venial privilege and sensual indulgence .
They had no artillery , no differentiation into this force or that ; the only weapon on either side was the little green metal carbine , whose secret manufacture and sudden distribution in enormous quantities had been one of Ostrog 's culminating moves against the Council .
Few had had any experience with this weapon , many had never discharged one , many who carried it came unprovided with ammunition ; never was wilder firing in the history of warfare .
It was a battle of amateurs , a hideous experimental warfare , armed rioters fighting armed rioters , armed rioters swept forward by the words and fury of a song , by the tramping sympathy of their numbers , pouring in countless myriads towards the smaller ways , the disabled lifts , the galleries slippery with blood , the halls and passages choked with smoke , beneath the flying stages , to learn there when retreat was hopeless the ancient mysteries of warfare .
And overhead save for a few sharpshooters upon the roof spaces and for a few bands and threads of vapour that multiplied and darkened towards the evening , the day was a clear serenity .
Ostrog it seems had no bombs at command and in all the earlier phases of the battle the flying machines played no part .
Not the smallest cloud was there to break the empty brilliance of the sky .
It seemed as though it held itself vacant until the aeroplanes should come .
`` We have driven them out of the under galleries at Norwood , Streatham is afire and burning wildly , and Roehampton is ours .
-- and we have taken the monoplane that lay thereon . ''
A shrill bell rang .
An agitated grey-headed man appeared from the room of the Ward Leaders .
`` It is all over , '' he cried .
`` Do you mean they are found ? ''
`` Nothing can stop them now , '' said the old man .
`` They have near a hundred aeroplanes in the first fleet . ''
`` How long would that take ? ''
`` You will be killed , '' she repeated .
The marksman became foul-mouthed and high-voiced in his earnest endeavour to make things plain .
And suddenly , interrupting him , came a noisy shouting from the substage .
`` What 's going on now ? ''
he said , and raised himself on one arm to survey the stairheads in the central groove of the stage .
A number of blue figures were coming up these , and swarming across the stage .
-- they 're shouting something . ''
And suddenly quite close to him were the black uniforms of the revolutionary guard , and for the first and last time in his life he saw Graham , saw him quite nearly .
A tall , dark man in a flowing black robe he was , with a white , resolute face and eyes fixed steadfastly before him ; a man who for all the little things about him had neither ears nor eyes nor thoughts ... .
For all his days that man remembered the passing of Graham 's bloodless face .
In a moment it had gone and he was fighting in the swaying crowd .
A lad weeping with terror thrust against him , pressing towards the stairways , yelling `` Clear for the start , you fools ! ''
The bell that cleared the flying stage became a loud unmelodious clanging .
He looked upward and saw two aeroplanes glide shouting far overhead , looked back , and saw the main body of the fleet opening out and rushing upward and outward ; saw the one he had struck fall edgewise on and strike like a gigantic knife-blade along the wind-wheels below it .
He passed two hundred feet or so above the Roehampton stage .
It was black with people and noisy with their frantic shouting .
But why was the Wimbledon Park stage black and cheering , too ?
The smoke and flame of Streatham now hid the three further stages .
He curved about and rose to see them and the northern quarters .
First came the square masses of Shooter 's Hill into sight , from behind the smoke , lit and orderly with the aeroplane that had landed and its disembarking negroes .
Then came Blackheath , and then under the corner of the reek the Norwood stage .
On Blackheath no aeroplane had landed .
Norwood was covered by a swarm of little figures running to and fro in a passionate confusion .
The stubborn defence of the flying stages was over , the people were pouring into the under-ways of these last strongholds of Ostrog 's usurpation .
And then , from far away on the northern border of the city , full of glorious import to him , came a sound , a signal , a note of triumph , the leaden thud of a gun .
His lips fell apart , his face was disturbed with emotion .
`` You see , '' said Ann Veronica , with the air of one who shares a difficulty , `` I 've promised to go .
I did n't realize -- I do n't see how I can get out of it now . ''
He `` went in '' for microscopy in the unphilosophical Victorian manner as his `` hobby . ''
A birthday present of a microscope had turned his mind to technical microscopy when he was eighteen , and a chance friendship with a Holborn microscope dealer had confirmed that bent .
He had remarkably skilful fingers and a love of detailed processes , and he had become one of the most dexterous amateur makers of rock sections in the world .
He spent a good deal more money and time than he could afford upon the little room at the top of the house , in producing new lapidary apparatus and new microscopic accessories and in rubbing down slices of rock to a transparent thinness and mounting them in a beautiful and dignified manner .
He did it , he said , `` to distract his mind . ''
His chief successes he exhibited to the Lowndean Microscopical Society , where their high technical merit never failed to excite admiration .
Their scientific value was less considerable , since he chose rocks entirely with a view to their difficulty of handling or their attractiveness at conversaziones when done .
He had a great contempt for the sections the `` theorizers '' produced .
They proved all sorts of things perhaps , but they were thick , unequal , pitiful pieces of work .
Yet an indiscriminating , wrong-headed world gave such fellows all sorts of distinctions ... .
He had no ideas about daughters .
They happen to a man .
But a little daughter is one thing and a daughter quite another .
There one comes to a relationship that Mr. Stanley had never thought out .
When he found himself thinking about it , it upset him so that he at once resorted to distraction .
The chromatic fiction with which he relieved his mind glanced but slightly at this aspect of life , and never with any quality of guidance .
Its heroes never had daughters , they borrowed other people 's .
The one fault , indeed , of this school of fiction for him was that it had rather a light way with parental rights .
His instinct was in the direction of considering his daughters his absolute property , bound to obey him , his to give away or his to keep to be a comfort in his declining years just as he thought fit .
About this conception of ownership he perceived and desired a certain sentimental glamour , he liked everything properly dressed , but it remained ownership .
Ownership seemed only a reasonable return for the cares and expenses of a daughter 's upbringing .
Daughters were not like sons .
He perceived , however , that both the novels he read and the world he lived in discountenanced these assumptions .
Nothing else was put in their place , and they remained sotto voce , as it were , in his mind .
The new and the old cancelled out ; his daughters became quasi-independent dependents -- which is absurd .
One married as he wished and one against his wishes , and now here was Ann Veronica , his little Vee , discontented with her beautiful , safe , and sheltering home , going about with hatless friends to Socialist meetings and art-class dances , and displaying a disposition to carry her scientific ambitions to unwomanly lengths .
She seemed to think he was merely the paymaster , handing over the means of her freedom .
And now she insisted that she MUST leave the chastened security of the Tredgold Women 's College for Russell 's unbridled classes , and wanted to go to fancy dress dances in pirate costume and spend the residue of the night with Widgett 's ramshackle girls in some indescribable hotel in Soho !
He had done his best not to think about her at all , but the situation and his sister had become altogether too urgent .
He had finally put aside The Lilac Sunbonnet , gone into his study , lit the gas fire , and written the letter that had brought these unsatisfactory relations to a head .
He gnawed his pen and reflected , tore the sheet up , and began again .
`` -- but this can not be . ''
`` So long as I am your father , so long as your life is entrusted to my care , I feel bound by every obligation to use my authority to check this odd disposition of yours toward extravagant enterprises .
A day will come when you will thank me .
It is not , my dear Veronica , that I think there is any harm in you ; there is not .
But a girl is soiled not only by evil but by the proximity of evil , and a reputation for rashness may do her as serious an injury as really reprehensible conduct .
So do please believe that in this matter I am acting for the best . ''
He signed his name and reflected .
Then he opened the study door and called `` Mollie ! ''
and returned to assume an attitude of authority on the hearthrug , before the blue flames and orange glow of the gas fire .
She was dressed in one of those complicated dresses that are all lace and work and confused patternings of black and purple and cream about the body , and she was in many ways a younger feminine version of the same theme as himself .
She had the same sharp nose -- which , indeed , only Ann Veronica , of all the family , had escaped .
She carried herself well , whereas her brother slouched , and there was a certain aristocratic dignity about her that she had acquired through her long engagement to a curate of family , a scion of the Wiltshire Edmondshaws .
He had died before they married , and when her brother became a widower she had come to his assistance and taken over much of the care of his youngest daughter .
But from the first her rather old-fashioned conception of life had jarred with the suburban atmosphere , the High School spirit and the memories of the light and little Mrs. Stanley , whose family had been by any reckoning inconsiderable -- to use the kindliest term .
Miss Stanley had determined from the outset to have the warmest affection for her youngest niece and to be a second mother in her life -- a second and a better one ; but she had found much to battle with , and there was much in herself that Ann Veronica failed to understand .
She came in now with an air of reserved solicitude .
Mr. Stanley took the letter and stood with it in his hand thoughtfully for a time .
`` I 'd give anything , '' he remarked , `` to see our little Vee happily and comfortably married . ''
He gave the note to the parlormaid the next morning in an inadvertent , casual manner just as he was leaving the house to catch his London train .
When Ann Veronica got it she had at first a wild , fantastic idea that it contained a tip .
`` I say , daddy , '' she began , and was suddenly short of breath .
`` You should n't have made an engagement until you 'd consulted your aunt . ''
`` I thought I was old enough , '' she gasped , between laughter and crying .
`` Very much as usual , '' said Ramage .
`` She finds lying up so much very irksome .
But , you see , she HAS to lie up . ''
`` Good God ! ''
`` Good-looking rascal she met at Worthing .
Very romantic and all that .
He fixed it . ''
Mr. Stanley poured wine .
`` Damned Rascal ! ''
`` Is n't there a brother to kick him ? ''
That 's about the beginning .
It 's these damned novels .
All this torrent of misleading , spurious stuff that pours from the press .
These sham ideals and advanced notions .
Women who Dids , and all that kind of thing ... . ''
At the end of dinner that evening Ann Veronica began : `` Father ! ''
`` I do n't see , Mollie , '' he remarked , taking a cigar from the box on the table as his sister and daughter rose , `` why you and Vee shouldn't discuss this little affair -- whatever it is -- without bothering me . ''
It seemed to show a want of affection , to be a deliberate and unmerited disregard , to justify the reprisal of being hurt .
When Ann Veronica came into the study she found every evidence of a carefully foreseen grouping about the gas fire .
Both arm-chairs had been moved a little so as to face each other on either side of the fender , and in the circular glow of the green-shaded lamp there lay , conspicuously waiting , a thick bundle of blue and white papers tied with pink tape .
Her father held some printed document in his hand , and appeared not to observe her entry .
`` Sit down , '' he said , and perused -- '' perused '' is the word for it -- for some moments .
Then he put the paper by .
`` And what is it all about , Veronica ? ''
he asked , with a deliberate note of irony , looking at her a little quizzically over his glasses .
Her answer was not quite ready .
`` Well , because I do n't see any reason why I should n't . ''
`` It is n't a suitable place ; it is n't a suitable gathering . ''
He put his head on one side , pulled down the corners of his mouth , and looked at her over his glasses .
`` You see , daddy , I do n't think it IS preposterous .
That 's really what I want to discuss .
It comes to this -- am I to be trusted to take care of myself , or am I not ? ''
`` Well , I do .
It 's just that I want to say .
I want to be a human being ; I want to learn about things and know about things , and not to be protected as something too precious for life , cooped up in one narrow little corner . ''
`` Well , '' she said , `` good-night , father . ''
Ann Veronica decided to be more explicit .
`` I 've been , '' she said , `` forbidden to come . ''
`` That 's the point .
I asked him why , and he had n't a reason . ''
`` YOU ASKED YOUR FATHER FOR A REASON ! ''
said Miss Miniver , with great intensity .
`` But I say , Vee , '' said Constance , `` if you come and you are forbidden to come there 'll be the deuce of a row . ''
`` Until you marry , Vee , '' said Hetty .
`` What 's our lot ? ''
Miss Miniver 's manner became impressive .
She addressed Ann Veronica with an air of conveying great open secrets to her .
`` As things are at present , '' she said , `` it is true .
We live under man-made institutions , and that is what they amount to .
Every girl in the world practically , except a few of us who teach or type-write , and then we 're underpaid and sweated -- it 's dreadful to think how we are sweated ! ''
She had lost her generalization , whatever it was .
She hung for a moment , and then went on , conclusively , `` Until we have the vote that is how things WILL be . ''
`` While we were minding the children they stole our rights and liberties .
The children made us slaves , and the men took advantage of it .
It 's -- Mrs. Shalford says -- the accidental conquering the essential .
Originally in the first animals there were no males , none at all .
It has been proved .
Then they appear among the lower things '' -- she made meticulous gestures to figure the scale of life ; she seemed to be holding up specimens , and peering through her glasses at them -- '' among crustaceans and things , just as little creatures , ever so inferior to the females .
Things you would laugh at .
And among human beings , too , women to begin with were the rulers and leaders ; they owned all the property , they invented all the arts .
Miss Miniver followed with an expression of perplexity , her mouth shaped to futile expositions .
The Widgett method of thought puzzled her weakly rhetorical mind .
`` There is no remedy , girls , '' she began , breathlessly , `` except the Vote .
Give us that -- ''
`` And they wo n't let us make plans for ourselves . ''
`` Oh , quite ! ''
said Teddy , convulsively , and lifted an imaginary hat and left her .
Ann Veronica agreed , and tried to make the manner of her assent cover a possible knowledge of a probable poem .
`` They 're very good this year , '' said Ann Veronica , avoiding controversial matter .
`` Do you think so ?
I find my interest in that sort of thing decline and decline . ''
`` A sort of history , '' said Mr. Manning ; and repeated , `` a sort of history .
But look at these glorious daisies ! ''
`` Every one must be experimental , '' said Mr. Manning , and glanced round hastily for further horticultural points of interest in secluded corners .
None presented themselves to save him from that return .
`` I think I ought to have one . ''
`` Well , I have two , '' said Mr. Manning -- '' one in Oxford University and one in Kensington . ''
He caught up and went on with a sort of clumsiness : `` Let me present you with them and be your voter . ''
Her interest grew as she read , a certain distaste disappeared .
Twice she smiled , but not unkindly .
Then she went back and mixed up the sheets in a search for particular passages .
Finally she fell into reflection .
`` Let me think , '' said Ann Veronica .
`` I wish this had n't turned up to-day of all days . ''
But that other world , in spite of her resolute exclusion of it , was always looking round corners and peeping through chinks and crannies , and rustling and raiding into the order in which she chose to live , shining out of pictures at her , echoing in lyrics and music ; it invaded her dreams , it wrote up broken and enigmatical sentences upon the passage walls of her mind .
She was aware of it now as if it were a voice shouting outside a house , shouting passionate verities in a hot sunlight , a voice that cries while people talk insincerely in a darkened room and pretend not to hear .
Its shouting now did in some occult manner convey a protest that Mr. Manning would on no account do , though he was tall and dark and handsome and kind , and thirty-five and adequately prosperous , and all that a husband should be .
But there was , it insisted , no mobility in his face , no movement , nothing about him that warmed .
If Ann Veronica could have put words to that song they would have been , `` Hot-blooded marriage or none ! ''
but she was far too indistinct in this matter to frame any words at all .
She thought of her father , and with an effort dismissed him from her mind .
Madgett 's `` English Poets '' ( twelve volumes ) , bound purple morocco ;
Through all this flutter of novelty there came and went a solicitous , preoccupied , almost depressed figure .
It was Doctor Ralph , formerly the partner of Doctor Stickell in the Avenue , and now with a thriving practice of his own in Wamblesmith .
He had shaved his side-whiskers and come over in flannels , but he was still indisputably the same person who had attended Ann Veronica for the measles and when she swallowed the fish-bone .
But his role was altered , and he was now playing the bridegroom in this remarkable drama .
Alice was going to be Mrs. Ralph .
He came in apologetically ; all the old `` Well , and how ARE we ? ''
note gone ; and once he asked Ann Veronica , almost furtively ,
Ann Veronica had got quite interested in Mr. Bribble 's rendering of the service -- he had the sort of voice that brings out things -- and was still teeming with ideas about it when finally a wild outburst from the organ made it clear that , whatever snivelling there might be down in the chancel , that excellent wind instrument was , in its Mendelssohnian way , as glad as ever it could be .
`` Pump , pump , per-um-pump , Pum , Pump , Per-um ... . ''
The wedding-breakfast was for Ann Veronica a spectacle of the unreal consuming the real ; she liked that part very well , until she was carelessly served against her expressed wishes with mayonnaise .
She was caught by an uncle , whose opinion she valued , making faces at Roddy because he had exulted at this .
When they were going home she asked her mother why she and Gwen and Alice had cried .
`` I do n't know whether I shall go on , '' said Gwen , a novel note of languorous professionalism creeping into her voice .
`` The other women do n't much like it if husband and wife work together , and I do n't think Hal would like me to act away from him . ''
said Ann Veronica , with arms akimbo and a careless , breathless manner .
I say -- did you marry Gwen ? ''
Ann Veronica had three things very definitely settled by the time when , a little after mid-day , she found herself perched up on a gate between a bridle-path and a field that commanded the whole wide stretch of country between Chalking and Waldersham .
Firstly , she did not intend to marry at all , and particularly she did not mean to marry Mr. Manning ; secondly , by some measure or other , she meant to go on with her studies , not at the Tredgold Schools but at the Imperial College ; and , thirdly , she was , as an immediate and decisive act , a symbol of just exactly where she stood , a declaration of free and adult initiative , going that night to the Fadden Ball .
He could n't turn her out of doors .
But what he could do or might do she could not imagine .
She was not afraid of violence , but she was afraid of something mean , some secondary kind of force .
Suppose he stopped all her allowance , made it imperative that she should either stay ineffectually resentful at home or earn a living for herself at once ... .
It appeared highly probable to her that he would stop her allowance .
Somewhere at this point Ann Veronica 's speculations were interrupted and turned aside by the approach of a horse and rider .
Mr. Ramage , that iron-gray man of the world , appeared dressed in a bowler hat and a suit of hard gray , astride of a black horse .
He pulled rein at the sight of her , saluted , and regarded her with his rather too protuberant eyes .
The girl 's gaze met his in interested inquiry .
`` It 's your gate , '' she said , amiably ; `` you got it first .
It 's for you to say if I may sit on it . ''
`` You 're lucky to live in an age when you can do so .
Your mother , for instance , could n't .
She had to do her thinking at home -- under inspection . ''
She looked down on him thoughtfully , and he let his admiration of her free young poise show in his face .
He paused , and went on , after a keen look at her :
`` I had rather gossip to a really intelligent girl than to any man alive . ''
`` I mean we 've long strings to tether us , but we are bound all the same .
A woman is n't much freer -- in reality . ''
`` One runs about , '' said Ann Veronica .
He looked interrogation with a faint smile .
`` I wonder why ? ''
`` Well , it might mean rather a row . ''
He had diverged only a little from the truth when he said that his chief interest in life was women .
It was n't so much women as Woman that engaged his mind .
His was the Latin turn of thinking ; he had fallen in love at thirteen , and he was still capable -- he prided himself -- of falling in love .
His invalid wife and her money had been only the thin thread that held his life together ; beaded on that permanent relation had been an inter-weaving series of other feminine experiences , disturbing , absorbing , interesting , memorable affairs .
Each one had been different from the others , each had had a quality all its own , a distinctive freshness , a distinctive beauty .
He could not understand how men could live ignoring this one predominant interest , this wonderful research into personality and the possibilities of pleasing , these complex , fascinating expeditions that began in interest and mounted to the supremest , most passionate intimacy .
All the rest of his existence was subordinate to this pursuit ; he lived for it , worked for it , kept himself in training for it .
She , perhaps , displayed herself rather consciously as a fine person unduly limited .
She even touched lightly on her father's unreasonableness .
`` I do n't think she will , '' she said .
`` But why did n't you prohibit once for all the whole thing ?
How dared she tell you that ? ''
`` I said everything I could say as soon as I realized she was trying to avoid the topic .
I said , 'It is no use your telling me about this walk and pretend I 've been told about the ball , because you have n't .
Your father has forbidden you to go ! '
`` Now look here , Ann Veronica , '' said Mr. Stanley , `` just a moment .
You are NOT going to that ball ! ''
Ann Veronica tried yet more earnestly to treat him , as she would treat any man , with an insistence upon her due of masculine respect .
`` You see , '' she said , very gently , `` I AM going .
I am sorry to seem to disobey you , but I am .
I wish '' -- she found she had embarked on a bad sentence -- '' I wish we need n't have quarrelled . ''
But things that a girl of sixteen may do in short skirts are not things to be done by a young lady of twenty-one in fancy dress and an opera-cloak , and just as she was coming unaided to an adequate realization of this , she discovered Mr. Pragmar , the wholesale druggist , who lived three gardens away , and who had been mowing his lawn to get an appetite for dinner , standing in a fascinated attitude beside the forgotten lawn-mower and watching her intently .
At eight that evening Miss Stanley tapped at Ann Veronica 's bedroom door .
`` I do n't think you see , '' she replied , with tears on her cheeks , and her brows knitting , `` how it shames and , ah !
-- disgraces me -- AH TISHU ! ''
`` That 's no reason , '' said Ann Veronica , speaking through her handkerchief and stopping abruptly .
Niece and aunt regarded each other for a moment over their pocket-handkerchiefs with watery but antagonistic eyes , each far too profoundly moved to see the absurdity of the position .
`` I hope , '' said Miss Stanley , with dignity , and turned doorward with features in civil warfare .
`` Better state of mind , '' she gasped ... .
`` By God ! ''
said Ann Veronica for the first time in her life .
`` But I will !
Ann Veronica had an impression that she did not sleep at all that night , and at any rate she got through an immense amount of feverish feeling and thinking .
What was she going to do ?
`` I shall go on my own .
Take a room ! ''
Teddy handed her into the second-class compartment her season-ticket warranted , and declared she was `` simply splendid . ''
`` If you want anything , '' he said , `` or get into any trouble , wire me .
I 'd come back from the ends of the earth .
I 'd do anything , Vee .
It 's horrible to think of you ! ''
She found herself alone in the train asking herself what she must do next , and trying not to think of herself as cut off from home or any refuge whatever from the world she had resolved to face .
She felt smaller and more adventurous even than she had expected to feel .
`` Let me see , '' she said to herself , trying to control a slight sinking of the heart , `` I am going to take a room in a lodging-house because that is cheaper ... .
But perhaps I had better get a room in an hotel to-night and look round ... .
But her heart kept on sinking .
What hotel should she go to ?
If she told a cabman to drive to an hotel , any hotel , what would he do -- or say ?
He might drive to something dreadfully expensive , and not at all the quiet sort of thing she required .
Finally she decided that even for an hotel she must look round , and that meanwhile she would `` book '' her luggage at Waterloo .
She told the porter to take it to the booking-office , and it was only after a disconcerting moment or so that she found she ought to have directed him to go to the cloak-room .
But that was soon put right , and she walked out into London with a peculiar exaltation of mind , an exaltation that partook of panic and defiance , but was chiefly a sense of vast unexampled release .
It seemed at first the most beautiful afternoon of all time to her , and perhaps the thrill of her excitement did add a distinctive and culminating keenness to the day .
The river , the big buildings on the north bank , Westminster , and St. Paul 's , were rich and wonderful with the soft sunshine of London , the softest , the finest grained , the most penetrating and least emphatic sunshine in the world .
The very carts and vans and cabs that Wellington Street poured out incessantly upon the bridge seemed ripe and good in her eyes .
A traffic of copious barges slumbered over the face of the river-barges either altogether stagnant or dreaming along in the wake of fussy tugs ; and above circled , urbanely voracious , the London seagulls .
She had never been there before at that hour , in that light , and it seemed to her as if she came to it all for the first time .
And this great mellow place , this London , now was hers , to struggle with , to go where she pleased in , to overcome and live in .
`` I am glad , '' she told herself , `` I came . ''
`` All right so far , '' she said to herself ... .
But presently , as she sat on the one antimacassared red silk chair and surveyed her hold-all and bag in that tidy , rather vacant , and dehumanized apartment , with its empty wardrobe and desert toilet-table and pictureless walls and stereotyped furnishings , a sudden blankness came upon her as though she did n't matter , and had been thrust away into this impersonal corner , she and her gear ... .
47 was no more than a sort of railway compartment on the way to that .
The art of ignoring is one of the accomplishments of every well-bred girl , so carefully instilled that at last she can even ignore her own thoughts and her own knowledge .
Ann Veronica could at the same time ask herself what this queer old gentleman could have meant by speaking to her , and know -- know in general terms , at least -- what that accosting signified .
About her , as she had gone day by day to and from the Tredgold College , she had seen and not seen many an incidental aspect of those sides of life about which girls are expected to know nothing , aspects that were extraordinarily relevant to her own position and outlook on the world , and yet by convention ineffably remote .
For all that she was of exceptional intellectual enterprise , she had never yet considered these things with unaverted eyes .
She had viewed them askance , and without exchanging ideas with any one else in the world about them .
There were moments when she thought of turning upon this man and talking to him .
But there was something in his face at once stupid and invincible that told her he would go on forcing himself upon her , that he would esteem speech with her a great point gained .
In the twilight he had ceased to be a person one could tackle and shame ; he had become something more general , a something that crawled and sneaked toward her and would not let her alone ... .
`` DEAR MR. MANNING , '' she had begun .
So far it had been plain sailing , and it had seemed fairly evident to go on : `` I find it very difficult to answer your letter . ''
`` I do hope you will see how things are , and not be offended with me or frightfully shocked and distressed by what I have done .
`` My dear , '' she said , when she could get her breath , `` you must come home at once . ''
`` He cares so much for you .
He did so care for you . ''
And I never dreamed anything of the sort was going on .
I had no idea ! ''
She sat down abruptly and threw her wrists limply upon the table .
`` Oh , Veronica ! ''
she said , `` to leave your home ! ''
`` Of course he imagined !
'What has happened , Peter ? '
He was standing up with the telegram crumpled in his hand .
He used a most awful word !
Then he said , 'It 's Ann Veronica gone to join her sister ! '
'Read that , ' and threw the telegram at me , so that it went into the tureen .
He swore when I tried to get it out with the ladle , and told me what it said .
Then he sat down again in a chair and said that people who wrote novels ought to be strung up .
It was as much as I could do to prevent him flying out of the house there and then and coming after you .
Never since I was a girl have I seen your father so moved .
he cried , 'little Vee ! '
and put his face between his hands and sat still for a long time before he broke out again . ''
`` Do you mean , aunt , '' she asked , `` that my father thought I had gone off -- with some man ? ''
Ann Veronica looked down at her fingers on the claret-colored table-cloth .
Her aunt had summoned up an altogether too vivid picture of her father as the masterful man , overbearing , emphatic , sentimental , noisy , aimless .
Why on earth could n't he leave her to grow in her own way ?
Her pride rose at the bare thought of return .
At first it had not been at all clear to Ann Veronica that she would refuse to return home ; she had had some dream of a capitulation that should leave her an enlarged and defined freedom , but as her aunt put this aspect and that of her flight to her , as she wandered illogically and inconsistently from one urgent consideration to another , as she mingled assurances and aspects and emotions , it became clearer and clearer to the girl that there could be little or no change in the position of things if she returned .
`` And what will Mr. Manning think ? ''
In the afternoon the task of expostulation was taken up by Mr. Stanley in person .
Her father 's ideas of expostulation were a little harsh and forcible , and over the claret-colored table-cloth and under the gas chandelier , with his hat and umbrella between them like the mace in Parliament , he and his daughter contrived to have a violent quarrel .
She had intended to be quietly dignified , but he was in a smouldering rage from the beginning , and began by assuming , which alone was more than flesh and blood could stand , that the insurrection was over and that she was coming home submissively .
In his desire to be emphatic and to avenge himself for his over-night distresses , he speedily became brutal , more brutal than she had ever known him before .
`` Not coming home ! ''
He paused , deeply moved .
In the retrospect she was amazed to think how things had gone to pieces , for at the outset she had been quite prepared to go home again upon terms .
While waiting for his coming she had stated her present and future relations with him with what had seemed to her the most satisfactory lucidity and completeness .
She had looked forward to an explanation .
Instead had come this storm , this shouting , this weeping , this confusion of threats and irrelevant appeals .
It was not only that her father had said all sorts of inconsistent and unreasonable things , but that by some incomprehensible infection she herself had replied in the same vein .
He had assumed that her leaving home was the point at issue , that everything turned on that , and that the sole alternative was obedience , and she had fallen in with that assumption until rebellion seemed a sacred principle .
Moreover , atrociously and inexorably , he allowed it to appear ever and again in horrible gleams that he suspected there was some man in the case ... .
`` I understand , '' said Ann Veronica , tear-wet and flushed with a reciprocal passion , but standing up to him with an equality that amazed even herself , `` I understand . ''
She controlled a sob .
`` Not a penny -- not one penny -- and never darken your doors again ! ''
`` No , '' said her brother , conclusively , `` it 's not for a parent to go on persuading a child . ''
`` Father , '' she cried , `` I have to live ! ''
He asked questions and listened to her views for a time .
`` I 'd chuck this lark right off if I were you , Vee , '' he said .
`` I 'm five years older than you , and no end wiser , being a man .
What you 're after is too risky .
It 's a damned hard thing to do .
It 's all very handsome starting out on your own , but it 's too damned hard .
That 's my opinion , if you ask me .
There 's nothing a girl can do that is n't sweated to the bone .
, and go home before you have to .
That 's my advice .
If you do n't eat humble-pie now you may live to fare worse later .
_I_ ca n't help you a cent .
Life 's hard enough nowadays for an unprotected male .
Let alone a girl .
You got to take the world as it is , and the only possible trade for a girl that is n't sweated is to get hold of a man and make him do it for her .
It 's no good flying out at that , Vee ; _I_ did n't arrange it .
That 's how things are ; that 's the order of the world .
It is n't pretty , but we 're made so .
Rot , no doubt ; but we ca n't alter it .
You go home and live on the G.V.
, and get some other man to live on as soon as possible .
It is n't sentiment but it 's horse sense .
All this Woman-who-Diddery -- no damn good .
After all , old P. -- Providence , I mean -- HAS arranged it so that men will keep you , more or less .
He made the universe on those lines .
You 've got to take what you can get . ''
`` You know -- , '' said Mr. Manning , relinquishing his cup without answering her question , `` when I hear you talk of earning a living , it 's as if I heard of an archangel going on the Stock Exchange -- or Christ selling doves ... .
I could n't help the thought . ''
`` And think of the ordinary wives and mothers , with their anxiety , their limitations , their swarms of children ! ''
Slowly and reluctantly she came to realize that Vivie Warren was what is called an `` ideal . ''
There were no such girls and no such positions .
No work that offered was at all of the quality she had vaguely postulated for herself .
With such qualifications as she possessed , two chief channels of employment lay open , and neither attracted her , neither seemed really to offer a conclusive escape from that subjection to mankind against which , in the person of her father , she was rebelling .
One main avenue was for her to become a sort of salaried accessory wife or mother , to be a governess or an assistant schoolmistress , or a very high type of governess-nurse .
The other was to go into business -- into a photographer 's reception-room , for example , or a costumer 's or hat-shop .
The first set of occupations seemed to her to be altogether too domestic and restricted ; for the latter she was dreadfully handicapped by her want of experience .
And also she did n't like them .
She did n't like the shops , she did n't like the other women 's faces ; she thought the smirking men in frock-coats who dominated these establishments the most intolerable persons she had ever had to face .
One called her very distinctly `` My dear ! ''
`` I was watching you at Morningside Park , dear , '' said Miss Miniver .
`` I am getting to watch all women .
I thought then perhaps you did n't care , that you were like so many of them .
NOW it 's just as though you had grown up suddenly . ''
`` Everybody is taking it up , '' said Miss Miniver .
`` YOU had to come in .
You could n't help it .
From suburbs , from country towns -- everywhere .
I see all the Movements .
As far as I can , I belong to them all .
I keep my finger on the pulse of things . ''
Very central in Miss Miniver 's universe were the Goopes .
The Goopes were the oddest little couple conceivable , following a fruitarian career upon an upper floor in Theobald 's Road .
They were childless and servantless , and they had reduced simple living to the finest of fine arts .
Mr. Goopes , Ann Veronica gathered , was a mathematical tutor and visited schools , and his wife wrote a weekly column in New Ideas upon vegetarian cookery , vivisection , degeneration , the lacteal secretion , appendicitis , and the Higher Thought generally , and assisted in the management of a fruit shop in the Tottenham Court Road .
Their very furniture had mysteriously a high-browed quality , and Mr. Goopes when at home dressed simply in a pajama-shaped suit of canvas sacking tied with brown ribbons , while his wife wore a purple djibbah with a richly embroidered yoke .
He was a small , dark , reserved man , with a large inflexible-looking convex forehead , and his wife was very pink and high-spirited , with one of those chins that pass insensibly into a full , strong neck .
Once a week , every Saturday , they had a little gathering from nine till the small hours , just talk and perhaps reading aloud and fruitarian refreshments -- chestnut sandwiches buttered with nut tose , and so forth -- and lemonade and unfermented wine ; and to one of these symposia Miss Miniver after a good deal of preliminary solicitude , conducted Ann Veronica .
Miss Miniver said that if once she lost her faith in Tolstoy's sincerity , nothing she felt would really matter much any more , and she appealed to Ann Veronica whether she did not feel the same ; and Mr. Goopes said that we must distinguish between sincerity and irony , which was often indeed no more than sincerity at the sublimated level .
And at last Ann Veronica and Miss Miniver came down the dark staircase and out into the foggy spaces of the London squares , and crossed Russell Square , Woburn Square , Gordon Square , making an oblique route to Ann Veronica 's lodging .
They trudged along a little hungry , because of the fruitarian refreshments , and mentally very active .
And Miss Miniver fell discussing whether Goopes or Bernard Shaw or Tolstoy or Doctor Tumpany or Wilkins the author had the more powerful and perfect mind in existence at the present time .
She was clear there were no other minds like them in all the world .
`` Not for these things , O Ann Veronica , have you revolted , '' it said ; `` and this is not your appropriate purpose . ''
These things illuminated her situation extremely .
Finally she decided upon a step that had always seemed reasonable to her , but that hitherto she had , from motives too faint for her to formulate , refrained from taking .
She resolved to go into the City to Ramage and ask for his advice .
And next morning she attired herself with especial care and neatness , found his address in the Directory at a post-office , and went to him .
Business exists for such interruptions .
There you are , the best client 's chair . ''
`` Well , you see , something has happened at home . ''
`` I suppose not . ''
`` That 's one of our differences .
We men are like children .
We can get absorbed in play , in games , in the business we do .
That 's really why we do them sometimes rather well and get on .
But women -- women as a rule do n't throw themselves into things like that .
As a matter of fact it is n't their affair .
And as a natural consequence , they do n't do so well , and they do n't get on -- and so the world does n't pay them .
They don't catch on to discursive interests , you see , because they are more serious , they are concentrated on the central reality of life , and a little impatient of its -- its outer aspects .
At least that , I think , is what makes a clever woman 's independent career so much more difficult than a clever man 's . ''
`` She does n't develop a specialty . ''
Ann Veronica was doing her best to follow him .
`` You see , if I do go home my father objects to the College , and as for typing -- ''
Ann Veronica opened her lips quickly and did not speak .
But the five per cent .
certainly did seem to improve the aspect of Ramage 's suggestion .
`` Well , anyhow , consider it open . ''
He dabbed with his paper-weight again , and spoke in an entirely indifferent tone .
`` And now tell me , please , how you eloped from Morningside Park .
How did you get your luggage out of the house ?
Was n't it -- was n't it rather in some respects -- rather a lark ?
It 's one of my regrets for my lost youth .
I never ran away from anywhere with anybody anywhen .
And now -- I suppose I should be considered too old .
I do n't feel it ... .
Did n't you feel rather EVENTFUL -- in the train -- coming up to Waterloo ? ''
`` Can you spare me forty pounds ? ''
`` I wo n't give you a check though -- Yes , I will .
I 'll give you an uncrossed check , and then you can get it at the bank here , quite close by ... .
You 'd better not have all the money on you ; you had better open a small account in the post-office and draw it out a fiver at a time .
That wo n't involve references , as a bank account would -- and all that sort of thing .
The money will last longer , and -- it wo n't bother you . ''
They talked across their meal in an easy and friendly manner about Ann Veronica 's affairs .
He was really very bright and clever , with a sort of conversational boldness that was just within the limits of permissible daring .
She described the Goopes and the Fabians to him , and gave him a sketch of her landlady ; and he talked in the most liberal and entertaining way of a modern young woman 's outlook .
He seemed to know a great deal about life .
He gave glimpses of possibilities .
He contrasted wonderfully with the empty showing-off of Teddy .
His friendship seemed a thing worth having ... .
That was two days before Christmas Eve .
The next morning came a compact letter from her father .
`` Please come home .
You will not find me unreasonable with you .
Her mind drifted into a speculation about her sister .
`` I ought to look up Gwen , '' she said .
`` I wonder what happened . ''
It was at the top of the building , and looked clear over a clustering mass of inferior buildings toward Regent 's Park .
It was long and narrow , a well-lit , well-ventilated , quiet gallery of small tables and sinks , pervaded by a thin smell of methylated spirit and of a mitigated and sterilized organic decay .
Along the inner side was a wonderfully arranged series of displayed specimens that Russell himself had prepared .
The supreme effect for Ann Veronica was its surpassing relevance ; it made every other atmosphere she knew seem discursive and confused .
The whole place and everything in it aimed at one thing -- to illustrate , to elaborate , to criticise and illuminate , and make ever plainer and plainer the significance of animal and vegetable structure .
It dealt from floor to ceiling and end to end with the Theory of the Forms of Life ; the very duster by the blackboard was there to do its share in that work , the very washers in the taps ; the room was more simply concentrated in aim even than a church .
To that , perhaps , a large part of its satisfyingness was due .
Contrasted with the confused movement and presences of a Fabian meeting , or the inexplicable enthusiasm behind the suffrage demand , with the speeches that were partly egotistical displays , partly artful manoeuvres , and partly incoherent cries for unsoundly formulated ends , compared with the comings and goings of audiences and supporters that were like the eddy-driven drift of paper in the street , this long , quiet , methodical chamber shone like a star seen through clouds .
Day after day for a measured hour in the lecture-theatre , with elaborate power and patience , Russell pieced together difficulty and suggestion , instance and counter-instance , in the elaborate construction of the family tree of life .
And then the students went into the long laboratory and followed out these facts in almost living tissue with microscope and scalpel , probe and microtome , and the utmost of their skill and care , making now and then a raid into the compact museum of illustration next door , in which specimens and models and directions stood in disciplined ranks , under the direction of the demonstrator Capes .
There was a couple of blackboards at each end of the aisle of tables , and at these Capes , with quick and nervous speech that contrasted vividly with Russell's slow , definitive articulation , directed the dissection and made illuminating comments on the structures under examination .
Then he would come along the laboratory , sitting down by each student in turn , checking the work and discussing its difficulties , and answering questions arising out of Russell 's lecture .
Ann Veronica had come to the Imperial College obsessed by the great figure of Russell , by the part he had played in the Darwinian controversies , and by the resolute effect of the grim-lipped , yellow , leonine face beneath the mane of silvery hair .
Capes was rather a discovery .
Capes was something superadded .
Russell burned like a beacon , but Capes illuminated by darting flashes and threw light , even if it was but momentary light , into a hundred corners that Russell left steadfastly in the shade .
The next few weeks were a time of the very liveliest thought and growth for Ann Veronica .
The crowding impressions of the previous weeks seemed to run together directly her mind left the chaotic search for employment and came into touch again with a coherent and systematic development of ideas .
The advanced work at the Central Imperial College was in the closest touch with living interests and current controversies ; it drew its illustrations and material from Russell 's two great researches -- upon the relation of the brachiopods to the echinodermata , and upon the secondary and tertiary mammalian and pseudo-mammalian factors in the free larval forms of various marine organisms .
Moreover , a vigorous fire of mutual criticism was going on now between the Imperial College and the Cambridge Mendelians and echoed in the lectures .
From beginning to end it was first-hand stuff .
But the influence of the science radiated far beyond its own special field -- beyond those beautiful but highly technical problems with which we do not propose for a moment to trouble the naturally terrified reader .
Biology is an extraordinarily digestive science .
It throws out a number of broad experimental generalizations , and then sets out to bring into harmony or relation with these an infinitely multifarious collection of phenomena .
The little streaks upon the germinating area of an egg , the nervous movements of an impatient horse , the trick of a calculating boy , the senses of a fish , the fungus at the root of a garden flower , and the slime upon a sea-wet rock -- ten thousand such things bear their witness and are illuminated .
And not only did these tentacular generalizations gather all the facts of natural history and comparative anatomy together , but they seemed always stretching out further and further into a world of interests that lay altogether outside their legitimate bounds .
It came to Ann Veronica one night after a long talk with Miss Miniver , as a sudden remarkable thing , as a grotesque , novel aspect , that this slowly elaborating biological scheme had something more than an academic interest for herself .
And not only so , but that it was after all , a more systematic and particular method of examining just the same questions that underlay the discussions of the Fabian Society , the talk of the West Central Arts Club , the chatter of the studios and the deep , the bottomless discussions of the simple-life homes .
It was the same Bios whose nature and drift and ways and methods and aspects engaged them all .
And she , she in her own person too , was this eternal Bios , beginning again its recurrent journey to selection and multiplication and failure or survival .
He was beginning to think about her inordinately .
He would sit in his inner office and compose conversations with her , penetrating , illuminating , and nearly conclusive -- conversations that never proved to be of the slightest use at all with her when he met her face to face .
And he began also at times to wake at night and think about her .
For a time Ann Veronica 's family had desisted from direct offers of a free pardon ; they were evidently waiting for her resources to come to an end .
Neither father , aunt , nor brothers made a sign , and then one afternoon in early February her aunt came up in a state between expostulation and dignified resentment , but obviously very anxious for Ann Veronica 's welfare .
`` I had a dream in the night , '' she said .
`` I saw you in a sort of sloping , slippery place , holding on by your hands and slipping .
You seemed to me to be slipping and slipping , and your face was white .
It was really most vivid , most vivid !
You seemed to be slipping and just going to tumble and holding on .
It made me wake up , and there I lay thinking of you , spending your nights up here all alone , and no one to look after you .
I wondered what you could be doing and what might be happening to you .
I said to myself at once , 'Either this is a coincidence or the caper sauce . '
But I made sure it was you .
I felt I MUST do something anyhow , and up I came just as soon as I could to see you . ''
`` I have never yet met a man whose intellect I could respect . ''
`` I ca n't imagine it , '' said Miss Miniver .
`` And think , think '' -- her voice sank -- '' of the horrible coarseness ! ''
`` Do n't we all rather humbug about the coarseness ?
All we women , I mean , '' said she .
She decided to go on , after a momentary halt .
`` We pretend bodies are ugly .
Really they are the most beautiful things in the world .
We pretend we never think of everything that makes us what we are . ''
`` We do not want the men , '' said Miss Miniver ; `` we do not want them , with their sneers and loud laughter .
Empty , silly , coarse brutes .
They are the brute still with us !
Science some day may teach us a way to do without them .
It is only the women matter .
It is not every sort of creature needs -- these males .
Some have no males . ''
`` But do you really think men 's minds are altered by the food they eat ? ''
`` I know it , '' said Miss Miniver .
When I am leading a true life , a pure and simple life free of all stimulants and excitements , I think -- I think -- oh !
with pellucid clearness ; but if I so much as take a mouthful of meat -- or anything -- the mirror is all blurred . ''
Then one day a little thing happened that clothed itself in significance .
`` It 's like this , '' he said , and dragged a stool beside her and sat down with his elbow four inches from hers and made a sketch .
Then he got up and left her .
`` Why should one pretend ? ''
`` Why should one pretend ?
`` I suppose girls and women have prayed for this , have come to this -- In Babylon , in Nineveh .
She went next day to the schools , and her world seemed all made of happiness just worked up roughly into shapes and occasions and duties .
She found she could do her microscope work all the better for being in love .
She winced when first she heard the preparation-room door open and Capes came down the laboratory ; but when at last he reached her she was self-possessed .
She put a stool for him at a little distance from her own , and after he had seen the day 's work he hesitated , and then plunged into a resumption of their discussion about beauty .
`` A number of beautiful things are not intense . ''
`` Now I see what everything means , '' said Ann Veronica to herself ; and it really felt for some days as though the secret of the universe , that had been wrapped and hidden from her so obstinately , was at last altogether displayed .
One afternoon , soon after Ann Veronica 's great discovery , a telegram came into the laboratory for her .
She stopped abruptly , afraid that Ramage might be able to infer Capes from the things she had said , and indeed his face was very eager .
`` It 's rather jolly of you , '' said Ann Veronica .
Ann Veronica took off her jacket and sat down in the corner chair , and leaned forward to look into the great hazy warm brown cavity of the house , and Ramage placed his chair to sit beside her and near her , facing the stage .
The music took hold of her slowly as her eyes wandered from the indistinct still ranks of the audience to the little busy orchestra with its quivering violins , its methodical movements of brown and silver instruments , its brightly lit scores and shaded lights .
She had never been to the opera before except as one of a congested mass of people in the cheaper seats , and with backs and heads and women 's hats for the frame of the spectacle ; there was by contrast a fine large sense of space and ease in her present position .
The curtain rose out of the concluding bars of the overture and revealed Isolde on the prow of the barbaric ship .
The voice of the young seaman came floating down from the masthead , and the story of the immortal lovers had begun .
She knew the story only imperfectly , and followed it now with a passionate and deepening interest .
The splendid voices sang on from phase to phase of love 's unfolding , the ship drove across the sea to the beating rhythm of the rowers .
The lovers broke into passionate knowledge of themselves and each other , and then , a jarring intervention , came King Mark amidst the shouts of the sailormen , and stood beside them .
She turned her eyes to him again , and saw her late friend and pleasant and trusted companion , who had seen fit suddenly to change into a lover , babbling interesting inacceptable things .
He looked eager and flushed and troubled .
His eyes caught at hers with passionate inquiries .
`` Tell me , '' he said ; `` speak to me . ''
She realized it was possible to be sorry for him -- acutely sorry for the situation .
Of course this thing was absolutely impossible .
But she was disturbed , mysteriously disturbed .
She remembered abruptly that she was really living upon his money .
She leaned forward and addressed him .
`` I MUST talk with you .
I must say what I have to say ! ''
`` It came , '' he said .
`` I never planned it -- And now I have begun -- ''
They regarded one another , each blinded to the other .
`` Forgive me , '' he decided to say at last , and his voice had a little quiver of emotion , and he laid his hand on hers upon her knee .
`` I am the most foolish of men .
I was stupid -- stupid and impulsive beyond measure to burst upon you in this way .
I -- I am a love-sick idiot , and not accountable for my actions .
Will you forgive me -- if I say no more ? ''
She looked at him with perplexed , earnest eyes .
Ann Veronica paused the fraction of a second before her reply came .
`` I thought much of it amazingly beautiful . ''
Ann Veronica tried to seem absolutely unconcerned .
The turning of the key startled her , but she did not see how she could make an objection .
She felt she had stepped into a world of unknown usages .
`` Wo n't you sit down , '' she said , `` and tell me what you want to say ? ''
Her voice was flat and faint .
Suddenly she had become afraid .
She struggled not to be afraid .
After all , what could happen ?
They were both astonished at the other 's strength .
Perhaps Ramage was the more astonished .
Ann Veronica had been an ardent hockey player and had had a course of jiu-jitsu in the High School .
Her defence ceased rapidly to be in any sense ladylike , and became vigorous and effective ; a strand of black hair that had escaped its hairpins came athwart Ramage 's eyes , and then the knuckles of a small but very hardly clinched fist had thrust itself with extreme effectiveness and painfulness under his jawbone and ear .
`` Let go ! ''
said Ann Veronica , through her teeth , strenuously inflicting agony , and he cried out sharply and let go and receded a pace .
`` You vixen ! ''
said Mr. Ramage , speaking the simplest first thought of his heart .
`` You had no right -- '' panted Ann Veronica .
Interpretation came pouring down upon her almost blindingly ; she understood now the room , the waiter , the whole situation .
She leaped to a world of shabby knowledge , of furtive base realizations .
She wanted to cry out upon herself for the uttermost fool in existence .
For some seconds she stood watching him and both were thinking very quickly .
Her state of mind would have seemed altogether discreditable to her grandmother .
She ought to have been disposed to faint and scream at all these happenings ; she ought to have maintained a front of outraged dignity to veil the sinking of her heart .
I would like to have to tell it so .
But indeed that is not at all a good description of her attitude .
She was an indignant queen , no doubt she was alarmed and disgusted within limits ; but she was highly excited , and there was something , some low adventurous strain in her being , some element , subtle at least if base , going about the rioting ways and crowded insurgent meeting-places of her mind declaring that the whole affair was after all -- they are the only words that express it -- a very great lark indeed .
At the bottom of her heart she was not a bit afraid of Ramage .
She had unaccountable gleams of sympathy with and liking for him .
And the grotesquest fact was that she did not so much loathe , as experience with a quite critical condemnation this strange sensation of being kissed .
Never before had any human being kissed her lips ... .
He , for his part , was trying to grasp the series of unexpected reactions that had so wrecked their tete-a-tete .
He had meant to be master of his fate that evening and it had escaped him altogether .
It had , as it were , blown up at the concussion of his first step .
It dawned upon him that he had been abominably used by Ann Veronica .
`` Look here , '' he said , `` I brought you here to make love to you . ''
`` What is the use of keeping up this note of indignation , Ann Veronica ?
I am your lover , burning for you .
I mean to have you !
Don't frown me off now .
Do n't go back into Victorian respectability and pretend you do n't know and you ca n't think and all the rest of it .
One comes at last to the step from dreams to reality .
This is your moment .
No one will ever love you as I love you now .
I have been dreaming of your body and you night after night .
I have been imaging -- ''
`` Mr. Ramage , '' she said , sharply , `` I have to make it plain to you .
I do n't think you understand .
I do n't love you .
I ca n't love you .
I love some one else .
It disgusts me that you should touch me . ''
He went to the door .
`` It 's all right , '' he said , reassuringly to the inquirer without .
Ann Veronica glanced at the mirror to discover a flushed and dishevelled disorder .
She began at once a hasty readjustment of her hair , while Ramage parleyed with inaudible interrogations .
`` A glass slipped from the table , '' he explained ... .
... Oui , dans la note ... .
That conversation ended and he turned to her again .
She took her hat from the peg in the corner and began to put it on .
He regarded that perennial miracle of pinning with wrathful eyes .
For a while he threatened her .
`` You have put all your life in my hands , '' he declared .
`` Think of that check you endorsed .
There it is -- against you .
I defy you to explain it away .
What do you think people will make of that ?
What will this lover of yours make of that ? ''
`` Have n't I just made a silly mess of things ?
I have n't got twenty ! ''
`` The young women of Jane Austen 's time did n't get into this sort of scrape !
At least -- one thinks so ... .
I wonder if some of them did -- and it did n't get reported .
Aunt Jane had her quiet moments .
Most of them did n't , anyhow .
They were properly brought up , and sat still and straight , and took the luck fate brought them as gentlewomen should .
And they had an idea of what men were like behind all their nicety .
They knew they were all Bogey in disguise .
She was not very clear about the position and duties of a chorus-girl , but it certainly had the air of being a last desperate resort .
There sprang from that a vague hope that perhaps she might extort a capitulation from her father by a threat to seek that position , and then with overwhelming clearness it came to her that whatever happened she would never be able to tell her father about her debt .
The completest capitulation would not wipe out that trouble .
And she felt that if she went home it was imperative to pay .
She would always be going to and fro up the Avenue , getting glimpses of Ramage , seeing him in trains ... .
For a time she promenaded the room .
`` Vulgarity of soul and innocence of mind -- the worst of all conceivable combinations .
I wish some one would kill Ramage by accident !
Then , after Capes had been through her work and had gone on , it came to her that the fabric of this life of hers was doomed to almost immediate collapse ; that in a little while these studies would cease , and perhaps she would never set eyes on him again .
After that consolations fled .
The question ceased to be a tea-table talk , and became suddenly tragically real for Ann Veronica .
There he sat , cheerfully friendly in his sex 's freedom -- the man she loved , the one man she cared should unlock the way to the wide world for her imprisoned feminine possibilities , and he seemed regardless that she stifled under his eyes ; he made a jest of all this passionate insurgence of the souls of women against the fate of their conditions .
`` Women should understand men 's affairs , perhaps , '' said Miss Garvice , `` but to mingle in them is just to sacrifice that power of influencing they can exercise now . ''
`` It 's just as often a little refuge .
Anyhow , that is how things are . ''
`` And the man stands as the master at the mouth of the den . ''
You forget all the mass of training and tradition and instinct that go to make him a tolerable master .
Nature is a mother ; her sympathies have always been feminist , and she has tempered the man to the shorn woman . ''
The door into the passage offered itself with an irresistible invitation -- the one alternative to a public , inexplicable passion of weeping .
Ann Veronica halted a pace , and Miss Klegg came alongside .
But I 'm going to-day .
I want a walk . ''
`` I 'm not surprised at it .
I thought Mr. Capes most trying . ''
`` I did n't mind that little argument . ''
`` You gave it him well .
What you said wanted saying .
After you went he got up and took refuge in the preparation-room .
Or else _I_ would have finished him . ''
`` Did n't you know he was married ? ''
asked Miss Klegg , and was struck by a thought that made her glance quickly at her companion .
`` No , '' said Ann Veronica , offhandedly .
`` Never heard anything of it . ''
She opened it and drew out a letter , and folded within it were the notes she had sent off to Ramage that day .
`` I suppose all life is an affair of chances .
But a woman 's life is all chance .
It 's artificially chance .
Find your man , that 's the rule .
All the rest is humbug and delicacy .
He 's the handle of life for you .
He will let you live if it pleases him ... .
Her mind diverged to other aspects , and another type of womanhood .
That phrase about dragging the truth through swamps of nonsense she remembered from Capes .
At the recollection that it was his , she seemed to fall through a thin surface , as one might fall through the crust of a lava into glowing depths .
She wallowed for a time in the thought of Capes , unable to escape from his image and the idea of his presence in her life .
She shook her fist ceilingward .
`` Do you hear ! ''
she said `` whatever you are , wherever you are !
I will not be slave to the thought of any man , slave to the customs of any time .
Confound this slavery of sex !
I am a man !
I will get this under if I am killed in doing it ! ''
She scowled into the cold blacknesses about her .
She had come to a resolution .
Abruptly she got out of bed , smoothed her sheet and straightened her pillow and lay down , and fell almost instantly asleep .
`` I want to know more about this movement , '' said Ann Veronica .
`` I do n't know , '' said Ann Veronica ; `` I think I am .
I want very much to do something for women .
But I want to know what you are doing . ''
The tired woman sat still for a moment .
`` You have n't come here to make a lot of difficulties ? ''
`` Is n't the question more complicated than that ? ''
`` Why should women be dependent on men ? ''
she asked ; and the question was at once converted into a system of variations upon the theme of `` Why are things as they are ? ''
-- '' Why are human beings viviparous ? ''
-- '' Why are people hungry thrice a day ? ''
-- '' Why does one faint at danger ? ''
please do n't lose yourself in a wilderness of secondary considerations , '' she said .
`` Do n't ask me to tell you all that women can do , all that women can be .
There is a new life , different from the old life of dependence , possible .
If only we are not divided .
If only we work together .
This is the one movement that brings women of different classes together for a common purpose .
If you could see how it gives them souls , women who have taken things for granted , who have given themselves up altogether to pettiness and vanity ... . ''
It was not Ann Veronica 's fault that the night 's work should have taken upon itself the forms of wild burlesque .
She was in deadly earnest in everything she did .
It seemed to her the last desperate attack upon the universe that would not let her live as she desired to live , that penned her in and controlled her and directed her and disapproved of her , the same invincible wrappering , the same leaden tyranny of a universe that she had vowed to overcome after that memorable conflict with her father at Morningside Park .
`` Through there , '' he said , and pointed with the pamphlet he was carrying .
`` I have always longed for prison service , '' said a voice , `` always .
But it 's only now I 'm able to do it . ''
A little blond creature close at hand suddenly gave way to a fit of hysterical laughter , and caught up the end of it with a sob .
So Ann Veronica , enterprising and a little dubious as ever , mingled with the stream of history and wrote her Christian name upon the police-court records of the land .
The ribald demons that infested the back of Ann Veronica 's mind urged various facetious interrogations upon her , as , for example , where the witness had acquired his prose style .
She controlled herself , and answered meekly , `` No . ''
Very slowly emerging out of a phase of stupefaction , these personal affairs and her personal problem resumed possession of her mind .
She had imagined she had drowned them altogether .
This couplet sprang into her mind from nowhere , and immediately begot an endless series of similar couplets that she began to compose and address to Capes .
They came teeming distressfully through her aching brain :
Then she fell into a fever of remorse for the habit of bad language she had acquired .
`` A man can smoke , a man can swear ; A man scores always , everywhere . ''
`` There is something to be said for the lady-like theory after all , '' she admitted .
`` Women ought to be gentle and submissive persons , strong only in virtue and in resistance to evil compulsion .
My dear -- I can call you that here , anyhow -- I know that .
The Victorians over-did it a little , I admit .
Their idea of maidenly innocence was just a blank white -- the sort of flat white that does n't shine .
But that does n't alter the fact that there IS innocence .
And I 've read , and thought , and guessed , and looked -- until MY innocence -- it 's smirched .
`` I 'm not gentle .
Certainly not a gentlewoman .
`` 'Go it , missie , ' they said ; `` kick aht ! '
`` I wonder if many people HAVE thought things out ?
`` It 's no sort of good , Ann Veronica , pretending one does believe when one does n't ... .
One of these was a classification of women into women who are and women who are not hostile to men .
`` The real reason why I am out of place here , '' she said , `` is because I like men .
I can talk with them .
I've never found them hostile .
I 've got no feminine class feeling .
I don't want any laws or freedoms to protect me from a man like Mr. Capes .
I know that in my heart I would take whatever he gave ... .
`` A woman wants a proper alliance with a man , a man who is better stuff than herself .
She wants that and needs it more than anything else in the world .
It may not be just , it may not be fair , but things are so .
It is n't law , nor custom , nor masculine violence settled that .
It is just how things happen to be .
She wants to be free -- she wants to be legally and economically free , so as not to be subject to the wrong man ; but only God , who made the world , can alter things to prevent her being slave to the right one .
`` And if she ca n't have the right one ?
`` Who are YOU that the world should lie down at your feet ?
It grew clear to her that throughout all her wild raid for independence she had done nothing for anybody , and many people had done things for her .
She thought of her aunt and that purse that was dropped on the table , and of many troublesome and ill-requited kindnesses ; she thought of the help of the Widgetts , of Teddy 's admiration ; she thought , with a new-born charity , of her father , of Manning 's conscientious unselfishness , of Miss Miniver 's devotion .
`` And for me it has been Pride and Pride and Pride !
`` I am the prodigal daughter .
I will arise and go to my father , and will say unto him --
`` The wrappered life-discipline !
One comes to that at last .
I begin to understand Jane Austen and chintz covers and decency and refinement and all the rest of it .
One puts gloves on one 's greedy fingers .
One learns to sit up ...
Ann Veronica made a strenuous attempt to carry out her good resolutions .
She meditated long and carefully upon her letter to her father before she wrote it , and gravely and deliberately again before she despatched it .
At this point she had perceived that she was drifting from her subject .
`` Really , daddy , I am sorry for all I have done to put you out .
May I come home and try to be a better daughter to you ?
He nodded twice , with his eyes on the fire , as though that was a formal statement .
`` I did , too , '' said Ann Veronica .
`` Well , '' she achieved at last .
`` Here goes for the new life ! ''
`` We 're going to be sensible . ''
She turned about , and was persecuted by visions , half memories , half dreams , of Ramage .
He became ugly and monstrous , dunning her , threatening her , assailing her .
At last some anodyne formed itself from these exercises , and , with eyelashes wet with such feeble tears as only three-o'clock-in-the-morning pathos can distil , she fell asleep .
`` I expected you this morning , '' he said .
`` I saw -- they knocked off your fetters yesterday . ''
`` Offended me when ? ''
`` I mean to go to prison directly the session is over , '' said Miss Klegg .
`` Wild horses -- not if they have all the mounted police in London -- shan't keep me out . ''
She sat very still , and his eyes rested on that ornament for a moment , and then travelled slowly to her wrist and the soft lines of her forearm .
`` It 's better to know life than be life . ''
`` One may do both , '' said Ann Veronica .
Finally , at the exit into Regent 's Park , they ran against Miss Klegg .
It was the expression of Miss Klegg 's face that put the idea into Ann Veronica 's head of showing Manning at the College one day , an idea which she did n't for some reason or other carry out for a fortnight .
The word must have had some gratifying quality , because he repeated it .
Then he stood up and repeated it again .
`` The fool I have been ! ''
he cried ; and now speech was coming to him .
He tried this sentence with expletives .
he went on , still warming .
`` Muck-headed moral ass !
I ought to have done anything .
`` What 's a man for ?
`` Gellett , '' he called , `` just come and clear up a mess , will you ?
I've smashed some things . ''
The thing rankled in her mind night and day .
She would wake in the night to repeat her bitter cry : `` Oh , why did I burn those notes ? ''
`` It makes me feel , '' he said , `` that nothing is impossible -- to have you here beside me .
I said , that day at Surbiton , 'There 's many good things in life , but there 's only one best , and that 's the wild-haired girl who 's pulling away at that oar .
I will make her my Grail , and some day , perhaps , if God wills , she shall become my wife ! '
`` Altogether holy , Ann Veronica .
but you ca n't imagine what you are to me and what you mean to me !
I suppose there is something mystical and wonderful about all women . ''
`` There is something mystical and wonderful about all human beings .
I do n't see that men need bank it with the women . ''
`` It would astonish that man with the barrow . ''
`` I think , '' began Ann Veronica , `` that you do n't realize -- ''
`` I do n't think you realize , '' Ann Veronica began again , `` that I am rather a defective human being . ''
`` I grant you absolution . ''
`` I wish I could make you visible to yourself .
I do n't believe in the faults .
They 're just a joyous softening of the outline -- more beautiful than perfection .
Like the flaws of an old marble .
If you talk of your faults , I shall talk of your splendors . ''
`` And we will sail that splendor wide , From day to day together , From isle to isle of happiness Through year 's of God 's own weather . ''
`` Yes , '' said his prospective fellow-sailor , `` that 's very pretty . ''
She stopped short , full of things un-said .
Ten thousand days , ten thousand nights !
`` I want to lay all my life at your feet . ''
Her heart had warmed toward him .
It had seemed to her that life might be very good indeed with his kindliness and sacrifice about her .
She thought of him as always courteous and helpful , as realizing , indeed , his ideal of protection and service , as chivalrously leaving her free to live her own life , rejoicing with an infinite generosity in every detail of her irresponsive being .
She twanged the catgut under her fingers .
And I am grateful to you ... . ''
At first the quality of her relationship to Manning seemed moving and beautiful to Ann Veronica .
She admired and rather pitied him , and she was unfeignedly grateful to him .
She even thought that perhaps she might come to love him , in spite of that faint indefinable flavor of absurdity that pervaded his courtly bearing .
She would never love him as she loved Capes , of course , but there are grades and qualities of love .
For Manning it would be a more temperate love altogether .
Much more temperate ; the discreet and joyless love of a virtuous , reluctant , condescending wife .
She had been quite convinced that an engagement with him and at last a marriage had exactly that quality of compromise which distinguishes the ways of the wise .
It would be the wrappered world almost at its best .
She saw herself building up a life upon that -- a life restrained , kindly , beautiful , a little pathetic and altogether dignified ; a life of great disciplines and suppressions and extensive reserves ...
But did many women get anything better ?
Her mind went on generalizing .
So it would always be between herself and Manning .
She saw her life before her robbed of all generous illusions , the wrappered life unwrappered forever , vistas of dull responses , crises of make-believe , years of exacting mutual disregard in a misty garden of fine sentiments .
She turned her eyes to Manning .
`` But , how , '' he said , sitting up astonished beyond measure , `` not go on ? ''
She moved her elbow nearer to him and spoke in a still lower tone .
`` I told you I did not love you . ''
`` Why did you ever let me love you ?
Why did you ever let me peep through the gates of Paradise ?
I do n't begin to feel and realize this yet .
It seems to me just talk ; it seems to me like the fancy of a dream .
Tell me I have n't heard .
This is a joke of yours . ''
He made his voice very low and full , and looked closely into her face .
She twisted her fingers tightly .
`` It is n't a joke , '' she said .
`` I feel shabby and disgraced ... .
I ought never to have thought of it .
Of you , I mean ... . ''
He made her tell him the core of the difficulty .
Ann Veronica had a vicious moment .
`` I wish he had , '' she said .
The long inconsecutive conversation by that time was getting on her nerves .
`` When one wants a thing more than anything else in the world , '' she said with outrageous frankness , `` one naturally wishes one had it . ''
He went to the window and fidgeted with the blind , looking out to where the tree-tops of Regent 's Park showed distantly over the houses .
He turned round toward her and found her looking at him and standing very still .
`` It 's the stir of spring , '' he said .
`` I believe it is . ''
She glanced out of the window , and the distant trees were a froth of hard spring green and almond blossom .
She formed a wild resolution , and , lest she should waver from it , she set about at once to realize it .
`` I 've broken off my engagement , '' she said , in a matter-of-fact tone , and found her heart thumping in her neck .
He moved slightly , and she went on , with a slight catching of her breath : `` It 's a bother and disturbance , but you see -- '' She had to go through with it now , because she could think of nothing but her preconceived words .
Her voice was weak and flat .
At last his voice came to release her tension .
he said , and hesitated , and then got up and went into the preparation-room .
For a time they walked in silence through the back streets that lead southward from the College .
Capes bore a face of infinite perplexity .
They went on for a time without another word .
There came a silence again .
`` I do n't care , '' said Ann Veronica .
`` But if you knew anything of that -- ''
`` I could n't help it .
It was an impulse .
I HAD to . ''
`` I had to , '' she repeated .
`` I was sick of the make-believe .
I do n't care !
I 'm glad I did .
I 'm glad I did . ''
`` Look here ! ''
said Capes , `` what on earth do you want ?
What do you think we can do ?
Do n't you know what men are , and what life is ?
-- to come to me and talk to me like this ! ''
`` We are , '' said Ann Veronica .
Ann Veronica gave him a pallid profile .
`` I do n't see that you could help -- ''
`` I might have helped -- ''
`` You are separated from your wife ? ''
`` Yes , but do you know how ? ''
`` To begin with , I was -- I was in the divorce court .
I was -- I was a co-respondent .
You understand that term ? ''
`` To know things by name is one thing ; to know them by seeing them and feeling them and being them quite another .
That is where life takes advantage of youth .
You do n't understand . ''
`` I 've had a biological training .
I 'm a hard young woman . ''
`` That 's all .
And yet -- Wait a little , you 'd better have every bit of it .
One does n't go about with these passions allayed simply because they have made wreckage and a scandal .
The same stuff still !
One has a craving in one 's blood , a craving roused , cut off from its redeeming and guiding emotional side .
A man has more freedom to do evil than a woman .
Irregularly , in a quite inglorious and unromantic way , you know , I am a vicious man .
That 's -- that 's my private life .
Until the last few months .
It is n't what I have been but what I am .
I haven't taken much account of it until now .
My honor has been in my scientific work and public discussion and the things I write .
Lots of us are like that .
But , you see , I 'm smirched .
For the sort of love-making you think about .
I 've muddled all this business .
I 've had my time and lost my chances .
I 'm damaged goods .
And you 're as clean as fire .
You come with those clear eyes of yours , as valiant as an angel ... . ''
`` That 's all . ''
`` I shall be very glad to have you for a friend , '' he said , `` loving friend .
I had never dreamed of such a friend as you . ''
She stood up and held her arms toward him .
`` I want you to kiss me , '' she said .
`` It will spoil your life . ''
`` What are we going to do ? ''
said Capes , with his eyes on the broad distances beyond the ribbon of the river .
`` My first love was all blundering , '' said Capes .
He thought for a moment , and went on : `` Love is something that has to be taken care of .
One has to be so careful ... .
It 's a beautiful plant , but a tender one ... .
I did n't know .
I 've a dread of love dropping its petals , becoming mean and ugly .
How can I tell you all I feel ?
I love you beyond measure .
And I 'm afraid ... .
I 'm anxious , joyfully anxious , like a man when he has found a treasure . ''
`` Why should it matter ? ''
`` Do you mean NOW ? ''
`` If you dare -- I dare , '' said Ann Veronica .
`` I was never so clear in all my life as I have been in this business . ''
She lifted steadfast eyes to him .
The tears were welling over now , but her voice was steady .
`` You 're not a man for me -- not one of a sex , I mean .
You're just a particular being with nothing else in the world to class with you .
You are just necessary to life for me .
I 've never met any one like you .
To have you is all important .
Nothing else weighs against it .
Morals only begin when that is settled .
I sha'n't care a rap if we can never marry .
I 'm not a bit afraid of anything -- scandal , difficulty , struggle ... .
I rather want them .
I do want them . ''
`` Hardship and danger . ''
It was an odd little encounter , that left vague and dubitable impressions in her mind .
She was aware of him -- a silk-hatted , shiny-black figure on the opposite side of the Avenue ; and then , abruptly and startlingly , he crossed the road and saluted and spoke to her .
`` I MUST speak to you , '' he said .
`` I ca n't keep away from you . ''
He began a jerky , broken conversation that lasted until they reached the station , and left her puzzled at its drift and meaning .
She quickened her pace , and so did he , talking at her slightly averted ear .
She made lumpish and inadequate interruptions rather than replies .
At times he seemed to be claiming pity from her ; at times he was threatening her with her check and exposure ; at times he was boasting of his inflexible will , and how , in the end , he always got what he wanted .
He said that his life was boring and stupid without her .
Something or other -- she did not catch what -- he was damned if he could stand .
He was evidently nervous , and very anxious to be impressive ; his projecting eyes sought to dominate .
The crowning aspect of the incident , for her mind , was the discovery that he and her indiscretion with him no longer mattered very much .
Its importance had vanished with her abandonment of compromise .
Even her debt to him was a triviality now .
`` Here we are , living in the same suburb , '' he began .
`` We have to be -- modern . ''
`` I want to speak to you about a little thing , Vee , '' said Mr. Stanley .
`` Friendships that are all very well between school-girls do n't always go on into later life .
It 's -- it 's a social difference . ''
Still , one has to be reasonable .
As you admitted to me -- one has to square one 's self with the world .
You do n't know .
With people of that sort all sorts of things may happen .
We do n't want things to happen . ''
Ann Veronica made no answer .
Ann Veronica remained anxious to hear more of her sister 's story from her father 's point of view , but he did not go on .
Even so much allusion as this to that family shadow , she felt , was an immense recognition of her ripening years .
She glanced at him .
He stood a little anxious and fussy , bothered by the responsibility of her , entirely careless of what her life was or was likely to be , ignoring her thoughts and feelings , ignorant of every fact of importance in her life , explaining everything he could not understand in her as nonsense and perversity , concerned only with a terror of bothers and undesirable situations .
`` We do n't want things to happen ! ''
Never had he shown his daughter so clearly that the womenkind he was persuaded he had to protect and control could please him in one way , and in one way only , and that was by doing nothing except the punctual domestic duties and being nothing except restful appearances .
He had quite enough to see to and worry about in the City without their doing things .
He had no use for Ann Veronica ; he had never had a use for her since she had been too old to sit upon his knee .
Nothing but the constraint of social usage now linked him to her .
And the less `` anything '' happened the better .
The less she lived , in fact , the better .
These realizations rushed into Ann Veronica 's mind and hardened her heart against him .
`` I may not see the Widgetts for some little time , father , '' she said .
`` I do n't think I shall . ''
`` He was in holy orders , and we were to have been married when he got a living .
He was a Wiltshire Edmondshaw , a very old family . ''
It came to Ann Veronica that life was wonderful beyond measure .
It seemed incredible that she and her aunt were , indeed , creatures of the same blood , only by a birth or so different beings , and part of that same broad interlacing stream of human life that has invented the fauns and nymphs , Astarte , Aphrodite , Freya , and all the twining beauty of the gods .
The love-songs of all the ages were singing in her blood , the scent of night stock from the garden filled the air , and the moths that beat upon the closed frames of the window next the lamp set her mind dreaming of kisses in the dusk .
Yet her aunt , with a ringed hand flitting to her lips and a puzzled , worried look in her eyes , deaf to all this riot of warmth and flitting desire , was playing Patience -- playing Patience , as if Dionysius and her curate had died together .
A faint buzz above the ceiling witnessed that petrography , too , was active .
Gray and tranquil world !
Amazing , passionless world !
A world in which days without meaning , days in which `` we do n't want things to happen '' followed days without meaning -- until the last thing happened , the ultimate , unavoidable , coarse , `` disagreeable . ''
It was her last evening in that wrappered life against which she had rebelled .
Warm reality was now so near her she could hear it beating in her ears .
Away in London even now Capes was packing and preparing ; Capes , the magic man whose touch turned one to trembling fire .
What was he doing ?
What was he thinking ?
It was less than a day now , less than twenty hours .
Seventeen hours , sixteen hours .
She glanced at the soft-ticking clock with the exposed brass pendulum upon the white marble mantel , and made a rapid calculation .
To be exact , it was just sixteen hours and twenty minutes .
The slow stars circled on to the moment of their meeting .
The softly glittering summer stars !
She saw them shining over mountains of snow , over valleys of haze and warm darkness ... .
There would be no moon .
`` I told them a lie .
I told them lies .
I wrote three letters yesterday and tore them up .
It was so hopeless to put it to them .
At last -- I told a story . ''
Ann Veronica watched a water-beetle fussing across the green depths .
`` One ca n't tell .
I 'm a female thing at bottom .
I like high tone for a flourish and stars and ideas ; but I want my things . ''
`` Will you be moral and your species , or immoral and yourself ?
We've decided to be immoral .
We need n't try and give ourselves airs .
We've deserted the posts in which we found ourselves , cut our duties , exposed ourselves to risks that may destroy any sort of social usefulness in us ... .
I do n't know .
One keeps rules in order to be one 's self .
One studies Nature in order not to be blindly ruled by her .
There 's no sense in morality , I suppose , unless you are fundamentally immoral . ''
`` But waive that point . ''
`` After all , it 's our honeymoon . ''
`` Any place would be beautiful , '' said Ann Veronica , in a low voice .
`` If we let it , poor dear . ''
Life seemed a very brave and glorious enterprise to Ann Veronica that day .
She was quivering with the sense of Capes at her side and glowing with heroic love ; it seemed to her that if they put their hands jointly against the Alps and pushed they would be able to push them aside .
She lay and nibbled at a sprig of dwarf rhododendron .
Presently it occurred to Ann Veronica to ask about the journey he had planned .
He had his sections of the Siegfried map folded in his pocket , and he squatted up with his legs crossed like an Indian idol while she lay prone beside him and followed every movement of his indicatory finger .
`` Here , '' he said , `` is this Blau See , and here we rest until to-morrow .
I think we rest here until to-morrow ? ''
`` Then we go on to this place , the Oeschinensee .
It 's a lake among precipices , and there is a little inn where we can stay , and sit and eat our dinner at a pleasant table that looks upon the lake .
For some days we shall be very idle there among the trees and rocks .
There are boats on the lake and shady depths and wildernesses of pine-wood .
After a day or so , perhaps , we will go on one or two little excursions and see how good your head is -- a mild scramble or so ; and then up to a hut on a pass just here , and out upon the Blumlis-alp glacier that spreads out so and so . ''
`` Is it very beautiful ? ''
He knew the circle of mountains about Saas Fee fairly well : he had been there twice before , and it was fine to get away from the straggling pedestrians into the high , lonely places , and sit and munch sandwiches and talk together and do things together that were just a little difficult and dangerous .
And they could talk , they found ; and never once , it seemed , did their meaning and intention hitch .
They were enormously pleased with one another ; they found each other beyond measure better than they had expected , if only because of the want of substance in mere expectation .
Their conversation degenerated again and again into a strain of self-congratulation that would have irked an eavesdropper .
said Capes , `` We 're not coarse . ''
`` But if we were ? ''
`` Why do n't they wait ? ''
`` No , I do n't .
But I liked to say it . ''
`` I do n't care if it does , '' said Ann Veronica .
`` I do n't care a rap for remembering .
I care for you .
This moment could n't be better until the next moment comes .
That 's how it takes me .
Why should WE hoard ?
We are n't going out presently , like Japanese lanterns in a gale .
It 's the poor dears who do , who know they will , know they ca n't keep it up , who need to clutch at way-side flowers .
And put 'em in little books for remembrance .
Flattened flowers are n't for the likes of us .
We like each other fresh and fresh .
It is n't illusions -- for us .
We two just love each other -- the real , identical other -- all the time . ''
`` There 's no delusions , so far as I know , '' said Ann Veronica .
`` I think everything 's right , '' said Ann Veronica , with the roaming eye of a capable but not devoted house-mistress .
`` There I ca n't help , '' said Capes .
`` My charm of manner , I suppose .
But , indeed , he 's very human . ''
`` I think -- yes , I went on in a pleasing blend of the casual and sotto voce , 'The fact of it is , sir , I happen to be your son-in-law , Capes .
I do wish you could come and dine with us some evening .
It would make my wife very happy . '
What else could he do ?
You ca n't kick up a scene on the spur of the moment in the face of such conflicting values as he had before him .
With me behaving as if everything was infinitely matter-of-fact , what could he do ?
And just then Heaven sent old Manningtree -- I did n't tell you before of the fortunate intervention of Manningtree , did I ?
He was looking quite infernally distinguished , with a wide crimson ribbon across him -- what IS a wide crimson ribbon ?
Some sort of knight , I suppose .
He is a knight .
'Well , young man , ' he said , 'we have n't seen you lately , ' and something about 'Bateson & Co. ' -- he's frightfully anti-Mendelian -- having it all their own way .
So I introduced him to my father-in-law like a shot .
I think that WAS decision .
Yes , it was Manningtree really secured your father .
They received the guests in their pretty little hall with genuine effusion .
Miss Stanley threw aside a black cloak to reveal a discreet and dignified arrangement of brown silk , and then embraced Ann Veronica with warmth .
`` So very clear and cold , '' she said .
`` I feared we might have a fog . ''
The housemaid 's presence acted as a useful restraint .
Ann Veronica passed from her aunt to her father , and put her arms about him and kissed his cheek .
`` Dear old daddy ! ''
she said , and was amazed to find herself shedding tears .
She veiled her emotion by taking off his overcoat .
`` And this is Mr .
she heard her aunt saying .
`` Dinner is served , m 'm , '' said the efficient parlor-maid in the archway , and the worst was over .
`` Quite charming apartments , '' Miss Stanley admired ; `` charming !
Everything is so pretty and convenient . ''
When Ann Veronica could attend again she found the men were discussing the ethics of the depreciation of house property through the increasing tumult of traffic in the West End , and agreeing with each other to a devastating extent .
It came into her head with real emotional force that this must be some particularly fantastic sort of dream .
It seemed to her that her father was in some inexplicable way meaner-looking than she had supposed , and yet also , as unaccountably , appealing .
His tie had demanded a struggle ; he ought to have taken a clean one after his first failure .
Why was she noting things like this ?
Capes seemed self-possessed and elaborately genial and commonplace , but she knew him to be nervous by a little occasional clumsiness , by the faintest shadow of vulgarity in the urgency of his hospitality .
She wished he could smoke and dull his nerves a little .
A gust of irrational impatience blew through her being .
Well , they 'd got to the pheasants , and in a little while he would smoke .
What was it she had expected ?
Surely her moods were getting a little out of hand .
It was a great relief to arrive at last at that pause when she could say to her aunt , `` Now , dear ? ''
and rise and hold back the curtain through the archway .
Capes and her father stood up , and her father made a belated movement toward the curtain .
She realized that he was the sort of man one does not think much about at dinners .
And Capes was thinking that his wife was a supremely beautiful woman .
He reached a silver cigar and cigarette box from the sideboard and put it before his father-in-law , and for a time the preliminaries of smoking occupied them both .
Then Capes flittered to the hearthrug and poked the fire , stood up , and turned about .
`` Ann Veronica is looking very well , do n't you think ? ''
he said , a little awkwardly .
`` It 's a very sound wine , '' said Mr. Stanley , consenting with dignity .
`` Great dears ! ''
said Capes , as the vehicle passed out of sight .
`` They seem smaller , you know , even physically smaller , '' she said .
They went up by the lift in silence .
`` It 's odd , '' said Ann Veronica , re-entering the flat .
`` What 's odd ? ''
She turned a firelit face to her husband .
`` Did you tell him ? ''
`` He said , 'Poor Alice has got no end ! '
`` Alice 's are different , '' said Ann Veronica , after an interval .
She did n't choose her man ... .
Well , I told aunt ... .
Husband of mine , I think we have rather overrated the emotional capacity of those -- those dears . ''
`` Your father , '' he said , `` remarked that all 's well that ends well , and that he was disposed to let bygones be bygones .
He then spoke with a certain fatherly kindliness of the past ... . ''
`` I could n't . ''
`` You see , '' he said , `` I do n't blame you in the least , but you've destroyed a habit , and it disorganises my day .
I 've walked past here for years -- years .
No doubt I 've hummed ... .
You 've made all that impossible ! ''
I suggested he might try some other direction .
`` It would be all different .
I should be self-conscious .
I should think of you at your play -- watching me irritated -- instead of thinking of my work .
I must have the bungalow . ''
Any one with the merest germ of an imagination will understand the extraordinary possibilities of such a substance , and will sympathise a little with the emotion I felt as this understanding emerged from the haze of abstruse phrases in which Cavor expressed himself .
Comic relief in a play indeed !
It was some time before I would believe that I had interpreted him aright , and I was very careful not to ask questions that would have enabled him to gauge the profundity of misunderstanding into which he dropped his daily exposition .
But no one reading the story of it here will sympathise fully , because from my barren narrative it will be impossible to gather the strength of my conviction that this astonishing substance was positively going to be made .
Beyond that , he was childish !
If he made it , it would go down to posterity as Cavorite or Cavorine , and he would be made an F.R.S.
, and his portrait given away as a scientific worthy with Nature , and things like that .
And that was all he saw !
He would have dropped this bombshell into the world as though he had discovered a new species of gnat , if it had not happened that I had come along .
And there it would have lain and fizzled , like one or two other little things these scientific people have lit and dropped about us .
I stuck like a leech to the `` we '' -- '' you '' and `` I '' did n't exist for me .
His idea was that the profits I spoke of might go to endow research , but that , of course , was a matter we had to settle later .
`` That 's all right , '' I shouted , `` that 's all right . ''
The great point , as I insisted , was to get the thing done .
`` Congratulate you ! ''
`` I 've done it . ''
`` Quite correct , '' he insisted ; `` quite correct .
I 've done it , and it 's all right . ''
`` But , '' I protested .
Why , there ca n't be a rick standing , or a fence or a thatched roof undamaged for twenty miles round ... . ''
`` You perceive , '' he said , `` it formed a sort of atmospheric fountain , a kind of chimney in the atmosphere .
And if the Cavorite itself had n't been loose and so got sucked up the chimney , does it occur to you what would have happened ? ''
`` Not exactly into space , '' said Cavor , `` but as bad -- practically .
It would have whipped the air off the world as one peels a banana , and flung it thousands of miles .
It would have dropped back again , of course -- but on an asphyxiated world !
From our point of view very little better than if it never came back ! ''
Certainly the aspect of things had changed very greatly .
I no longer doubted at all the enormous possibilities of the substance , but I began to have doubts about the gun-carriage and the patent boots .
We set to work at once to reconstruct his laboratory and proceed with our experiments .
Cavor talked more on my level than he had ever done before , when it came to the question of how we should make the stuff next .
`` Finishes what ? ''
`` Imagine a sphere , '' he explained , `` large enough to hold two people and their luggage .
It will be made of steel lined with thick glass ; it will contain a proper store of solidified air , concentrated food , water distilling apparatus , and so forth .
And enamelled , as it were , on the outer steel -- ''
`` I 've just thought of that , '' said Cavor .
`` That 's what I meant when I said the thing is finished .
The inner glass sphere can be air-tight , and , except for the manhole , continuous , and the steel sphere can be made in sections , each section capable of rolling up after the fashion of a roller blind .
These can easily be worked by springs , and released and checked by electricity conveyed by platinum wires fused through the glass .
All that is merely a question of detail .
So you see , that except for the thickness of the blind rollers , the Cavorite exterior of the sphere will consist of windows or blinds , whichever you like to call them .
Well , when all these windows or blinds are shut , no light , no heat , no gravitation , no radiant energy of any sort will get at the inside of the sphere , it will fly on through space in a straight line , as you say .
But open a window , imagine one of the windows open .
Then at once any heavy body that chances to be in that direction will attract us -- ''
`` You see ? ''
`` Oh , I _see_ . ''
`` I do n't quite see what we shall do it for !
It 's really only jumping off the world and back again . ''
`` It is n't as though we were confined to the moon . ''
`` Two hundred million miles at present , '' said Cavor airily ; `` and you go close by the sun . ''
`` I never did hold with them ballooneys , '' she said evidently under the impression that this was a common excursion enough .
`` I would n't go up in one -- not for ever so . ''
`` We shall be floating in this sphere with absolutely no occupation . ''
`` We shall be an hour . ''
It was an old number of _Tit-Bits_ that one of the men must have brought .
Farther away in the corner I saw a torn _Lloyd 's News_ .
I scrambled back into the sphere with these things .
`` What have you got ? ''
`` I -- '' I said , and then it did n't seem to matter what happened .
For a time I was , as it were , stunned ; I had nothing to say .
It was just as if I had never heard of this idea of leaving the world before .
Then I perceived an unaccountable change in my bodily sensations .
It was a feeling of lightness , of unreality .
Coupled with that was a queer sensation in the head , an apoplectic effect almost , and a thumping of blood vessels at the ears .
Neither of these feelings diminished as time went on , but at last I got so used to them that I experienced no inconvenience .
I heard a click , and a little glow lamp came into being .
He pointed to the loose cases and bundles that had been lying on the blankets in the bottom of the sphere .
I was astonished to see that they were floating now nearly a foot from the spherical wall .
Then I saw from his shadow that Cavor was no longer leaning against the glass .
I thrust out my hand behind me , and found that I too was suspended in space , clear of the glass .
I did not cry out nor gesticulate , but fear came upon me .
It was like being held and lifted by something -- you know not what .
The mere touch of my hand against the glass moved me rapidly .
I understood what had happened , but that did not prevent my being afraid .
We were cut off from all exterior gravitation , only the attraction of objects within our sphere had effect .
Consequently everything that was not fixed to the glass was falling -- slowly because of the slightness of our masses -- towards the centre of gravity of our little world , which seemed to be somewhere about the middle of the sphere , but rather nearer to myself than Cavor , on account of my greater weight .
`` We must turn round , '' said Cavor , `` and float back to back , with the things between us . ''
Those who have only seen the starry sky from the earth can not imagine its appearance when the vague , half luminous veil of our air has been withdrawn .
The stars we see on earth are the mere scattered survivors that penetrate our misty atmosphere .
But now at last I could realise the meaning of the hosts of heaven !
It was curiously unlike earthly experience , too , to have the light coming up to one .
On earth light falls from above , or comes slanting down sideways , but here it came from beneath our feet , and to see our shadows we had to look up .
`` I knew some one who was rather interested in astronomy .
It occurred to me that it would be rather odd if -- my friend -- chanced to be looking through come telescope . ''
`` By the bye , '' I said , `` why did n't we bring a gun ? ''
`` Of course , there 's my minerals , anyhow , '' I said ; `` whatever the conditions may be . ''
We were still very near -- Cavor told me the distance was perhaps eight hundred miles and the huge terrestrial disc filled all heaven .
But already it was plain to see that the world was a globe .
The land below us was in twilight and vague , but westward the vast gray stretches of the Atlantic shone like molten silver under the receding day .
I think I recognised the cloud-dimmed coast-lines of France and Spain and the south of England , and then , with a click , the shutter closed again , and I found myself in a state of extraordinary confusion sliding slowly over the smooth glass .
When at last things settled themselves in my mind again , it seemed quite beyond question that the moon was `` down '' and under my feet , and that the earth was somewhere away on the level of the horizon -- the earth that had been `` down '' to me and my kindred since the beginning of things .
[ * Footnote : It is a curious thing , that while we were in the sphere we felt not the slightest desire for food , nor did we feel the want of it when we abstained .
At first we forced our appetites , but afterwards we fasted completely .
Altogether we did not consume one-hundredth part of the compressed provisions we had brought with us .
The amount of carbonic acid we breathed was also unnaturally low , but why this was , I am quite unable to explain . ]
We sat getting our breath again , and feeling the bruises on our limbs .
I do n't think either of us had had a very clear expectation of such rough handling as we had received .
I struggled painfully to my feet .
`` And now , '' said I , `` to look at the landscape of the moon !
It 's tremendously dark , Cavor ! ''
We shall have to wait until our air gets warm again , and then this glass will clear .
We ca n't do anything till then .
It 's night here yet ; we must wait for the day to overtake us .
Meanwhile , do n't you feel hungry ? ''
For a space I did not answer him , but sat fretting .
I turned reluctantly from the smeared puzzle of the glass and stared at his face .
`` Yes , '' I said , `` I am hungry .
I feel somehow enormously disappointed .
I had expected -- I do n't know what I had expected , but not this . ''
As we saw it first it was the wildest and most desolate of scenes .
We were in an enormous amphitheatre , a vast circular plain , the floor of the giant crater .
Its cliff-like walls closed us in on every side .
From the westward the light of the unseen sun fell upon them , reaching to the very foot of the cliff , and showed a disordered escarpment of drab and grayish rock , lined here and there with banks and crevices of snow .
This was perhaps a dozen miles away , but at first no intervening atmosphere diminished in the slightest the minutely detailed brilliancy with which these things glared at us .
They stood out clear and dazzling against a background of starry blackness that seemed to our earthly eyes rather a gloriously spangled velvet curtain than the spaciousness of the sky .
Whatever light was about us was reflected by the westward cliffs .
It showed a huge undulating plain , cold and gray , a gray that deepened eastward into the absolute raven darkness of the cliff shadow .
Innumerable rounded gray summits , ghostly hummocks , billows of snowy substance , stretching crest beyond crest into the remote obscurity , gave us our first inkling of the distance of the crater wall .
These hummocks looked like snow .
At the time I thought they were snow .
But they were not -- they were mounds and masses of frozen air .
`` In the sky .
On the blackness -- a little touch of blue .
The stars seem larger .
And the little ones and all those dim nebulosities we saw in empty space -- they are hidden ! ''
Steadily , inevitably came a brilliant line , came a thin edge of intolerable effulgence that took a circular shape , became a bow , became a blazing sceptre , and hurled a shaft of heat at us as though it was a spear .
And with that incandescence came a sound , the first sound that had reached us from without since we left the earth , a hissing and rustling , the stormy trailing of the aerial garment of the advancing day .
And with the coming of the sound and the light the sphere lurched , and blinded and dazzled we staggered helplessly against each other .
It lurched again , and the hissing grew louder .
I had shut my eyes perforce , I was making clumsy efforts to cover my head with my blanket , and this second lurch sent me helplessly off my feet .
I fell against the bale , and opening my eyes had a momentary glimpse of the air just outside our glass .
It was running -- it was boiling -- like snow into which a white-hot rod is thrust .
What had been solid air had suddenly at the touch of the sun become a paste , a mud , a slushy liquefaction , that hissed and bubbled into gas .
Something was at work upon my face , some thin feelers worried my ears .
Then I discovered the brilliance of the landscape around was mitigated by blue spectacles .
Cavor bent over me , and I saw his face upside down , his eyes also protected by tinted goggles .
His breath came irregularly , and his lip was bleeding from a bruise .
he said , wiping the blood with the back of his hand .
`` It would n't have done , '' I said , as though there had been no interval .
I sat down with my legs on either side of the manhole and prepared to unscrew it , but Cavor stopped me .
`` There is first a little precaution , '' he said .
He pointed out that although it was certainly an oxygenated atmosphere outside , it might still be so rarefied as to cause us grave injury .
He reminded me of mountain sickness , and of the bleeding that often afflicts aeronauts who have ascended too swiftly , and he spent some time in the preparation of a sickly-tasting drink which he insisted on my sharing .
It made me feel a little numb , but otherwise had no effect on me .
Then he permitted me to begin unscrewing .
As our air sizzled out from the screw the moisture of it condensed in little puffs .
I shaded my eyes with my hand .
`` It 's like the landscape of a dream .
These things are less like earthly land plants than the things one imagines among the rocks at the bottom of the sea .
Look at that yonder !
One might imagine it a lizard changed into a plant .
And the glare ! ''
It was horrible and delightful , and as wild as a nightmare , to go flying off in this fashion .
I realised my leap had been altogether too violent .
I flew clean over Cavor 's head and beheld a spiky confusion in a gully spreading to meet my fall .
I gave a yelp of alarm .
I put out my hands and straightened my legs .
We were bitten by a spirit of enterprise .
We selected a lichenous kopje perhaps fifteen yards away , and landed neatly on its summit one after the other .
we cried to each other ; `` good ! ''
and Cavor made three steps and went off to a tempting slope of snow a good twenty yards and more beyond .
I stood for a moment struck by the grotesque effect of his soaring figure -- his dirty cricket cap , and spiky hair , his little round body , his arms and his knicker-bockered legs tucked up tightly -- against the weird spaciousness of the lunar scene .
A gust of laughter seized me , and then I stepped off to follow .
I dropped beside him .
`` No , '' I said .
`` We have turned in a curve .
here is the mark of my heels .
It 's clear the thing must be more to the eastward , much more .
No -- the sphere must be over there . ''
We stared into one another 's eyes .
The area of the crater had become enormously vast to our imaginations , the growing thickets already impenetrably dense .
`` What is it ? ''
`` We must find the sphere ! ''
`` But if we do n't ? ''
`` We must take our chance . ''
`` Cover , '' whispered Cavor , and I turned towards the bushes .
At that instant came a thud like the thud of a gun , and then a thing happened -- it still haunts me in my dreams .
I had turned my head to look at Cavor 's face , and thrust out my hand in front of me as I did so .
And my hand met nothing !
I plunged suddenly into a bottomless hole !
`` _That_ was not a man . ''
`` If only some of that snow had remained ! ''
We roused ourselves to another spurt of crawling .
My mind ran entirely on edible things , on the hissing profundity of summer drinks , more particularly I craved for beer .
I was haunted by the memory of a sixteen gallon cask that had swaggered in my Lympne cellar .
I thought of the adjacent larder , and especially of steak and kidney pie -- tender steak and plenty of kidney , and rich , thick gravy between .
Ever and again I was seized with fits of hungry yawning .
We came to flat places overgrown with fleshy red things , monstrous coralline growths ; as we pushed against them they snapped and broke .
I noted the quality of the broken surfaces .
The confounded stuff certainly looked of a biteable texture .
Then it seemed to me that it smelt rather well .
I picked up a fragment and sniffed at it .
Cavor replied to my third repetition of my `` surplus population '' remark with similar words of approval .
I felt that my head swam , but I put this down to the stimulating effect of food after a long fast .
`` Ess'lent discov'ry yours , Cavor , '' said I .
`` Se'nd on'y to the 'tato . ''
I looked at him , shocked at his suddenly hoarse voice , and by the badness of his articulation .
It occurred to me in a flash that he was intoxicated , possibly by the fungus .
It also occurred to me that he erred in imagining that he had discovered the moon ; he had not discovered it , he had only reached it .
I tried to lay my hand on his arm and explain this to him , but the issue was too subtle for his brain .
It was also unexpectedly difficult to express .
After a momentary attempt to understand me -- I remember wondering if the fungus had made my eyes as fishy as his -- he set off upon some observations on his own account .
I tried to point out that this was dangerous for some reason that was not perfectly clear to me , but the word `` dangerous '' had somehow got mixed with `` indiscreet , '' and came out rather more like `` injurious '' than either ; and after an attempt to disentangle them , I resumed my argument , addressing myself principally to the unfamiliar but attentive coralline growths on either side .
I felt that it was necessary to clear up this confusion between the moon and a potato at once -- I wandered into a long parenthesis on the importance of precision of definition in argument .
I did my best to ignore the fact that my bodily sensations were no longer agreeable .
I was more frightened than I had yet been by anything in all our strange experiences .
For a time I tugged silently at my bonds .
I cried out sharply .
`` Why am I tied ?
Why have you tied me hand and foot ? ''
Then as I strained to trace our later movements down to our present plight , the pain in my head became intolerable .
I came to an insurmountable barrier , an obstinate blank .
He made no answer but a grunt .
The lingering traces of the poison seemed to make him oddly irritable .
His ear vanished -- gave place to an eye !
He came forward three steps and paused for a time .
His movements seemed absolutely noiseless .
Then he came forward again .
He walked like a bird , his feet fell one in front of the other .
He stepped out of the ray of light that came through the doorway , and it seemed as though he vanished altogether in the shadow .
For a moment my eyes sought him in the wrong place , and then I perceived him standing facing us both in the full light .
Only the human features I had attributed to him were not there at all !
Cavor broke the silence ; started to speak , went hoarse , and cleared his throat .
Outside began a terrific bellowing , as if a mooncalf were in trouble .
It ended in a shriek , and everything was still again .
Presently the Selenite turned about , flickered into the shadow , stood for a moment retrospective at the door , and then closed it on us ; and once more we were in that murmurous mystery of darkness into which we had awakened .
I lost my temper at his persistence , and swore to myself .
For a time we hated one another in silence .
I drummed with my fingers on the floor between my knees , and gritted the links of my fetters together .
Presently I was forced to talk again .
`` Now , '' he said , `` it seems such an obvious thing . ''
`` Among those plants ? ''
For a time Cavor kept up a broken monologue without much help from me .
`` You said to me , 'Call it prospecting ' . ''
`` But these machines and clothing !
No , I do n't hold with you , Bedford .
The difference is wide -- ''
I looked up , and stopped in mid-sentence .
The darkness had given place to that bluish light again .
The door was opening , and several noiseless Selenites were coming into the chamber .
I became quite still , staring at their grotesque faces .
My hands were so tightly chained that I could barely contrive to reach the bowl ; but when they saw the effort I made , two of them dexterously released one of the turns about my wrist .
Their tentacle hands were soft and cold to my skin .
I immediately seized a mouthful of the food .
It had the same laxness in texture that all organic structures seem to have upon the moon ; it tasted rather like a gauffre or a damp meringue , but in no way was it disagreeable .
I took two other mouthfuls .
`` I wanted -- foo ' ! ''
said I , tearing off a still larger piece ... .
`` Do they want us to imitate those sounds ? ''
`` I do n't think so , '' he said .
`` Let us shake our heads at him . ''
The thick-set Selenite had gone some paces unheeded .
He came back and stood between us and the great machine .
I avoided seeing him , because I guessed somehow that his idea was to beckon us onward .
He walked away in the direction he wished us to go , and turned and came back , and flicked our faces to attract our attention .
`` Yes , '' said Cavor .
`` We 'll try that . ''
He turned to our guide and smiled , and pointed to the machine , and pointed again , and then to his head , and then to the machine .
By some defect of reasoning he seemed to imagine that broken English might help these gestures .
`` Me look 'im , '' he said , `` me think 'im very much .
His behaviour seemed to check the Selenites in their desire for our progress for a moment .
They faced one another , their queer heads moved , the twittering voices came quick and liquid .
Then one of them , a lean , tall creature , with a sort of mantle added to the puttee in which the others were dressed , twisted his elephant trunk of a hand about Cavor's waist , and pulled him gently to follow our guide , who again went on ahead .
`` We may just as well begin explaining ourselves now .
They may think we are new animals , a new sort of mooncalf perhaps !
It is most important that we should show an intelligent interest from the outset . ''
`` Is n't there some geometrical point you might bring in apropos of that affair ? ''
I suggested , as the Selenites conferred again .
`` Possibly a parabolic -- '' he began .
`` He pricked me ! ''
said Cavor , with a catching of the voice .
`` We ca n't do anything , '' he said .
`` It 's a mistake .
They do n't understand .
As they want us to go . ''
How well the picture of that grouping has bitten into my brain ; the back of Cavor 's downcast head just in front of me , and the dejected droop of his shoulders , and our guide 's gaping visage , perpetually jerking about him , and the goad-bearers on either side , watchful , yet open-mouthed -- a blue monochrome .
And after all , I do remember one other thing besides the purely personal affair , which is , that a sort of gutter came presently across the floor of the cavern , and then ran along by the side of the path of rock we followed .
And it was full of that same bright blue luminous stuff that flowed out of the great machine .
I walked close beside it , and I can testify it radiated not a particle of heat .
It was brightly shining , and yet it was neither warmer nor colder than anything else in the cavern .
His remark roused me from my sullen pre-occupation .
`` It may be that . ''
`` There may be others less stupid .
This is the mere outer fringe of their world .
It must go down and down , cavern , passage , tunnel , down at last to the sea -- hundreds of miles below . ''
`` There 's no doubt about that , '' I said .
`` Some rare sort of animal , '' I said , `` might comfort himself in that way while they were bringing him to the Zoo ... .
It does n't follow that we are going to be shown all these things . ''
For a moment I and Cavor stood as near the edge as we dared , peering into a blue-tinged profundity .
And then our guide was pulling at my arm .
There was a pause .
-- '' said Cavor .
One of the other Selenites walked a few paces out upon the plank , and turned and looked back at us unconcernedly .
The others stood ready to follow after us .
Our guide 's expectant figure reappeared .
He was returning to see why we had not advanced .
`` I ca n't see . ''
`` Anyhow , we must make them understand . ''
I heard Cavor 's voice in alarm and entreaty .
Even then I think he wanted to compromise with these creatures .
`` I say , Bedford , '' he cried , `` I know a way ! ''
But the sting of that second stab seemed to set free some pent-up reserve of energy in my being .
Instantly the link of the wrist-chain snapped , and with it snapped all considerations that had held us unresisting in the hands of these moon creatures .
For that second , at least , I was mad with fear and anger .
I took no thought of consequences .
I hit straight out at the face of the thing with the goad .
The chain was twisted round my fist .
There came another of these beastly surprises of which the moon world is full .
Then , realising that I dared not run back to him , because my ill-calculated steps might carry me over the edge , he came shuffling towards me , with his hands held out before him .
They 'll come back .
They 're throwing things !
Which way shall we go ? ''
`` By the light .
We were both very much out of breath .
We spoke in panting , broken sentences .
`` What are we to do ? ''
`` Cavor , '' I said , `` if one of us lifts the other , he can reach that crack ! ''
`` I 'll lift you , '' he said , and incontinently hoisted me as though I was a baby .
I thrust an arm into the crack , and just at my finger tips found a little ledge by which I could hold .
I could see the white light was very much brighter now .
I pulled myself up by two fingers with scarcely an effort , though on earth I weigh twelve stone , reached to a still higher corner of rock , and so got my feet on the narrow ledge .
I stood up and searched up the rocks with my fingers ; the cleft broadened out upwardly .
`` It's climbable , '' I said to Cavor .
`` Can you jump up to my hand if I hold it down to you ? ''
`` Here we are burrowing in this beastly world that is n't a world , with its inky ocean hidden in some abominable blackness below , and outside that torrid day and that death stillness of night .
And all these things that are chasing us now , beastly men of leather -- insect men , that come out of a nightmare !
After all , they 're right !
What business have we here smashing them and disturbing their world !
For all we know the whole planet is up and after us already .
In a minute we may hear them whimpering , and their gongs going .
What are we to do ?
Where are we to go ?
Here we are as comfortable as snakes from Jamrach 's loose in a Surbiton villa ! ''
They would have carried us ! ''
`` Either we can attempt to make our way -- fight our way if necessary -- out to the exterior again , and then hunt for our sphere until we find it , or the cold of the night comes to kill us , or else -- ''
`` So far as I 'm concerned -- it 's the first . ''
`` You see , '' said Cavor , `` I do not think we can judge the Selenites by what we have seen of them .
Their central world , their civilised world will be far below in the profounder caverns about their sea .
This region of the crust in which we are is an outlying district , a pastoral region .
At any rate , that is my interpretation .
These Selenites we have seen may be only the equivalent of cowboys and engine-tenders .
Their use of goads -- in all probability mooncalf goads -- the lack of imagination they show in expecting us to be able to do just what they can do , their indisputable brutality , all seem to point to something of that sort .
But if we endured -- ''
`` No , '' said Cavor ; `` but then -- ''
`` How do we know their eyes would see the sort of marks we made ? ''
`` I think you 'll quite admit , Cavor , that you 're rather an exceptional man . ''
`` You think so .
That 's just it .
You think every other mind wants to know .
I remember once , when I asked you why you conducted all these researches , you said you wanted your F.R.S.
, and to have the stuff called Cavorite , and things like that .
You know perfectly well you did n't do it for that ; but at the time my question took you by surprise , and you felt you ought to have something to look like a motive .
Really you conducted researches because you had to .
It 's your twist . ''
`` Well , suppose there are a few philosophers like yourself .
They are just the very Selenites who 'll never have heard of our existence .
Suppose a Selenite had dropped on the earth when you were at Lympne , you 'd have been the last man in the world to hear he had come .
You never read a newspaper !
You see the chances against you .
Well , it 's for these chances we 're sitting here doing nothing while precious time is flying .
I tell you we 've got into a fix .
We 've come unarmed , we 've lost our sphere , we 've got no food , we 've shown ourselves to the Selenites , and made them think we're strange , strong , dangerous animals ; and unless these Selenites are perfect fools , they 'll set about now and hunt us till they find us , and when they find us they 'll try to take us if they can , and kill us if they ca n't , and that 's the end of the matter .
If they take us , they 'll probably kill us , through some misunderstanding .
After we 're done for , they may discuss us perhaps , but we sha n't get much fun out of that . ''
`` Look here , Cavor , '' I said , `` I 've half the voting power anyhow in this affair , and this is a case for a practical man .
I 'm a practical man , and you are not .
I 'm not going to trust to Selenites and geometrical diagrams if I can help it .
Drop all this secrecy -- or most of it .
And come again . ''
For a time we nursed our knees in silence .
Then he seemed to decide for my reasons .
`` But suppose the gully is too narrow ? ''
`` They 'll not think of the cleft .
They 'll go past . ''
I do not know how far we clambered before we came to the grating .
It may be we ascended only a few hundred feet , but at the time it seemed to me we might have hauled and jammed and hopped and wedged ourselves through a mile or more of vertical ascent .
Whenever I recall that time , there comes into my head the heavy clank of our golden chains that followed every movement .
Very soon my knuckles and knees were raw , and I had a bruise on one cheek .
After a time the first violence of our efforts diminished , and our movements became more deliberate and less painful .
The noise of the pursuing Selenites had died away altogether .
It seemed almost as though they had not traced us up the crack after all , in spite of the tell-tale heap of broken fungi that must have lain beneath it .
At times the cleft narrowed so much that we could scarce squeeze up it ; at others it expanded into great drusy cavities , studded with prickly crystals or thickly beset with dull , shining fungoid pimples .
Sometimes it twisted spirally , and at other times slanted down nearly to the horizontal direction .
Ever and again there was the intermittent drip and trickle of water by us .
Once or twice it seemed to us that small living things had rustled out of our reach , but what they were we never saw .
They may have been venomous beasts for all I know , but they did us no harm , and we were now tuned to a pitch when a weird creeping thing more or less mattered little .
And at last , far above , came the familiar bluish light again , and then we saw that it filtered through a grating that barred our way .
`` No , '' I said .
`` Not as we are . ''
Chid , chid , chid went the chipping , and the shadows moved to and fro .
We wasted a little time in vague discussion .
Then I took one of the bars in both hands , and got my feet up against the rock until they were almost on a level with my head , and so thrust against the bar .
It bent so suddenly that I almost slipped .
I clambered about and bent the adjacent bar in the opposite direction , and then took the luminous fungus from my pocket and dropped it down the fissure .
We twisted ourselves about , and lay as still as death , with every sense alert .
In a little while I did not doubt that something was quietly ascending the cleft .
Very slowly and quite noiselessly I assured myself of a good grip on my chain , and waited for that something to appear .
Then I could see that there was something moving dimly in the blackness below the grating , but what it might be I could not distinguish .
The whole thing seemed to hang fire just for a moment -- then smash !
I had sprung to my feet , struck savagely at something that had flashed out at me .
It was the keen point of a spear .
I have thought since that its length in the narrowness of the cleft must have prevented its being sloped to reach me .
Anyhow , it shot out from the grating like the tongue of a snake , and missed and flew back and flashed again .
But the second time I snatched and caught it , and wrenched it away , but not before another had darted ineffectually at me .
`` Go back ! ''
`` What are you doing -- ''
I dropped a crowbar , pulled the spear out of my shoulder , and began to jab it down the grating into the darkness .
At each jab came a shriek and twitter .
Finally I hurled the spear down upon them with all my strength , leapt up , picked up the crowbar again , and started for the multitude up the cavern .
said I , and thrust out the jacket .
I glanced for a moment at the smashed and writhing bodies that were scattered over the cavern floor , with a vague idea of further violence , then hurried on after Cavor .
Presently we saw that the cavern before us opened upon a hazy void .
In another moment we had emerged upon a sort of slanting gallery , that projected into a vast circular space , a huge cylindrical pit running vertically up and down .
Round this pit the slanting gallery ran without any parapet or protection for a turn and a half , and then plunged high above into the rock again .
Somehow it reminded me then one of those spiral turns of the railway through the Saint Gothard .
It was all tremendously huge .
I can scarcely hope to convey to you the Titanic proportion of all that place , the Titanic effect of it .
Our eyes followed up the vast declivity of the pit wall , and overhead and far above we beheld a round opening set with faint stars , and half of the lip about it well nigh blinding with the white light of the sun .
At that we cried aloud simultaneously .
For a moment I listened , then tightened my grip on my crowbar , and led the way up the gallery .
`` We 'll come back , '' I said , for now we had escaped so much I was rashly sanguine that we should recover the sphere .
`` It depends on what they think of us , and I do n't see how we can begin to guess that .
And it depends upon what they have in reserve .
It 's as you say , Cavor , we have touched the merest outside of this world .
They may have all sorts of things inside here .
Even with those shooting things they might make it bad for us ... .
`` How does one tell time ? ''
He look this way and that , glanced up at the sky and down at the tunnel , and astonished me by a sudden gesture of impatience .
but we have done foolishly !
To have come to this pass !
Think how it might have been , and the things we might have done ! ''
`` I do n't know .
How am I to know ?
One might carry a torch , one might have a lamp -- The others -- might understand . ''
He stood for a moment with his hands held down and a rueful face , staring out over the waste that defied him .
Then with a gesture of renunciation he turned towards me with proposals for the systematic hunting of the sphere .
`` We can return , '' I said .
`` Yes , '' he said .
`` You had better take a club , '' I said .
In a little while it seemed to me as though I had always been alone on the moon .
I hunted for a time with a certain intentness , but the heat was still very great , and the thinness of the air felt like a hoop about one's chest .
I came presently into a hollow basin bristling with tall , brown , dry fronds about its edge , and I sat down under these to rest and cool .
I intended to rest for only a little while .
I put down my clubs beside me , and sat resting my chin on my hands .
I saw with a sort of colourless interest that the rocks of the basin , where here and there the crackling dry lichens had shrunk away to show them , were all veined and splattered with gold , that here and there bosses of rounded and wrinkled gold projected from among the litter .
What did that matter now ?
A sort of languor had possession of my limbs and mind , I did not believe for a moment that we should ever find the sphere in that vast desiccated wilderness .
I seemed to lack a motive for effort until the Selenites should come .
Then I supposed I should exert myself , obeying that unreasonable imperative that urges a man before all things to preserve and defend his life , albeit he may preserve it only to die more painfully in a little while .
Some day , thought I , I will have an inscription standing there right in the midst of the hollow .
It came to me , if only this teeming world within knew of the full import of the moment , how furious its tumult would become !
I felt I must act instantly if I was to save Cavor .
I whipped off my vest and flung it as a mark on the sere bayonets of the shrubs behind me , and then set off in a straight line towards the handkerchief .
Perhaps it was a couple of miles away -- a matter of a few hundred leaps and strides .
I have already told how one seemed to hang through those lunar leaps .
In each suspense I sought Cavor , and marvelled why he should be hidden .
In each leap I could feel the sun setting behind me .
Each time I touched the ground I was tempted to go back .
Not a sign of Cavor , not a sound in all the stillness , only the stir and waving of the scrub and of the shadows increased .
And suddenly and violently I shivered .
`` Cav -- '' I began , and realised once more the uselessness of the human voice in that thin air .
The silence of death .
Then it was my eye caught something -- a little thing lying , perhaps fifty yards away down the slope , amidst a litter of bent and broken branches .
I knew , and yet for some reason I would not know .
I went nearer to it .
It was the little cricket-cap Cavor had worn .
I did not touch it , I stood looking at it .
The sense of solitude and desolation became the sense of an overwhelming presence that stooped towards me , that almost touched me .
I fell on all fours , and my lungs whooped .
The frost gathered on my lips , icicles hung from my moustache , I was white with the freezing atmosphere .
I was a dozen yards from it .
My eyes had become dim .
`` Lie down ! ''
screamed despair ; `` lie down ! ''
I fought stiffly with it .
I was on the manhole lip , a stupefied , half-dead being .
The snow was all about me .
I pulled myself in .
There lurked within a little warmer air .
I do not know how long that drifting took .
In the sphere of course , even more than on the moon , one 's earthly time sense was ineffectual .
At the touch of the bale it was as if I had awakened from a dreamless sleep .
I immediately perceived that if I wanted to keep awake and alive I must get a light or open a window , so as to get a grip of something with my eyes .
And besides , I was cold .
I kicked off from the bale , therefore , clawed on to the thin cords within the glass , crawled along until I got to the manhole rim , and so got my bearings for the light and blind studs , took a shove off , and flying once round the bale , and getting a scare from something big and flimsy that was drifting loose , I got my hand on the cord quite close to the studs , and reached them .
I lit the little lamp first of all to see what it was I had collided with , and discovered that old copy of _Lloyd 's News_ had slipped its moorings , and was adrift in the void .
That brought me out of the infinite to my own proper dimensions again .
It made me laugh and pant for a time , and suggested the idea of a little oxygen from one of the cylinders .
After that I lit the heater until I felt warm , and then I took food .
Then I set to work in a very gingerly fashion on the Cavorite blinds , to see if I could guess by any means how the sphere was travelling .
I puzzled out at last that my best chance would be to drop back towards the moon as near as I dared in order to gather velocity , then to shut my windows , and fly behind it , and when I was past to open my earthward windows , and so get off at a good pace homeward .
But whether I should ever reach the earth by that device , or whether I might not simply find myself spinning about it in some hyperbolic or parabolic curve or other , I could not tell .
Later I had a happy inspiration , and by opening certain windows to the moon , which had appeared in the sky in front of the earth , I turned my course aside so as to head off the earth , which it had become evident to me I must pass behind without some such expedient .
I did a very great deal of complicated thinking over these problems -- for I am no mathematician -- and in the end I am certain it was much more my good luck than my reasoning that enabled me to hit the earth .
Had I known then , as I know now , the mathematical chances there were against me , I doubt if I should have troubled even to touch the studs to make any attempt .
And having puzzled out what I considered to be the thing to do , I opened all my moonward windows , and squatted down -- the effort lifted me for a time some feet or so into the air , and I hung there in the oddest way -- and waited for the crescent to get bigger and bigger until I felt I was near enough for safety .
Then I would shut the windows , fly past the moon with the velocity I had got from it -- if I did not smash upon it -- and so go on towards the earth .
However I disavowed him , there I was most certainly bound up with him , and I knew that wherever or whatever I might be , I must needs feel the stress of his desires , and sympathise with all his joys and sorrows until his life should end .
And with the dying of Bedford -- what then ?
Until at last I began to feel the pull of the earth upon my being , drawing me back again to the life that is real for men .
And then , indeed , it grew clearer and clearer to me that I was quite certainly Bedford after all , and returning after amazing adventures to this world of ours , and with a life that I was very likely to lose in this return .
I set myself to puzzle out the conditions under which I must fall to earth .
My line of flight was about parallel with the surface as I came into the upper air .
The temperature of sphere began to rise forthwith .
I knew it behoved me to drop at once .
Far below me , in a darkling twilight , stretched a great expanse of sea .
I opened every window I could , and fell -- out of sunshine into evening , and out of evening into night .
Vaster grew the earth and vaster , swallowing up the stars , and the silvery translucent starlit veil of cloud it wore spread out to catch me .
At last the world seemed no longer a sphere but flat , and then concave .
It was no longer a planet in the sky , but the world of Man .
I shut all but an inch or so of earthward window , and dropped with a slackening velocity .
The broadening water , now so near that I could see the dark glitter of the waves , rushed up to meet me .
The sphere became very hot .
I snapped the last strip of window , and sat scowling and biting my knuckles , waiting for the impact ... .
The sphere hit the water with a huge splash : it must have sent it fathoms high .
At the splash I flung the Cavorite shutters open .
Down I went , but slower and slower , and then I felt the sphere pressing against my feet , and so drove up again as a bubble drives .
And at the last I was floating and rocking upon the surface of the sea , and my journey in space was at an end .
It was dawn , a gray dawn , rather overcast but showing here and there a long patch of greenish gray .
Some way out a ship was lying at anchor , a pale silhouette of a ship with one yellow light .
The water came rippling in in long shallow waves .
Away to the right curved the land , a shingle bank with little hovels , and at last a lighthouse , a sailing mark and a point .
Inland stretched a space of level sand , broken here and there by pools of water , and ending a mile away perhaps in a low shore of scrub .
To the north-east some isolated watering-place was visible , a row of gaunt lodging-houses , the tallest things that I could see on earth , dull dabs against the brightening sky .
What strange men can have reared these vertical piles in such an amplitude of space I do not know .
There they are , like pieces of Brighton lost in the waste .
`` Have you floated ashore ?
Have you been wrecked or something ?
What is it ? ''
I made an estimate of the little man 's appearance as he drew nearer .
`` By Jove ! ''
he said , `` you 've had a time of it !
I thought you -- Well -- Where were you cast away ?
Is that thing a sort of floating thing for saving life ? ''
I decided to take that line for the present .
I made a few vague affirmatives .
`` I want help , '' I said hoarsely .
`` I want to get some stuff up the beach -- stuff I ca n't very well leave about . ''
I became aware of three other pleasant-looking young men with towels , blazers , and straw hats , coming down the sands towards me .
Evidently the early bathing section of this Littlestone .
`` Come up to the hotel , '' said the foremost little man .
`` We 'll look after that thing there . ''
`` It 's lead , or gold ! ''
`` Gold , right enough , '' said the third .
through space -- in that ball . ''
And I took a delicious mouthful of egg .
I made a private note that when I went back to the moon I would take a box of eggs .
`` Ah , well , '' said I , and shrugged my shoulders .
`` Well , anyhow , '' I said , `` it wo n't float far . ''
And somewhere a window was broken ... .
He receded a step as though I had threatened him .
I made a bolt through them into the hotel .
I charged back into the coffee-room , rang the bell furiously .
I gripped the waiter as he entered .
`` D 'ye hear ? ''
`` Get help and carry these bars up to my room right away . ''
He failed to understand me , and I shouted and raved at him .
A scared-looking little old man in a green apron appeared , and further two of the young men in flannels .
I made a dash at them and commandeered their services .
As soon as the gold was in my room I felt free to quarrel .
`` Now get out , '' I shouted ; `` all of you get out if you do n't want to see a man go mad before your eyes ! ''
And I helped the waiter by the shoulder as he hesitated in the doorway .
And then , as soon as I had the door locked on them all , I tore off the little man 's clothes again , shied them right and left , and got into bed forthwith .
And there I lay swearing and panting and cooling for a very long time .
The Astonishing Communication of Mr. Julius Wendigee
My scientific attainments , I must admit , are not great , but so far as they enable me to judge , Mr. Wendigee 's contrivances for detecting and recording any disturbances in the electromagnetic conditions of space are singularly original and ingenious .
And by a happy combination of circumstances they were set up and in operation about two months before Cavor made his first attempt to call up the earth .
Consequently we have fragments of his communication even from the beginning .
Unhappily , they are only fragments , and the most momentous of all the things that he had to tell humanity -- the instructions , that is , for the making of Cavorite , if , indeed , he ever transmitted them -- have throbbed themselves away unrecorded into space .
We never succeeded in getting a response back to Cavor .
He was unable to tell , therefore , what we had received or what we had missed ; nor , indeed , did he certainly know that any one on earth was really aware of his efforts to reach us .
And the persistence he displayed in sending eighteen long descriptions of lunar affairs -- as they would be if we had them complete -- shows how much his mind must have turned back towards his native planet since he left it two years ago .
Altogether we have probably lost quite half of the communications he made , and much we have is damaged , broken , and partly effaced .
In the abstract that follows the reader must be prepared therefore for a considerable amount of break , hiatus , and change of topic .
Mr. Wendigee and I are collaborating in a complete and annotated edition of the Cavor record , which we hope to publish , together with a detailed account of the instruments employed , beginning with the first volume in January next .
That will be the full and scientific report , of which this is only the popular transcript .
But here we give at least sufficient to complete the story I have told , and to give the broad outlines of the state of that other world so near , so akin , and yet so dissimilar to our own .
The two earlier messages of Mr. Cavor may very well be reserved for that larger volume .
They simply tell , with greater brevity and with a difference in several details that is interesting , but not of any vital importance , the bare facts of the making of the sphere and our departure from the world .
Throughout , Cavor speaks of me as a man who is dead , but with a curious change of temper as he approaches our landing on the moon .
`` Poor Bedford , '' he says of me , and `` this poor young man , '' and he blames himself for inducing a young man , `` by no means well equipped for such adventures , '' to leave a planet `` on which he was indisputably fitted to succeed '' on so precarious a mission .
I think he underrates the part my energy and practical capacity played in bringing about the realisation of his theoretical sphere .
`` We arrived , '' he says , with no more account of our passage through space than if we had made a journey of common occurrence in a railway train .
And then he becomes increasingly unfair to me .
Unfair , indeed , to an extent I should not have expected in a man trained in the search for truth .
Looking back over my previously written account of these things , I must insist that I have been altogether juster to Cavor than he has been to me .
I have extenuated little and suppressed nothing .
But his account is : --
( He says , you observe , nothing of his own concession to these same `` vesicles . ''
`` Among their catch was a many-tentaculate , evil-eyed black thing , ferociously active , whose appearance they greeted with shrieks and twitters , and which with quick , nervous movements they hacked to pieces by means of little hatchets .
All its dissevered limbs continued to lash and writhe in a vicious manner .
Afterwards , when fever had hold of me , I dreamt again and again of that bitter , furious creature rising so vigorous and active out of the unknown sea .
It was the most active and malignant thing of all the living creatures I have yet seen in this world inside the moon ... .
The messages of Cavor from the sixth up to the sixteenth are for the most part so much broken , and they abound so in repetitions , that they scarcely form a consecutive narrative .
They will be given in full , of course , in the scientific report , but here it will be far more convenient to continue simply to abstract and quote as in the former chapter .
We have subjected every word to a keen critical scrutiny , and my own brief memories and impressions of lunar things have been of inestimable help in interpreting what would otherwise have been impenetrably dark .
And , naturally , as living beings , our interest centres far more upon the strange community of lunar insects in which he was living , it would seem , as an honoured guest than upon the mere physical condition of their world .
`` Conceive an enormous cylindrical space , '' says Cavor , in his seventh message , `` a quarter of a mile across , perhaps ; very dimly lit at first and then brighter , with big platforms twisting down its sides in a spiral that vanishes at last below in a blue profundity ; and lit even more brightly -- one could not tell how or why .
Think of the well of the very largest spiral staircase or lift-shaft that you have ever looked down , and magnify that by a hundred .
Imagine it at twilight seen through blue glass .
Imagine yourself looking down that ; only imagine also that you feel extraordinarily light , and have got rid of any giddy feeling you might have on earth , and you will have the first conditions of my impression .
Round this enormous shaft imagine a broad gallery running in a much steeper spiral than would be credible on earth , and forming a steep road protected from the gulf only by a little parapet that vanishes at last in perspective a couple of miles below .
The manner in which Phi-oo and Tsi-puff attacked the problem of speech was fairly obvious .
They came into this `` hexagonal cell '' in which Cavor was confined , and began imitating every sound he made , beginning with a cough .
He seems to have grasped their intention with great quickness , and to have begun repeating words to them and pointing to indicate the application .
The procedure was probably always the same .
Phi-oo would attend to Cavor for a space , then point also and say the word he had heard .
`` It seemed long and yet brief -- a matter of days -- before I was positively talking with these insects of the moon .
Of course , at first it was an intercourse infinitely tedious and exasperating , but imperceptibly it has grown to comprehension .
And my patience has grown to meet its limitations , Phi-oo it is who does all the talking .
He does it with a vast amount of meditative provisional 'M 'm -- M 'm ' and has caught up one or two phrases , 'If I may say , ' 'If you understand , ' and beads all his speech with them .
`` I have already mentioned the retinues that accompany most of the intellectuals : ushers , bearers , valets , extraneous tentacles and muscles , as it were , to replace the abortive physical powers of these hypertrophied minds .
Porters almost invariably accompany them .
There are also extremely swift messengers with spider-like legs and 'hands ' for grasping parachutes , and attendants with vocal organs that could well nigh wake the dead .
Apart from their controlling intelligence these subordinates are as inert and helpless as umbrellas in a stand .
They exist only in relation to the orders they have to obey , the duties they have to perform .
`` The bulk of these insects , however , who go to and fro upon the spiral ways , who fill the ascending balloons and drop past me clinging to flimsy parachutes are , I gather , of the operative class .
'Machine hands , ' indeed , some of these are in actual nature -- it is not figure of speech , the single tentacle of the mooncalf herd is profoundly modified for clawing , lifting , guiding , the rest of them no more than necessary subordinate appendages to these important mechanisms , have enormously developed auditory organs ; some whose work lies in delicate chemical operations project a vast olfactory organ ; others again have flat feet for treadles with anchylosed joints ; and others -- who I have been told are glassblowers -- seem mere lung-bellows .
But every one of these common Selenites I have seen at work is exquisitely adapted to the social need it meets .
Fine work is done by fined-down workers , amazingly dwarfed and neat .
Some I could hold on the palm of my hand .
There is even a sort of turnspit Selenite , very common , whose duty and only delight it is to apply the motive power for various small appliances .
And to rule over these things and order any erring tendency there might be in some aberrant natures are the most muscular beings I have seen in the moon , a sort of lunar police , who must have been trained from their earliest years to give a perfect respect and obedience to the swollen heads .
`` My eye had just caught the figure of an exceptionally big and ungainly Selenite lying motionless among the stems , face downward .
'Him -- worker -- no work to do .
Get little drink then -- make sleep -- till we him want .
What good him wake , eh ?
No want him walking about . '
`` I must confess that all this multitude made me feel extremely shabby and unworthy .
I was unshaven and unkempt ; I had brought no razor ; I had a coarse beard over my mouth .
On earth I have always been inclined to despise any attention to my person beyond a proper care for cleanliness ; but under the exceptional circumstances in which I found myself , representing , as I did , my planet and my kind , and depending very largely upon the attractiveness of my appearance for a proper reception , I could have given much for something a little more artistic and dignified than the husks I wore .
I had been so serene in the belief that the moon was uninhabited as to overlook such precautions altogether .
As it was I was dressed in a flannel jacket , knickerbockers , and golfing stockings , stained with every sort of dirt the moon offered , slippers ( of which the left heel was wanting ) , and a blanket , through a hole in which I thrust my head .
( These clothes , indeed , I still wear . )
Sharp bristles are anything but an improvement to my cast of features , and there was an unmended tear at the knee of my knickerbockers that showed conspicuously as I squatted in my litter ; my right stocking , too , persisted in getting about my ankle .
I am fully alive to the injustice my appearance did humanity , and if by any expedient I could have improvised something a little out of the way and imposing I would have done so .
But I could hit upon nothing .
I did what I could with my blanket -- folding it somewhat after the fashion of a toga , and for the rest I sat as upright as the swaying of my litter permitted .
`` He was scrutinising the first man he had ever seen ... .
`` My eyes dropped at last from his greatness to the ant figures in the blue mist about him , and then down the steps to the massed Selenites , still and expectant in their thousands , packed on the floor below .
Once again an unreasonable horror reached out towards me ... .
`` A tide of twittering and piping swept into the remotest corners of that great assembly when it was at last made clear that we men know absolutely nothing of the contents of the world upon which the immemorial generations of our ancestors had been evolved .
Three times had I to repeat that of all the 4000 miles of distance between the earth and its centre men knew only to the depth of a mile , and that very vaguely .
I understood the Grand Lunar to ask why had I come to the moon seeing we had scarcely touched our own planet yet , but he did not trouble me at that time to proceed to an explanation , being too anxious to pursue the details of this mad inversion of all his ideas .
`` He reverted to the question of weather , and I tried to describe the perpetually changing sky , and snow , and frost and hurricanes .
'But when the night comes , ' he asked , 'is it not cold ? '
`` I told him it was colder than by day .
`` 'But how do you keep even such wisdom as you have ? '
he asked ; and I explained to him the way we helped our limited ''
`` He was at first perplexed and incredulous .
'You mean to say , ' he asked , seeking confirmation , 'that you run about over the surface of your world -- this world , whose riches you have scarcely begun to scrape -- killing one another for beasts to eat ? '
`` And so , for a space , though something loath , I told him the story of earthly War .
`` I told them an ironclad could fire a shot of a ton twelve miles , and go through 20 feet of iron -- and how we could steer torpedoes under water .
I went on to describe a Maxim gun in action , and what I could imagine of the Battle of Colenso .
The Grand Lunar was so incredulous that he interrupted the translation of what I had said in order to have my verification of my account .
They particularly doubted my description of the men cheering and rejoicing as they went into battle .
Taken in its completeness , I submit that it is a greater claim than almost any religion can justifiably make , to satisfy the need I have stated .
No religion prescribes rules that can be immediately applied to every eventuality .
Between the general rules laid down and the particular instance there is always a wide gap , into which doubts and alternatives enter and the private judgment has play .
No doubt upon certain defined issues of every-day life some religions are absolutely explicit ; the Mahomedan religion , for example , is very uncompromising upon the use of wine , and the law of the Ten Commandments completely prohibits the making of graven images , and almost all the great variety of creeds professed among us English-speaking peoples prescribe certain general definitions of what is righteous and what constitutes sin .
But upon a thousand questions of great public importance , on the question of forms of government , of social and educational necessities , of one's course and attitude towards such great facts as the press , trusts , housing , and the like , religion , as it is generally understood , gives by itself no conclusive light .
It may , no doubt , give a directing light in some cases , but not a conclusive light .
It leaves us inconsistent and uncertain amidst these unavoidable problems .
Yet upon these questions most people feel that something more is needed than the mood of the moment or the spin of a coin .
Religious conviction may help us , it may stimulate us to press for clearer light upon these matters , but it certainly does not give us any decisions .
And these repudiations extend also to the political parties that struggle to realize themselves within the forms of our established state .
There is not in Great Britain , and I understand there is not in America , any party , any section , any group , any single politician even , based upon the manifest trend and purpose of life as it appears in the modern view .
The necessities of continuity in public activity and of a glaring consistency in public profession , have so far prevented any such fundamental reconstruction as the new generation requires .
One hears of Liberty , of Compromise , of Imperial Destinies and Imperial Unity , one hears of undying loyalty to the Memory of Mr. Gladstone and the inalienable right of Ireland to a separate national existence .
One hears , too , of the sacred principle of Free Trade , of Empires and Zollvereins , and the Rights of the Parent to blockade the education of his children , but one hears nothing of the greater end .
At the best all the objects of our political activity can be but means to that end , their only claim to our recognition can be their adequacy to that end , and none of these vociferated `` cries , '' these party labels , these programme items , are ever propounded to us in that way .
I can not see how , in England at any rate , a serious and perfectly honest man , holding as true that ampler view of life I have suggested , can attach himself loyally to any existing party or faction .
At the utmost he may find their faction-fighting may be turned for a time towards his remoter ends .
These parties derive from that past when the new view of life had yet to establish itself , they carry faded and obliterated banners that the glare and dust of conflict , the vote-storms of great campaigns , have robbed long since of any colour of reality they once possessed .
They express no creative purpose now , whatever they did in their inception , they point towards no constructive ideals .
Essentially they are things for the museum or the bonfire , whatever momentary expediency may hold back the New Republican from an unqualified advocacy of such a destination .
The old party fabrics are no more than dead rotting things , upon which a great tangle of personal jealousies , old grudges , thorny nicknames , prickly memories , family curses , Judas betrayals and sacred pledges , a horrible rubbish thicket , maintains a saprophytic vitality .
Those particular passengers in the figure , present the New Republic .
It is a dissension , an inquiry , it is the vague unconsolidated matter for a new direction .
`` We who are young , '' says the spirit of the New Republic , `` we who are in earnest can no more compass our lives under these old kingships and loyalties , under these old leaders and these old traditions , constitutions and pledges , with their party liabilities , their national superstitions , their rotting banners and their accumulating legacy of feuds and lies , than we can pretend we are indeed impassioned and wholly devoted subjects of King Edward , spending our lives in the service of his will .
It is not that we have revolted from these things , it is not that we have grown askew to them and that patching and amendment will serve our need ; it is that we have travelled outside them altogether -- almost inadvertently , but quite beyond any chance of return to a simple acceptance again .
We are no more disposed to call ourselves Liberals or Conservatives and to be stirred to party passion at the clash of these names , than we are to fight again the battles of the Factio Albata or the Factio Prasina .
These current dramas , these current conflicts seem scarcely less factitious .
Men without faith may be content to spend their lives for things only half believed in , and for causes that are contrived .
But that is not our quality .
We want reality because we have faith , we seek the beginning of realism in social and political life , we seek it and we are resolved to find it . ''
If to-morrow the whole world were to sign an unanimous round-robin to Mr. Francis Galton and Mrs. Victoria Woodhull Martin , admitting absolutely their leading argument that it _is_ absurd to breed our horses and sheep and improve the stock of our pigs and fowls , while we leave humanity to mate in the most heedless manner , and if , further , the whole world , promising obedience , were to ask these two to gather together a consultative committee , draw up a scheme of rules , and start forthwith upon the great work of improving the human stock as fast as it can be done , if it undertook that marriages should no longer be made in heaven or earth , but only under licence from that committee , I venture to think that , after a very brief epoch of fluctuating legislation , this committee , except for an extremely short list of absolute prohibitions , would decide to leave matters almost exactly as they are now ; it would restore love and private preference to their ancient authority and freedom , at the utmost it would offer some greatly qualified advice , and so released , it would turn its attention to those flaws and gaps in our knowledge that at present render these regulations no more than a theory and a dream .
It may be urged that this attempt to whittle down the `` inherited craving '' to a habit does not meet Mr. Reid 's argument from the gradual increase of resisting power in races subjected to alcoholic temptation , an increase due to the elimination of all the more susceptible individuals .
There can be no denying that those nations that have had fermented drinks longest are the soberest , but that , after all , may be only one aspect of much more extensive operations .
The nations that have had fermented drinks the longest are also those that have been civilized the longest .
The passage of a people from a condition of agricultural dispersal to a more organized civilization means a very extreme change in the conditions of survival , of which the increasing intensity of temptation to alcoholic excess is only one aspect .
Gluttony , for example , becomes a much more possible habit , and many other vices tender death for the first time to the men who are gathering in and about towns .
The city demands more persistent , more intellectualized and less intense physical desires than the countryside .
Moral qualities that were a disadvantage in the dispersed stage become advantageous in the city , and conversely .
Rugged independence ceases to be helpful , and an intelligent turn for give and take , for collaboration and bargaining , makes increasingly for survival .
Moreover , there grows very slowly an indefinable fabric of traditional home training in restraint that is very hard to separate in analysis from mental heredity .
People who have dwelt for many generations in towns are not only more temperate and less explosive in the grosser indulgences , but more _urbane_ altogether .
The drunken people are also the `` uncivil '' peoples and the individualistic peoples .
The great prevalence of drunkenness among the upper classes two centuries ago can hardly have been bred out in the intervening six or seven generations , and it is also a difficult fact for Mr. Reid that drunkenness has increased in France .
In most of the cases cited by Mr. Reid a complex of operating forces could be stated in which the appearance of fermented liquors is only one factor , and a tangle of consequent changes in which a gradually increasing insensibility to the charms of intoxication was only one thread .
Drunkenness has no doubt played a large part in eliminating certain types of people from the world , but that it specifically eliminates one specific definable type is an altogether different matter .
So much for the existing possibilities of making the race better by breeding .
For the rest of these papers we shall take the births into the world , for the most part , as we find them .
It does not at all follow that even the Rutland 103 represents the possible minimum of infant mortality .
One learns from the Register- General 's returns for 1891 that among the causes of death specified in the three counties of Dorset , Wiltshire , and Hereford , where infant mortality is scarcely half what it is in the three vilest towns in England in this respect , Preston , Leicester , and Blackburn , the number of children killed by injury at birth is three times as great as it is in these same towns .
Unclassified `` violence '' also accounts for more infant deaths in the country than in towns .
This suggests pretty clearly a delayed and uncertain medical attendance and rough conditions , and it points us to still better possibilities .
These diagrams and these facts justify together a reasonable hope that the mortality of infants under five throughout England might be brought to less than one-third what it is in child-destroying Lancashire at the present time , to a figure that is well under ninety in the thousand .
Period 1846-1850 33 8 births per 1000 Period 1896-1900 28 0 births per 1000 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 5.8 fall in the birth-rate .
Clearly it is not along these lines that the capable men-makers we suppose to be attacking the problem will spend much of their energies .
All the experiences of Charities and Poor-Law Authorities simply confirm our postulate of the necessity of a standard of comfort if a child is to have a really good initial chance in the world .
The only conceivable solution of this problem is one that will ensure that no child , or only a few accidental and exceptional children , will be born outside these advantages .
It is no good trying to sentimentalize the issue away .
This is the end we must attain , to attain any effectual permanent improvement in the conditions of childhood .
A certain number of people have to be discouraged and prevented from parentage , and a great number of homes have to be improved .
How can we ensure these ends , or how far can we go towards ensuring them ?
These things -- if we could bring them about -- would leave us with a sort of clarified Problem of the Unemployed on our hands .
Our Minimum Wage would have strained these people out , and , provided there existed what is already growing up , an intelligent system of employment bureaus , we should have much more reason to conclude than we have at present , that they were mainly unemployed because of a real incapacity in character , strength , or intelligence for efficient citizenship .
Our raised standards of housing , our persecution of overcrowding , and our obstruction of employment below the minimum wage , would have swept out the rookeries and hiding-places of these people of the Abyss .
They would exist , but they would not multiply -- and that is our supreme end .
They would be tramping on roads where mendicity laws would prevail , there would be no house-room for them , no squatting-places .
The casual wards would catch them and register them , and telephone one to the other about them .
It is rare that children come into this world without a parent or so being traceable .
Everything would converge to convince these people that to bear children into such an unfavourable atmosphere is an extremely inconvenient and undesirable thing .
They would not have many children , and such children as they had would fall easily into our organized net and get the protection of the criticised and improved development of the existing charitable institutions .
[ Footnote : `` I wonder whether there is any legal flaw in the second section of the Prevention of Cruelty to Children Act of 1894 , which may have been _specially_ aimed at beggars with offspring .
It is specially punishable to beg having an infant in their arms , quite apart from teaching the infant in question to beg .
Or is this law insufficiently enforced through popular apathy ? ''
G. STUART MENTEATH . ]
This is the best we can do for those poor little creatures .
As for that increasing section of the Abyss that will contrive to live childless , these papers have no quarrel with them .
A childless wastrel is a terminating evil , and it may be , a picturesque evil .
I must confess that a lazy rogue is very much to my taste , provided there is no tragedy of children to smear the joke with misery .
And if he or she neither taints nor tempts the children , who are our care , a childless weakling we may freely let our pity and mercy go out to .
To go childless is in them a virtue for which they merit our thanks .
`` With a view to prevent such deplorable loss of life it is suggested to Parents and Guardians , who have the care of young children , that it is very desirable that efficient fire-guards should be provided , in order to render it impossible for children to obtain access to the fire- grates .
`` E. R. C. BRADFORD , `` The Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis .
`` Metropolitan Police Office , `` New Scotland Yard , `` January 28th , 1902 . ''
THE BEGINNINGS OF THE MIND AND LANGUAGE
With speech humanity begins .
With the dawn of speech the child ceases to be an animal we cherish , and crosses the boundary into distinctly human intercourse .
There begins in its mind the development of the most wonderful of all conceivable apparatus , a subtle and intricate keyboard , that will end at last with thirty or forty or fifty thousand keys .
This queer , staring , soft little being in its mother 's arms is organizing something within itself , beside which the most wonderful orchestra one can imagine is a lump of rude clumsiness .
There will come a time when , at the merest touch upon those keys , image will follow image and emotion develop into emotion , when the whole creation , the deeps of space , the minutest beauties of the microscope , cities , armies , passions , splendours , sorrows , will leap out of darkness into the conscious being of thought , when this interwoven net of brief , small sounds will form the centre of a web that will hold together in its threads the universe , the All , visible and invisible , material and immaterial , real and imagined , of a human mind .
And if we are to make the best of a child , it is in no way secondary to its physical health and growth that it should acquire a great and thorough command over speech , not merely that it should speak , but , what is far more vital , that it should understand swiftly and subtly things written and said .
Indeed , this is more than any physical need .
The body is the substance and the implement ; the mind , built and compact of language , is the man .
All that has gone before , all that we have discussed of sound birth and physical growth and care , is no more than the making ready of the soil for the mind that is to grow therein .
As we come to this matter of language , we come a step nearer to the intimate realities of our subject -- we come to the mental plant that is to bear the flower and the ripe fruit of the individual life .
The next phase of our inquiry , therefore , is to examine how we can get this mental plant , this foundation substance , this abundant mastered language best developed in the individual , and how far we may go to ensure this best development for all children born into the world .
Of course there is a natural and necessary growth and development in a living language , a growth that no one may arrest .
In appliances , in politics , in science , in philosophical interpretation , there is a perpetual necessity for new words , words to express new ideas and new relationships , words free from ambiguity and encumbering associations .
But the neologisms of the street and the saloon rarely supply any occasion of this kind .
For the most part they are just the stupid efforts of ignorant men to supply the unnecessary .
And side by side with the invention of inferior cheap substitutes for existing words and phrases , and infinitely more serious than that invention , goes on a perpetual misuse and distortion of those that are insufficiently known .
These are processes not of growth but of decay -- they distort , they render obsolete , and they destroy .
The obsolescence and destruction of words and phrases cuts us off from the nobility of our past , from the severed masses of our race overseas , far more effectually than any growth of neologisms .
A language may grow -- our language must grow -- it may be clarified and refined and strengthened , but it need not suffer the fate of an algal filament , and pass constantly into rottenness and decay whenever growth is no longer in progress .
That has been the fate of languages in the past because of the feebler organization , the slenderer , slower intercommunication , and , above all , the insufficient records of human communities ; but the time has come now -- or , at the worst , is rapidly coming -- when this will cease to be a fated thing .
We may have a far more copious and varied tongue than had Addison or Spenser -- that is no disaster -- but there is no reason why we should not keep fast hold of all they had .
There is no reason why the whole fine tongue of Elizabethan England should not be at our disposal still .
Conceivably Addison would find the rich , allusive English of George Meredith obscure ; conceivably we might find a thousand words and phrases of the year 2000 strange and perplexing ; but there is no reason why a time should ever come when what has been written well in English since Elizabethan days should no longer be understandable and fine .
To expect that so ample a cause as this should find any support among the festering confusion of the old politics is to expect too much .
There is no party for the English language anywhere in the world .
We have to take this problem as we took our former problem and deal with it as though the old politics , which slough so slowly , were already happily excised .
To begin with , we may give our attention to the foundation of this foundation , to the growth of speech in the developing child .
For example , an important factor in the early stage of speech-teaching is the nursery rhyme .
A little child , towards the end of the first year , having accumulated a really very comprehensive selection of sounds and noises by that time , begins to imitate first the associated motions , and then the sounds of various nursery rhymes -- '' Pat-a-cake , '' for example .
In the book I imagine , there would be , among many other things , a series of little versicles , old and new , in which , to the accompaniment of simple gestures , all the elementary sounds of the language could be easily and agreeably made familiar to the child's ears .
[ Footnote : Messrs. Heath of Boston , U.S.A. , have sent me a book of Nursery Rhymes , arranged by Mr. Charles Welsh , which is certainly the best thing I have seen in this way .
It is worthy of note that the neglect of pedagogic study in Great Britain is forcing the intelligent British parent and teacher to rely more and more upon American publishers for children 's books .
The work of English writers is often very tasteful and pretty , but of the smallest educational value. ]
The child at five , unless it is colour blind , should know the range of colours by name , and distinguish them easily , blue and green not excepted ; it should be able to distinguish pink from pale red and crimson from scarlet .
[ Footnote : There could be a set of colour bands in the book that the English Language Society might publish . ]
Many children through the neglect of those about them do not distinguish these colours until a very much later age .
I think also -- in spite of the fact that many adults go vague and ignorant on these points -- that a child of five may have been taught to distinguish between a square , a circle , an oval , a triangle and an oblong , and to use these words .
It is easier to keep hold of ideas with words than without them , and none of these words should be impossible by five .
The child should also know familiarly by means of toys , wood blocks and so on , many elementary solid forms .
It is matter of regret that in common language we have no easy , convenient words for many of these forms , and instead of being learnt easily and naturally in play , they are left undistinguished , and have to be studied later under circumstances of forbidding technicality .
It would be quite easy to teach the child in an incidental way to distinguish cube , cylinder , cone , sphere ( or ball ) , prolate spheroid ( which might be called `` egg '' ) , oblate spheroid ( which might be called `` squatty ball '' ) , the pyramid , and various parallelepipeds , as , for example , the square slab , the oblong slab , the brick , and post .
He could have these things added to his box of bricks by degrees , he would build with them and combine them and play with them over and over again , and absorb an intimate knowledge of their properties , just at the age when such knowledge is almost instinctively sought and is most pleasant and easy in its acquisition .
These things need not be specially forced upon him .
In no way should he be led to emphasize them or give a priggish importance to his knowledge of them .
They will come into his toys and play mingled with a thousand other interests , the fortifying powder of clear general ideas , amidst the jam of play .
So far we have concerned ourselves with the introductory and foundation matter of the New Republican project , with the measures and methods that may be resorted to , firstly , if we would raise the general quality of the children out of whom we have to make the next generation , and , secondly , if we would replace divergent dialects and partial and confused expression by a uniform , ample and thorough knowledge of English throughout the English-speaking world .
These two things are necessary preliminaries to the complete attainment of the more essential nucleus in the New Republican idea .
So much has been discussed .
This essential nucleus , thus stripped , reveals itself as the systematic direction of the moulding forces that play upon the developing citizen , towards his improvement , with a view to a new generation of individuals , a new social state , at a higher level than that at which we live to-day , a new generation which will apply the greater power , ampler knowledge and more definite will our endeavours will give it , to raise its successor still higher in the scale of life .
Or we may put the thing in another and more concrete and vivid way .
On the one hand imagine an average little child let us say in its second year .
We have discussed all that can be done to secure that this average little child shall be well born , well fed , well cared for , and we will imagine all that can be done has been done .
Accordingly , we have a sturdy , beautiful healthy little creature to go upon , just beginning to walk , just beginning to clutch at things with its hands , to reach out to and apprehend things with its eyes , with its ears , with the hopeful commencement of speech .
We want to arrange matters so that this little being shall develop into its best possible adult form .
That is our remaining problem .
This group of people , who constitute the home , will be in constant reaction upon him .
If as a whole they bear themselves with grace and serenity , say and do kindly things , control rage , and occupy themselves constantly , they will do much to impose these qualities upon the new- comer .
If they quarrel one with another , behave coarsely and spitefully , loiter and lounge abundantly , these things will also stamp the child .
A raging father , a scared deceitful mother , vulgarly acting , vulgarly thinking friends , all leave an almost indelible impress .
Precept may play a part in the home , but it is a small part , unless it is endorsed by conduct .
What these people do , on the whole , believe in and act upon , the child will tend to believe in and act upon ; what they believe they believe , but do not act upon , the child will acquire also as a non-operative belief ; their practices , habits , and prejudices will be enormously prepotent in his life .
If , for example , the parent talks constantly of the contemptible dirtiness of Boers and foreigners , and of the extreme beauty of cleanliness and -- even obviously -- rarely washes , the child will grow to the same professions and the same practical denial .
This home circle it is that will describe what , in modified Herbartian phraseology , one may call the child 's initial circle of thought ; it is a circle many things will subsequently enlarge and modify , but of which they have the centering at least and the establishment of the radial trends , almost beyond redemption .
The effect of home influence , indeed , constitutes with most of us a sort of secondary heredity , interweaving with , and sometimes almost indistinguishable from , the real unalterable primary heredity , a moral shaping by suggestion , example , and influence , that is a sort of spiritual parallel to physical procreation .
Our skilled operative , on the other hand , will pocket his tip .
He is on the other side of the boundary .
He presents a rising element coming from the servile mass .
Probably his net income equals or exceeds the shopman 's , but there is no servant , no black coat and silk hat , no middle-class school in his scheme of things .
He calls the shopman `` Sir , '' and makes no struggle against his native accent .
In his heart he despises the middle class , the mean tip-givers , and he is inclined to overrate the gentry or big tippers .
He is much more sociable , much noisier , relatively shameless , more intelligent , more capable , less restrained .
He is rising against his tradition , and almost against his will .
The serf still bulks large in him .
The whole trend of circumstance is to substitute science for mere rote skill in him , to demand initiative and an intelligent self-adaptation to new discoveries and new methods , to make him a professional man and a job and pieceworker after the fashion of the great majority of professional men .
Against all these things the serf element in him fights .
He resists education and clings to apprenticeship , he fights for time- work , he obstructs new inventions , he clings to the ideal of short hours , high pay , shirk and let the master worry .
His wife is a far more actual creature than the clerk 's ; she does the house herself in a rough , effectual fashion , his children get far more food for mind and body , and far less restraint .
You can tell the age of the skilled operative within a decade by the quantity of books in his home ; the younger he is the more numerous these are likely to be .
And the younger he is the more likely he is to be alive to certain general views about his rights and his place in the social scale , the less readily will his finger go to his cap at the sight of broad-cloth , or his hand to the proffered half-crown .
He will have listened to Trade Union organizers and Socialist speakers ; he will have read the special papers of his class .
The whole of this home is , in comparison with the shopman 's , wide open to new influences .
The children go to a Board School , and very probably afterwards to evening classes -- or music-halls .
Here again is a new type of home , in which the English of 1920 are being made in thousands , and which is forced a little way up the intellectual and moral scale every year , a little further from its original conception of labour , dependence , irresponsibility , and servility .
Of late years , in Great Britain more particularly , the School has been called upon to conquer still other fields .
It has become apparent that in this monarchy of ours , in which honour is heaped high upon money- making , even if it is money-making that adds nothing to the collective wealth or efficiency , and denied to the most splendid public services unless they are also remunerative ; where public applause is the meed of cricketers , hostile guerillas , clamorous authors , yacht-racing grocers , and hopelessly incapable generals , and where suspicion and ridicule are the lot of every man working hard and living hard for any end beyond a cabman 's understanding ; in this world-wide Empire whose Government is entrusted as a matter of course to peers and denied as a matter of course to any man of humble origin ; where social pressure of the most urgent kind compels every capable business manager to sell out to a company and become a `` gentleman '' at the very earliest opportunity , the national energy is falling away .
That driving zeal , that practical vigour that once distinguished the English is continually less apparent .
Our workmen take no pride in their work any longer , they shirk toil and gamble .
And what is worse , the master takes no pride in the works ; he , too , shirks toil and gambles .
Our middle-class young men , instead of flinging themselves into study , into research , into literature , into widely conceived business enterprises , into so much of the public service as is not preserved for the sons of the well connected , play games , display an almost oriental slackness in the presence of work and duty , and seem to consider it rather good form to do so .
And seeking for some reason and some remedy for this remarkable phenomenon , a number of patriotic gentlemen have discovered that the Schools , the Schools are to blame .
Something in the nature of Reform has to be waved over our schools .
Here again is something the school did not cause , the school can not cure .
Even after our clarifying discussion , in which we have shown that schooling is only a part , and by no means the major part , of the educational process , and in which we have distinguished and separated the home element in the boarding-school from the schooling proper , there still remains something more than a simple theme in schooling .
After all these eliminations we remain with a mixed function and mixed traditions , and it is necessary now to look a little into the nature of this mixture .
If we take this and hold to it as a guide , and explore a scheme of school work , in the direction it takes us , we shall find it shaping itself ( for an English-speaking citizen ) something after this fashion : --
The problem is much simpler in the case of mathematical teaching than in the case of English , because the educational theory and method have been more thoroughly discussed .
There is no need for the ten years of experiment and trial I have suggested for the organization of English teaching .
The mathematical reformer may begin now at a point the English language reformer will not reach for some years .
Suppose now a suitably authenticated committee were to work out -- on the basis of Professor Perry 's syllabus perhaps -- a syllabus of school mathematics , and then make a thorough review of all the mathematical textbooks on sale throughout the English-speaking world , admitting some perhaps as of real permanent value for teaching of the new type , provisionally recognizing others as endurable , but with clear recommendations for their revision and improvement , and condemning the others specifically _by name_ .
Let them make it clear that this syllabus and report will be respected by all public examining bodies ; let them spend a hundred pounds or so in the intelligent distribution of their report , and the scholastic profession will not be long before it is equipped with the recommended books .
Meanwhile , the English and American scholastic publishers will become extremely active , the warned books will be revised , and new books will be written in competition for the enormous prize of the committee 's final approval , an activity that a second review , after an interval of five or six years , will recognize and reward .
There remains the question of _C_ , the amount of Information that is to take a place in schooling .
Now there is one `` subject '' that it would be convenient to include , were it only for the sake of the mass of exercise and illustration it supplies to the mathematical course , and that is the science of Physics .
In addition , the science of physics , since it culminates in a clear understanding and use of the terminology of the aspects of energy and a clear sense of adequate causation , is fundamentally necessary to modern thought .
Practical work is , no doubt , required for the proper understanding of physical science , and so far it must enter into schooling , but it may be pointed out here that in many cases the educational faddist is overdoing the manual side of science study to a ridiculous extent .
Things have altered very much at the Royal College of Science , no doubt , since my student days , but fifteen years ago the courses in elementary physics and in elementary geology were quite childishly silly in this respect .
Both these courses seemed to have been inspired by that eminent educationist , Mr. Squeers , and the sequel to spelling `` window '' was always to `` go and clean one . ''
The science in each course in those days could have been acquired just as well in a fortnight as in half a year .
One muddled away three or four days etching a millimetre scale with hydrofluoric acid on glass -- to no earthly end that I could discover -- and a week or so in making a needless barometer .
In the course in geology , days and days were spent in drawing ideal crystalline forms and colouring them in water-colours , apparently in order to get a totally false idea of a crystal , and weeks in the patient copying of microscopic rock sections in water-colours .
Effectual measures of police were taken to prevent the flight of the intelligent student from these tiresome duties .
The mischief done in this way is very great .
It deadens the average students and exasperates and maddens the eager ones .
I am inclined to think that a very considerable proportion of what passes as `` practical '' science work , for which costly laboratories are built and expensive benches fitted , consists of very similar solemnities , and it can not be too strongly urged that `` practical '' work that does not illuminate is mere waste of the student 's time .
There are certain consequences that must follow from the unchallenged acceptation of an aristocratic monarchy , consequences that do not seem to be sufficiently recognized in this connection , and it is to these that the reader 's attention is now particularly drawn .
There are a great number of British people who are more or less sincerely seeking the secret of national efficiency at present , and I can not help thinking that sooner or later , in spite of their evident aversion , they will be forced to look into this dusty chamber of thought for the clue to the thing they need .
The corner they will have to turn is the admission that no state and no people can be at its maximum efficiency until every public function is discharged by the man best able to perform it , and that no Commonweal can be near efficiency until it is endeavouring very earnestly to bring that ideal condition of affairs about .
And when they have got round that corner they will have to face the fact that an Hereditary Monarchy is a state in which this principle is repudiated at a cardinal point , a state in which one position , which no amount of sophistication will prevent common men and women regarding as the most honourable , powerful , and responsible one of all , which is indeed by that very fact alone a great and responsible one , is filled on purely genealogical grounds .
In a state that has also an aristocratic constitution this repudiation of special personal qualities is carried very much further .
Reluctantly but certainly the seeker after national efficiency will come to the point that the aristocracy and their friends and connections _must_ necessarily form a caste about the King , that their gradations _must_ set the tone of the whole social body , and that their political position must enable them to demand and obtain a predominating share in any administration that may be formed .
So long , therefore , as your constitution remains aristocratic you must expect to see men of quite ordinary ability , quite ordinary energy , and no exceptional force of character , men frequently less clever and influential than their wives and lady friends , controlling the public services , a Duke of Norfolk managing so vital a business as the Post Office and succeeded by a Marquis of Londonderry , and a Marquis of Lansdowne organizing military affairs , and nothing short of a change in your political constitution can prevent this sort of thing .
No one believes these excellent gentlemen hold these positions by merit or capacity , and no one believes that from them we are getting anything like the best imaginable services in these positions .
These positions are held by the mere accident of birth , and it is by the mere accident of birth the great mass of Englishmen are shut out from the remotest hope of serving their country in such positions .
The American atmosphere has one great and indisputable superiority over the British : it insists upon the right of every citizen , it almost presents it as a duty , to do all that he possibly can do ; it holds out to him even the highest position in the state as a possible reward for endeavour .
Up to the point of its equality of opportunity surely no sane Englishman can do anything but envy the American state .
In America `` presumption '' is not a sin .
All the vigorous enterprise that differentiates the American from the Englishman in business flows quite naturally from that ; all the patriotic force and loyalty of the common American , which glows beside the English equivalent as the sun beside the moon , glows even oppressively .
But apart from these inestimable advantages I do not see that the American has much that an Englishman need envy .
There are certainly points of inferiority in the American atmosphere , influences in development that are bad , not only in comparison with what is ideally possible , but even in comparison with English parallels .
It will be argued that this enumeration of American and British defects is a mere expansion of that familiar proposition of the logic text- books , `` all men are mortal . ''
You have here , says the objector , one of two alternatives , either you must draw your administrators , your legislators , your sources of honour and reward from a limited , hereditary , and specially-trained class , who will hold power as a right , or you must rely upon the popular choice exercised in the shop and at the polling booth .
What else can you have but inheritance or election , or some blend of the two , blending their faults ?
Each system has its disadvantages , and the disadvantages of each system may be minimized by education ; in particular by keeping the culture and code of honour of your ruling class high in the former case and by keeping your common schools efficient in the latter .
But the essential evils of each system are -- essential evils , and one has to suffer them and struggle against them , as one has to struggle perpetually with the pathogenic bacteria that infest the world .
The theory of monarchy is , no doubt , inferior to the democratic theory in stimulus , but the latter fails in qualitative effect , much more than the former .
There , the objector submits , lies the quintessence of the matter .
Both systems need watching , need criticism , the pruning knife and the stimulant , and neither is bad enough to justify a revolutionary change to the other .
In some such conclusion as this most of the English people with whom one can discuss this question have come to rest , and it is to this way of looking at the matter that one must ascribe the apathetic acquiescence in the British hereditary system , upon which I have already remarked .
There is a frank and excessive admission of every real and imaginary fault of the American system , and with the proposition that we are on the horns of a dilemma , the discussion is dismissed .
When these issues of public honour and efficient democratic administration have begun to move towards a definite solution , the community will be in a position to extend the operation of the new methods towards a profounder revolution , the control of private property .
`` We are all Socialists nowadays , '' and it is needless , therefore , to argue here at any length to establish the fact that beyond quite personal belongings all Property is the creation of society , and in reality no more than an administrative device .
At present , in spite of some quite hideous and mischievous local aspects , the institution of Property , even in land and the shares of quasi- public businesses , probably gives as efficient a method of control , and even it may be a more efficient method of control than any that could be devised to replace it under existing conditions .
We have no public bodies and no methods of check and control sufficiently trustworthy to justify extensive expropriations .
Even the municipalization of industries needs to go slowly until municipal areas have been brought more into conformity with the conditions of efficient administration .
Areas too cramped and areas that overlap spell waste and conflicting authorities , and premature municipalization in such areas will lead only to the final triumph of the private company .
Political efficiency must precede Socialism .
[ Footnote : See Appendix I. ]
But there can be no doubt that the spectacle of irresponsible property is a terribly demoralizing force in the development of each generation .
It is idle to deny that Property , both in Great Britain and America , works out into a practical repudiation of that equality , political democracy so eloquently asserts .
There is a fatalistic submission to inferiority on the part of an overwhelming majority of those born poor , they hold themselves cheap in countless ways , and they accept as natural the use of wealth for wanton pleasure and purposes absolutely mischievous , they despair of effort in the public service , and find their only hope in gambling , sharp greedy trading , or in base acquiescences to the rich .
The good New Republican can only regard our present system of Property as a terribly unsatisfactory expedient and seek with all his power to develop a better order to replace it .
The intellectual trouble in the matter , as it presents itself to me , comes in upon this , that the question does not lie in one plane .
So many discussions ignore this fact , and deal with it on one plane only .
For example , we may take the whole business on the plane of the medical man , ignoring all other considerations .
On that plane it would probably be almost easy to reason out a working system .
It never has been done by the medical profession , as a whole , which is fairly understandable , or by any group of medical men , which is the more surprising , but it would be an extremely interesting thing to have done and a material contribution to the sane discussion of this problem .
It would not solve it but it would illuminate certain aspects .
Let the mere physiological problem be taken .
We want healthy children and the best we can get .
Let the medical man devise his scheme primarily for that .
Understand we are shutting our eyes to every other consideration but physical or quasi- physical ones .
Imagine the thing done , for example , by a Mr. Francis Galton , who had an absolutely open mind upon all other questions .
Some form of polygamy , marriage of the most transient description , with reproduction barred to specified types , would probably come from such a speculation .
But , in addition , a number of people who can have only a few children or none are , nevertheless , not adapted physiologically for celibacy .
Conceive the medical man working that problem out upon purely materialistic lines and with an eye to all physiological and pathological peculiarities .
The Tasmanians ( now extinct ) seem to have been somewhere near the probable result .
How the sexual consciousness of a great proportion of our young people is being awakened , the curious reader may see for himself if he will expend a few pennies weekly for a month or so upon the halfpenny or penny `` comic '' papers which are bought so eagerly by boys .
They begin upon the facts of sex as affairs of nodding and winking , of artful innuendo and scuffles in the dark .
The earnest efforts of Broadbeam's minor kindred to knock the nonsense out of even younger people may be heard at almost any pantomime .
The Lord Chamberlain 's attempts to stem the tide amaze the English Judges .
No scheme for making the best of human lives can ignore this system of influences .
There immediately arises the question whether we are to limit art and literature to the sphere permissible to the growing youth and `` young person . ''
So far as shop windows , bookstalls , and hoardings go , so far as all general publicity goes , I would submit the answer is Yes .
I am on the side of the Puritans here , unhesitatingly .
But our adults must not walk in mental leading strings , and were this world an adult world I doubt if there is anything I would not regard as fit to print and publish .
But can not we contrive that our adult literature shall be as free as air while the literature and art of the young is sanely expurgated ?
Assuredly it is not by sermons on Purity to Men Only and by nasty little pamphlets of pseudo-medical and highly alarming information stuffed into clean young hands [ Footnote : See Clouston 's _Mental Diseases_ , fifth edition , p. 535 , for insanity caused by these pamphlets ; see also p. 591 _et seq._ for `` adolescent '' literature . ]
-- ultra `` adult '' that stuff should be -- but in the drum and trumpet style the thing should be done .
There is a mass of fine literature to-day wherein love shines clean and noble .
There is art telling fine stories .
There is a possibility in the Theatre .
Probably the average of the theatre-goer is under rather than over twenty-two .
Literature , the drama , art ; that is the sort of food upon which the young imagination grows stout and tall .
There is the literature and art of youth that may or may not be part of the greater literature of life , and upon this mainly we must depend when our children pass from us into these privacies , these dreams and inquiries that will make them men and women .
See the right stuff is near them and the wrong stuff as far as possible away , chase cad and quack together , and for the rest , in this matter -- _leave them alone._
When we digressed to the general question of the political , social , and moral atmosphere in which the English-speaking citizen develops , we left the formal education of the average child , whose development threads through these papers and holds them together , at about the age of fifteen and at the end of the process of Schooling .
We have now to carry on that development to adult citizenship .
It is integral in the New Republican idea that the process of Schooling , which is the common atrium to all public service , should be fairly uniform throughout the social body , that although the average upper-class child may have all the advantages his conceivably better mental inheritance , his better home conditions , and his better paid and less overworked teachers may give him , there shall be no disadvantages imposed upon the child of any class , there shall be no burking of the intellectual education for any purpose whatever .
To keep poor wretches in serfdom on the land by depriving them of all but the most rudimentary literary education , as a very considerable element in the new Nature Study Movement certainly intends , is altogether antagonistic to New Republican ideas , and there must be no weeding out of capable and high-minded teachers by filtering them through grotesque and dishonouring religious tests -- dishonouring because compulsory , whatever the real faith of the teacher may be .
And at the end of the Schooling period there must begin a process of sorting in the mass of the national youth -- as far as possible , regardless of their social origins -- that will go on throughout life .
For the competition of public service must constitute the Battle for Existence in the civilized state .
All-round inferiority in school life -- failure not simply at this or that or at the total result ( which , indeed , may be due very often to the lopsidedness of exceptional gifts ) but failure all along the line -- is a mark of essential inferiority .
A certain proportion of boys and girls will have shown this inferiority , will have done little with any of their chances in or out of school during their school life , and these -- when they are poorer-class children -- will very naturally drop out of the educational process at this stage and pass into employment suited to their capacity , employment which should not carry with it any considerable possibility of prolific marriage .
A really well-contrived leaving-school examination -- and it must be remembered that the theory and science of examinations scarcely exists as yet -- an examination which would take account of athletic development and moral influence ( let us say provisionally by the vote of fellow-pupils ) and which would be so contrived as to make specially high quality in one department as good as all-round worth -- could effect this first classification .
It would throw out the worst of the duffers and fools and louts all along the social scale .
What is to become of the rejected of the upper and wealthy class is , I admit , a difficult problem as things are to-day .
At present they carry a loutish ingredient to the public schools , to the Army , to Oxford and Cambridge , and it is open to question whether it would not be well to set aside one public school , one especially costly university , and one gentlemen 's regiment of an attractively smart type , into which this mass of expensive slackness might be drained along a channel of specially high fees , low standards , and agreeable social conditions .
That , however , is a quite subsidiary question in this discussion .
A day may come , as I have already suggested , when it will be considered as reasonable to insist upon a minimum mental qualification for the administration of property as for any other form of power in the state .
Pride and their many advantages -- of which one is quite conceivably an average essential superiority -- will probably ensure a satisfactory result from the Schooling process in the case of a much greater proportion of better-class than of lower-class boys and girls .
[ Footnote : In most big public schools , I am told , there is a system of superannuation about sixteen , but I know nothing of the provision for those who are weeded out . ]
By fourteen the power of abstract reasoning and of an analytical treatment of things is in existence , the learner is now less to be moulded and more to be guided than he was .
We want now to give this mind we have established , the most stimulating and invigorating training we can , we want to give it a sane coherent view of our knowledge of the universe in relation to itself , and we want to equip it for its own special work in the world .
How , on the basis of the Schooling we have predicated , are these ends to be attained ?
The second course will probably seem less acceptable to many readers , but all who are qualified to speak will testify to its enormous educational value .
It is what one may speak of as the Biological Course .
Just as the conception of Energy will be the central idea of the Natural Philosophy course , so the conception of Organic Evolution will be the central idea of the Biological Course .
A general review of the whole field of Biology -- not only of the Natural History of the present but of the geological record -- in relation to the known laws and the various main theories of the evolutionary process will be taken , and in addition some special department , either the Comparative Anatomy of the Vertebrata chiefly , or of the plants chiefly , or of several Invertebrated groups chiefly , will be exhaustively worked out in relation to these speculations .
The first of these alternatives is not only probably the most invigorating mental exercise of the three but bears also more directly upon the practical concerns of life .
Physiology will be taken up in relation to this special exhaustive study , and the `` Elementary Physics of the Schooling '' stage will be prolonged up into a treatment of Chemistry with especial reference to biological problems .
Through such a course as this students might pass to the study of medicine just as well as through Natural Philosophy , and the medical profession would profit by the clash of the two types of student .
The biological course , with its insistence upon heredity and physiological facts , would also give the very best and gravest preparation in the world for the practical concerns of motherhood .
From it students would pass on illuminated to the study of psychology , philosophical science , and educational method .
The training in the discussion of broad generalization , and much of the fact involved , would be a most excellent preliminary to special theological study and also to the advanced study of economics and political science .
From this course also artists of various sorts would escape through the avenue of Section ii .
which , by the by , would have to involve Historical Reading .
So much for my second suggested College course .
Thought is the life , the spontaneous flexibility of a community .
A community that thinks freely and fully throughout its population is capable of a thousand things that are impossible in an unthinking mass of people .
The latter , collectively considered , is a large rigid thing , a lifeless thing , that will break rather than bend , that will die rather than develop .
Its inevitable end is dust and extinction .
Look at the thing from the baser level of political conceptions , and still that floating tide of thought is a necessity .
With thought and gathered knowledge things that mean tumult , bloodshed , undying hatreds , schisms and final disaster to uncivilized races , are accomplished in peace ; constitutional changes , economic reorganizations , boundary modifications and a hundred grave matters .
Thought is the solvent that will make a road for men through Alpine difficulties that seem now unconquerable , that will dissolve those gigantic rocks of custom and tradition that loom so forbiddingly athwart all our further plans .
For three thousand years and more the Book has been becoming more and more the evident salvation of man .
If our present civilization collapse , it will collapse as all previous civilizations have collapsed , not from want of will but from the want of organization for its will , for the want of that knowledge , that conviction , and that general understanding that would have kept pace with the continually more complicated problems that arose about it .
[ Footnote : Dr. Beattie Crozier , in his most interesting and suggestive _History of Intellectual Development_ , terms the literary apparatus that holds a people together to a common purpose , the `` Bible '' of that people , and suggests that the `` Bible '' of a modern people should be the History of Civilization .
His work expresses by very different phrases and methods a line of thought closely akin to the thesis of this paper . ]
One writes `` our present civilization '' and of previous civilizations , but indeed no civilizations have yet really come into existence .
Tribes have aggregated into nations , nations have aggregated into empires , and then , after a struggle , has come a great confusion of thought , a failure to clarify a common purpose , and disintegration .
Each successive birth has developed a more abundant body of thought , a more copious literature than the last , each has profited by the legacy of the previous failure , but none have yet developed enough .
Mankind has been struggling to win this step of a permanent civilized state , and has never yet attained any sort of permanency -- unless perhaps in China .
And that sole imperfect permanency was based primarily upon a literature .
A literature is the triumphant instrument of the invincible culture of the Jews .
Through the whole volume of history the thoughtful reader can not but exclaim , again and again , `` But if they had only understood one another , all this bloodshed , all this crash , disaster , and waste of generations could have been avoided ! ''
Our time has come , and we of the European races are making our struggle in our turn .
Slavery still fights a guerilla war in factory and farm , cruelty and violence peep from every slum , barbaric habits , rude barbaric ways of thinking , grossness and stupidity are still all about us .
And yet in many ways we seem to have got nearer to the hope of permanent beginnings than any of those previous essays in civilization .
Collectively we know a great deal more , and more of us are in touch with the general body of knowledge than was ever the case at any earlier stage .
Assuredly we know enough to hope that we have passed the last of the Dark Ages .
But though we hope , we deal with no certainties , and it is upon the broadening and increase of the flow of ideas that our hope depends .
At present this stream of thought and common understanding is not nearly so wide and deep as it might conceivably become , as it must become if indeed this present civilization is to be more than another false start .
Our society [ Footnote : _Anticipations_ , Chapter III .
Developing Social Elements . ]
has ceased to be homogeneous , and it has become a heterogeneous confusion without any secure common grounds of action , under the stress of its own material achievements .
For the lack of a sufficient literature we specialize into inco-ordinated classes .
A number of new social types are developing , ignorant of each other , ignorant almost of themselves , full of mutual suspicions and mutual misunderstandings , narrow , limited , and dangerously incapable of intelligent collective action in the face of crises .
The medical man sees nothing beyond his profession ; he misunderstands the artist , the divine , and the engineer .
The engineer hates and despises the politician , the lawyer misses the aims of the medical man , the artist lives angrily in a stuffy little corner of pure technique ; none of them read any general literature at all except perhaps a newspaper .
Each thinks parochially in his own limits , and , except for his specialty , is an illiterate man .
It is absolutely necessary to the progress of our civilization that these isolations should be overcome , that the community should become aware of itself collectively and should think as a whole .
And the only thing that can overcome these isolations and put the mass of intelligent men upon a common basis of understanding , is an abundant and almost universally influential contemporary literature .
We have already discussed the possibility of developing the innervation of the state , the distribution of books , the stimulation and direction of reading , and all the peripheral aspects of literature , and we come now to the difficult and intricate problem of whether we can do anything , and what it is we may do , to stimulate the central thought .
Can we hope to improve the conditions of literary production , to make our literature more varied , quintessential and abundant , to enforce it with honour and help , to attract to its service every man and woman with gifts of value , and to make the most of these gifts ?
Now before we can discuss how else we can deal with those who constitute the current thought of the community , we must consider how we are to distinguish what is worth sustaining from what is not .
It is upon this basis of an organized criticism and of a well-taught and cherished language that the English literature of the Twentieth Century , the literature of analysis and research , and the literature of creative imagination , has to stand .
Upon such a basis it becomes possible to consider the practicability of the endowment of general literature .
For to that at last we come .
I submit that it is only by the payment of authors , and if necessary their endowment in a spacious manner , and in particular by the entire separation of the rewards of writing from the accidents of the book market , that the function of literature can be adequately discharged in the modern state .
The laws of supply and demand break down altogether in this case .
We have to devise some means of sustaining those who discharge this necessary public function in the progressive state .
This , perhaps , is something of a digression from our second general proposition , that we must pay directly for the work itself .
But it leads to a third proposition .
The whole history of literature and science abundantly shows that no critical judgment is more than an approximation to the truth .
Criticism should be equal to the exposure of the imitator and the pure sham , of course , it should be able to analyze and expose these types , but above that level is the disputed case .
At the present time in England only a very few writers or investigators hold high positions by anything approaching the unanimous verdict of the intelligent public -- of that section of the public that counts .
In the department of fiction , for example , there is a very audible little minority against Mr. Kipling , and about Mr. George Moore or Mr. Zangwill or Mr. Barrie one may hear the most diverse opinions .
By the test of blackballing , only the unknown would survive .
The valuation is as erratic in many branches of science .
The development of criticism will diminish , but it certainly will not end , this sort of thing , and since our concern is to stimulate rather than punish , we must do just exactly what we should not do if we were electing men for a club , we must include rather than exclude .
I am told that Americans remark in relation to University endowments , `` we speculate in research , '' and that will serve for only a slight exaggeration of this third proposition .
So long as we get most of the men of exceptional mental gifts in the community under the best conditions for their work , it scarcely matters if , for each one of them , we get four or five shams or mere respectabilities upon our hands .
Respectabilities and shams have a fatal facility for living on the community anyhow , and there is no more reason in not doing these things on their account than there would be in burning a house down to get rid of cockroaches and rats .
The rat poison of sound criticism -- to follow that analogy -- is the remedy here .
And if the respectability lives , his work at any rate dies .
It must not be imagined that such an endowment would be a new payment , by the community .
In all probability we are already paying as much , or more , to authors , in the form of royalties , of serial fees , and the like .
We are paying now with an unjust unevenness -- we starve the new and deep and overpay the trite and obvious .
Moreover , the community would have something in exchange for its money ; it would have the copyright of the works written .
It may be suggested that by a very simple device a large proportion of these payments could be recovered .
Suppose that all books , whether copyright or not , and all periodicals sold above a certain price -- sixpence , let us say -- had to bear a defaced stamp of -- for example -- a halfpenny for each shilling of price .
This would probably yield a revenue almost sufficient to cover these literary pensions .
In addition the books of the pensioned authors might bear an additional stamp as the equivalent of the present royalty .
In a few years this that I call New Republicanism here , under I know not what final name , will have become a great world movement conscious of itself and consistent within itself , and we who are making now the crude discovery of its possibility will be working towards its realization in our thousand different ways and positions .
And coming to our help , to reinforce us , to supersede us , to take the growing task out of our hands will come youth , will come our sons and daughters and those for whom we have written our books , for whom we have taught in our schools , for whom we have founded and ordered libraries , toiled in laboratories , and in waste places and strange lands ; for whom we have made saner and cleaner homes and saner and cleaner social and political arrangements , foregoing a hundred comfortable acquiescences that these things might be done .
Youth will come to take over the work from us and go on with it in a bolder and ampler manner than we in these limited days dare to attempt .
With each year of their lives they come more distinctly into conscious participation with our efforts .
Those soft little creatures that we have figured grotesquely as dropping from an inexorable spout into our world , those weak and wailing lumps of pink flesh more helpless than any animal , for whom we have planned better care , a better chance of life , better conditions of all sorts , those laval souls who are at first helpless clay in our hands , presently insensibly have become helpers beside us in the struggle .
In a little while they are beautiful children , they are boys and girls and youths and maidens , full of the zest of new life , full of an abundant , joyful receptivity .
In a little while they are walking with us , seeking to know whither we go , and whither we lead them , and why .
Our account of the men-makers is not complete until we add to birth and school and world , the increasing element of deliberate co-operation in the man or woman we are seeking to make .
In a little while they are young men and women , and then men and women , save for a fresher vigour , like ourselves .
For us it comes at last to fellowship and resignation .
For them it comes at last to responsibility , to freedom , and to introspection and the searching of hearts .
We must if we would be men-makers , as the first and immediate part of the business , correct and finish ourselves .
The good New Republican must needs ask and ask repeatedly : What have I done and what am I doing with myself while I tamper with the lives of others ?
His self-examination will be no monstrous egotism of perfectibility , indeed , no virtuosity of virtue , no exquisite retreat and slinking `` out of the race , where that immortal garland is to be run for , not without dust and heat . ''
But he will seek perpetually to gauge his quality , he will watch to see himself the master of his habits and of his powers ; he will take his brain , blood , body , and lineage as a trust to be administered for the world .
To know all one can of one 's self in relation to the world about one , to think out all one can , to take nothing for granted except by reason of one 's unavoidable limitations , to be swift , indeed , but not hasty , to be strong but not violent , to be as watchful of one 's self as it is given one to be , is the manifest duty of all who would subserve the New Republic .
For the New Republican , as for his forerunner the Puritan , conscience and discipline must saturate life .
He must be ruled by duties and a certain ritual in life .
Every day and every week he must set aside time to read and to think , to commune with others and himself , he must be as jealous of his health and strength as the Levites of old .
Can we in this generation make but a few thousands of such men and women , men and women who are not afraid to live , men and women with a common faith and a common understanding , then , indeed , our work will be done .
They will in their own time take this world as a sculptor takes his marble and shape it better than all our dreams .
There are , however , more limited Socialisms , systems which deal mainly with economic organizations , which recognize the rights of individuals to possessions of a personal sort , and which assume without detailed discussion the formation of family groups within the general community .
There are limited socialisms whose repudiation of property affects only the common interests of the community , the land it occupies , the services in which all are interested , the necessary minimum of education , and the sanitary and economic interaction of one person or family group upon another ; socialisms which , in fact , come into touch with an intelligent individualism , and which are based on the attempt to ensure equality of opportunity and freedom for complete individual development to every citizen .
Such socialists look not so much to the abolition of property as to the abolition of inheritance , and to the intelligent taxation of property for the services of the community .
It is among such moderate socialists that I would number myself .
I would make no hard and fast rule with regard to any portion of the material and apparatus used in the service of a community .
With regard to any particular service or concern , I would ask , Is it more convenient , more likely to lead to economy and efficiency , to let this service rest in the hands of some single person or group of persons who may offer to do the service or administer the concern , and whom we will call the owners , or to place it in the hands of some single person or group of persons , elected or chosen by lot , whom we will call the official or group of officials ?
And if you were to suggest some method of election that would produce officials that , on the whole , were likely to manage worse than private owners , and to waste more than the private owner's probable profits , I should say then by all means leave the service or concern in private hands .
Then came the night of the first falling star .
It was seen early in the morning , rushing over Winchester eastward , a line of flame high in the atmosphere .
Hundreds must have seen it , and taken it for an ordinary falling star .
Albin described it as leaving a greenish streak behind it that glowed for some seconds .
Denning , our greatest authority on meteorites , stated that the height of its first appearance was about ninety or one hundred miles .
It seemed to him that it fell to earth about one hundred miles east of him .
He remained standing at the edge of the pit that the Thing had made for itself , staring at its strange appearance , astonished chiefly at its unusual shape and colour , and dimly perceiving even then some evidence of design in its arrival .
The early morning was wonderfully still , and the sun , just clearing the pine trees towards Weybridge , was already warm .
He did not remember hearing any birds that morning , there was certainly no breeze stirring , and the only sounds were the faint movements from within the cindery cylinder .
He was all alone on the common .
And then he perceived that , very slowly , the circular top of the cylinder was rotating on its body .
It was such a gradual movement that he discovered it only through noticing that a black mark that had been near him five minutes ago was now at the other side of the circumference .
Even then he scarcely understood what this indicated , until he heard a muffled grating sound and saw the black mark jerk forward an inch or so .
Then the thing came upon him in a flash .
The cylinder was artificial -- hollow -- with an end that screwed out !
Something within the cylinder was unscrewing the top !
`` Good heavens ! ''
`` There 's a man in it -- men in it !
Half roasted to death !
Trying to escape ! ''
Henderson stood up with his spade in his hand .
Ogilvy told him all that he had seen .
Henderson was a minute or so taking it in .
Then he dropped his spade , snatched up his jacket , and came out into the road .
The two men hurried back at once to the common , and found the cylinder still lying in the same position .
But now the sounds inside had ceased , and a thin circle of bright metal showed between the top and the body of the cylinder .
Air was either entering or escaping at the rim with a thin , sizzling sound .
There were four or five boys sitting on the edge of the Pit , with their feet dangling , and amusing themselves -- until I stopped them -- by throwing stones at the giant mass .
After I had spoken to them about it , they began playing at `` touch '' in and out of the group of bystanders .
Among these were a couple of cyclists , a jobbing gardener I employed sometimes , a girl carrying a baby , Gregg the butcher and his little boy , and two or three loafers and golf caddies who were accustomed to hang about the railway station .
There was very little talking .
Few of the common people in England had anything but the vaguest astronomical ideas in those days .
Most of them were staring quietly at the big table like end of the cylinder , which was still as Ogilvy and Henderson had left it .
I fancy the popular expectation of a heap of charred corpses was disappointed at this inanimate bulk .
Some went away while I was there , and other people came .
I clambered into the pit and fancied I heard a faint movement under my feet .
The top had certainly ceased to rotate .
A large portion of the cylinder had been uncovered , though its lower end was still embedded .
As soon as Ogilvy saw me among the staring crowd on the edge of the pit he called to me to come down , and asked me if I would mind going over to see Lord Hilton , the lord of the manor .
The growing crowd , he said , was becoming a serious impediment to their excavations , especially the boys .
They wanted a light railing put up , and help to keep the people back .
He told me that a faint stirring was occasionally still audible within the case , but that the workmen had failed to unscrew the top , as it afforded no grip to them .
The case appeared to be enormously thick , and it was possible that the faint sounds we heard represented a noisy tumult in the interior .
I was very glad to do as he asked , and so become one of the privileged spectators within the contemplated enclosure .
I failed to find Lord Hilton at his house , but I was told he was expected from London by the six o'clock train from Waterloo ; and as it was then about a quarter past five , I went home , had some tea , and walked up to the station to waylay him .
`` He 's fallen in the pit ! ''
Everything was then quite invisible , hidden by the deep pit and the heap of sand that the fall of the cylinder had made .
Anyone coming along the road from Chobham or Woking would have been amazed at the sight -- a dwindling multitude of perhaps a hundred people or more standing in a great irregular circle , in ditches , behind bushes , behind gates and hedges , saying little to one another and that in short , excited shouts , and staring , staring hard at a few heaps of sand .
The barrow of ginger beer stood , a queer derelict , black against the burning sky , and in the sand pits was a row of deserted vehicles with their horses feeding out of nosebags or pawing the ground .
Most of the spectators had gathered in one or two groups -- one a little crowd towards Woking , the other a knot of people in the direction of Chobham .
Evidently they shared my mental conflict .
There were few near me .
One man I approached -- he was , I perceived , a neighbour of mine , though I did not know his name -- and accosted .
But it was scarcely a time for articulate conversation .
It was this , as much as anything , that gave people courage , and I suppose the new arrivals from Woking also helped to restore confidence .
At any rate , as the dusk came on a slow , intermittent movement upon the sand pits began , a movement that seemed to gather force as the stillness of the evening about the cylinder remained unbroken .
Vertical black figures in twos and threes would advance , stop , watch , and advance again , spreading out as they did so in a thin irregular crescent that promised to enclose the pit in its attenuated horns .
I , too , on my side began to move towards the pit .
It came to me that I was upon this dark common , helpless , unprotected , and alone .
Suddenly , like a thing falling upon me from without , came -- fear .
With an effort I turned and began a stumbling run through the heather .
The news of the massacre probably reached Chobham , Woking , and Ottershaw about the same time .
In Woking the shops had closed when the tragedy happened , and a number of people , shop people and so forth , attracted by the stories they had heard , were walking over the Horsell Bridge and along the road between the hedges that runs out at last upon the common .
You may imagine the young people brushed up after the labours of the day , and making this novelty , as they would make any novelty , the excuse for walking together and enjoying a trivial flirtation .
You may figure to yourself the hum of voices along the road in the gloaming .
For my own part , I remember nothing of my flight except the stress of blundering against trees and stumbling through the heather .
All about me gathered the invisible terrors of the Martians ; that pitiless sword of heat seemed whirling to and fro , flourishing overhead before it descended and smote me out of life .
I came into the road between the crossroads and Horsell , and ran along this to the crossroads .
`` Have n't you heard of the men from Mars ? ''
said I ; `` the creatures from Mars ? ''
`` Quite enough , '' said the woman over the gate .
`` Thenks '' ; and all three of them laughed .
`` Do n't , dear ! ''
said my wife , knitting her brows and putting her hand on mine .
`` They have done a foolish thing , '' said I , fingering my wineglass .
`` They are dangerous because , no doubt , they are mad with terror .
Perhaps they expected to find no living things -- certainly no intelligent living things . ''
I did not know it , but that was the last civilised dinner I was to eat for very many strange and terrible days .
In Woking junction , until a late hour , trains were stopping and going on , others were shunting on the sidings , passengers were alighting and waiting , and everything was proceeding in the most ordinary way .
A boy from the town , trenching on Smith 's monopoly , was selling papers with the afternoon 's news .
The ringing impact of trucks , the sharp whistle of the engines from the junction , mingled with their shouts of `` Men from Mars ! ''
Excited men came into the station about nine o'clock with incredible tidings , and caused no more disturbance than drunkards might have done .
People rattling Londonwards peered into the darkness outside the carriage windows , and saw only a rare , flickering , vanishing spark dance up from the direction of Horsell , a red glow and a thin veil of smoke driving across the stars , and thought that nothing more serious than a heath fire was happening .
It was only round the edge of the common that any disturbance was perceptible .
There were half a dozen villas burning on the Woking border .
There were lights in all the houses on the common side of the three villages , and the people there kept awake till dawn .
About eleven a company of soldiers came through Horsell , and deployed along the edge of the common to form a cordon .
Later a second company marched through Chobham to deploy on the north side of the common .
Several officers from the Inkerman barracks had been on the common earlier in the day , and one , Major Eden , was reported to be missing .
The colonel of the regiment came to the Chobham bridge and was busy questioning the crowd at midnight .
The military authorities were certainly alive to the seriousness of the business .
About eleven , the next morning 's papers were able to say , a squadron of hussars , two Maxims , and about four hundred men of the Cardigan regiment started from Aldershot .
`` They are n't to be killed , '' said the milkman , `` if that can possibly be avoided . ''
`` Get aht ! ''
`` What 's cover against this 'ere 'eat ?
Sticks to cook yer !
What we got to do is to go as near as the ground 'll let us , and then drive a trench . ''
`` Where 's your shells ? ''
said the first speaker .
`` There ai n't no time .
Do it in a rush , that 's my tip , and do it at once . ''
I got back to lunch about two , very tired for , as I have said , the day was extremely hot and dull ; and in order to refresh myself I took a cold bath in the afternoon .
About half past four I went up to the railway station to get an evening paper , for the morning papers had contained only a very inaccurate description of the killing of Stent , Henderson , Ogilvy , and the others .
But there was little I didn't know .
The Martians did not show an inch of themselves .
They seemed busy in their pit , and there was a sound of hammering and an almost continuous streamer of smoke .
Apparently they were busy getting ready for a struggle .
`` Fresh attempts have been made to signal , but without success , '' was the stereotyped formula of the papers .
A sapper told me it was done by a man in a ditch with a flag on a long pole .
The Martians took as much notice of such advances as we should of the lowing of a cow .
Down the hill I saw a bevy of hussars ride under the railway bridge ; three galloped through the open gates of the Oriental College ; two others dismounted , and began running from house to house .
The sun , shining through the smoke that drove up from the tops of the trees , seemed blood red , and threw an unfamiliar lurid light upon everything .
I explained hastily that I had to leave my home , and so secured the dog cart .
At the time it did not seem to me nearly so urgent that the landlord should leave his .
I took care to have the cart there and then , drove it off down the road , and , leaving it in charge of my wife and servant , rushed into my house and packed a few valuables , such plate as we had , and so forth .
The beech trees below the house were burning while I did this , and the palings up the road glowed red .
While I was occupied in this way , one of the dismounted hussars came running up .
He was going from house to house , warning people to leave .
He was going on as I came out of my front door , lugging my treasures , done up in a tablecloth .
I shouted after him :
In front was a quiet sunny landscape , a wheat field ahead on either side of the road , and the Maybury Inn with its swinging sign .
I saw the doctor 's cart ahead of me .
At the bottom of the hill I turned my head to look at the hillside I was leaving .
Thick streamers of black smoke shot with threads of red fire were driving up into the still air , and throwing dark shadows upon the green treetops eastward .
The smoke already extended far away to the east and west -- to the Byfleet pine woods eastward , and to Woking on the west .
The road was dotted with people running towards us .
And very faint now , but very distinct through the hot , quiet air , one heard the whirr of a machine-gun that was presently stilled , and an intermittent cracking of rifles .
Apparently the Martians were setting fire to everything within range of their Heat-Ray .
Ripley Street was deserted , and except for a lighted window or so the village showed not a sign of life ; but I narrowly escaped an accident at the corner of the road to Pyrford , where a knot of people stood with their backs to me .
They said nothing to me as I passed .
I do not know what they knew of the things happening beyond the hill , nor do I know if the silent houses I passed on my way were sleeping securely , or deserted and empty , or harassed and watching against the terror of the night .
Even as I beheld this a lurid green glare lit the road about me and showed the distant woods towards Addlestone .
I felt a tug at the reins .
I saw that the driving clouds had been pierced as it were by a thread of green fire , suddenly lighting their confusion and falling into the field to my left .
It was the third falling star !
So much I saw then , all vaguely for the flickering of the lightning , in blinding highlights and dense black shadows .
The storm had left the sky clear , and over the smoke of the burning land the little fading pinpoint of Mars was dropping into the west , when a soldier came into my garden .
I heard a slight scraping at the fence , and rousing myself from the lethargy that had fallen upon me , I looked down and saw him dimly , clambering over the palings .
At the sight of another human being my torpor passed , and I leaned out of the window eagerly .
He stopped astride of the fence in doubt .
Then he came over and across the lawn to the corner of the house .
He bent down and stepped softly .
`` My God ! ''
he said , as I drew him in .
Later this shield staggered up on tripod legs and became the first of the fighting-machines I had seen .
The gun he drove had been unlimbered near Horsell , in order to command the sand pits , and its arrival it was that had precipitated the action .
As the limber gunners went to the rear , his horse trod in a rabbit hole and came down , throwing him into a depression of the ground .
At the same moment the gun exploded behind him , the ammunition blew up , there was fire all about him , and he found himself lying under a heap of charred dead men and dead horses .
`` I lay still , '' he said , `` scared out of my wits , with the fore quarter of a horse atop of me .
We 'd been wiped out .
And the smell -- good God !
I was hurt across the back by the fall of the horse , and there I had to lie until I felt better .
Just like parade it had been a minute before -- then stumble , bang , swish ! ''
He had hid under the dead horse for a long time , peeping out furtively across the common .
The Cardigan men had tried a rush , in skirmishing order , at the pit , simply to be swept out of existence .
Then the monster had risen to its feet and had begun to walk leisurely to and fro across the common among the few fugitives , with its headlike hood turning about exactly like the head of a cowled human being .
A kind of arm carried a complicated metallic case , about which green flashes scintillated , and out of the funnel of this there smoked the Heat-Ray .
Since then he had been skulking along towards Maybury , in the hope of getting out of danger Londonward .
People were hiding in trenches and cellars , and many of the survivors had made off towards Woking village and Send .
He had been consumed with thirst until he found one of the water mains near the railway arch smashed , and the water bubbling out like a spring upon the road .
That was the story I got from him , bit by bit .
He grew calmer telling me and trying to make me see the things he had seen .
He had eaten no food since midday , he told me early in his narrative , and I found some mutton and bread in the pantry and brought it into the room .
We lit no lamp for fear of attracting the Martians , and ever and again our hands would touch upon bread or meat .
As he talked , things about us came darkly out of the darkness , and the trampled bushes and broken rose trees outside the window grew distinct .
It would seem that a number of men or animals had rushed across the lawn .
I began to see his face , blackened and haggard , as no doubt mine was also .
Between us and Leatherhead , however , lay the third cylinder , with its guarding giants .
Had I been alone , I think I should have taken my chance and struck across country .
But the artilleryman dissuaded me : `` It 's no kindness to the right sort of wife , '' he said , `` to make her a widow '' ; and in the end I agreed to go with him , under cover of the woods , northward as far as Street Cobham before I parted with him .
Thence I would make a big detour by Epsom to reach Leatherhead .
His voice and face were eager .
The men behind him stared curiously .
The artilleryman jumped down the bank into the road and saluted .
`` I shall go on , '' he said .
Byfleet was in a tumult ; people packing , and a score of hussars , some of them dismounted , some on horseback , were hunting them about .
Three or four black government waggons , with crosses in white circles , and an old omnibus , among other vehicles , were being loaded in the village street .
There were scores of people , most of them sufficiently sabbatical to have assumed their best clothes .
The soldiers were having the greatest difficulty in making them realise the gravity of their position .
We saw one shrivelled old fellow with a huge box and a score or more of flower pots containing orchids , angrily expostulating with the corporal who would leave them behind .
I stopped and gripped his arm .
Here we found an excited and noisy crowd of fugitives .
As yet the flight had not grown to a panic , but there were already far more people than all the boats going to and fro could enable to cross .
People came panting along under heavy burdens ; one husband and wife were even carrying a small outhouse door between them , with some of their household goods piled thereon .
One man told us he meant to try to get away from Shepperton station .
Across the Thames , except just where the boats landed , everything was quiet , in vivid contrast with the Surrey side .
The people who landed there from the boats went tramping off down the lane .
The big ferryboat had just made a journey .
Three or four soldiers stood on the lawn of the inn , staring and jesting at the fugitives , without offering to help .
The inn was closed , as it was now within prohibited hours .
`` What 's that ? ''
cried a boatman , and `` Shut up , you fool ! ''
said a man near me to a yelping dog .
Then the sound came again , this time from the direction of Chertsey , a muffled thud -- the sound of a gun .
`` The sojers 'll stop 'em , '' said a woman beside me , doubtfully .
A haziness rose over the treetops .
Then , advancing obliquely towards us , came a fifth .
Their armoured bodies glittered in the sun as they swept swiftly forward upon the guns , growing rapidly larger as they drew nearer .
One on the extreme left , the remotest that is , flourished a huge case high in the air , and the ghostly , terrible Heat-Ray I had already seen on Friday night smote towards Chertsey , and struck the town .
For a moment I heeded nothing of the heat , forgot the patent need of self-preservation .
I splashed through the tumultuous water , pushing aside a man in black to do so , until I could see round the bend .
Half a dozen deserted boats pitched aimlessly upon the confusion of the waves .
The fallen Martian came into sight downstream , lying across the river , and for the most part submerged .
Thick clouds of steam were pouring off the wreckage , and through the tumultuously whirling wisps I could see , intermittently and vaguely , the gigantic limbs churning the water and flinging a splash and spray of mud and froth into the air .
The tentacles swayed and struck like living arms , and , save for the helpless purposelessness of these movements , it was as if some wounded thing were struggling for its life amid the waves .
Enormous quantities of a ruddy-brown fluid were spurting up in noisy jets out of the machine .
But they were in no hurry .
Cylinder followed cylinder on its interplanetary flight ; every twenty-four hours brought them reinforcement .
And meanwhile the military and naval authorities , now fully alive to the tremendous power of their antagonists , worked with furious energy .
Every minute a fresh gun came into position until , before twilight , every copse , every row of suburban villas on the hilly slopes about Kingston and Richmond , masked an expectant black muzzle .
And through the charred and desolated area -- perhaps twenty square miles altogether -- that encircled the Martian encampment on Horsell Common , through charred and ruined villages among the green trees , through the blackened and smoking arcades that had been but a day ago pine spinneys , crawled the devoted scouts with the heliographs that were presently to warn the gunners of the Martian approach .
But the Martians now understood our command of artillery and the danger of human proximity , and not a man ventured within a mile of either cylinder , save at the price of his life .
`` Have you any water ? ''
`` I was walking through the roads to clear my brain , '' he said .
`` And suddenly -- fire , earthquake , death ! ''
Presently he began waving his hand .
Another pause , and he broke out again like one demented .
he said , staring about him .
`` How can God 's ministers be killed ? ''
`` We had better follow this path , '' I said , `` northward . ''
The habit of personal security , moreover , is so deeply fixed in the Londoner 's mind , and startling intelligence so much a matter of course in the papers , that they could read without any personal tremors : `` About seven o'clock last night the Martians came out of the cylinder , and , moving about under an armour of metallic shields , have completely wrecked Woking station with the adjacent houses , and massacred an entire battalion of the Cardigan Regiment .
No details are known .
Maxims have been absolutely useless against their armour ; the field guns have been disabled by them .
Flying hussars have been galloping into Chertsey .
The Martians appear to be moving slowly towards Chertsey or Windsor .
Great anxiety prevails in West Surrey , and earthworks are being thrown up to check the advance Londonward . ''
That was how the Sunday _Sun_ put it , and a clever and remarkably prompt `` handbook '' article in the _Referee_ compared the affair to a menagerie suddenly let loose in a village .
No one in London knew positively of the nature of the armoured Martians , and there was still a fixed idea that these monsters must be sluggish : `` crawling , '' `` creeping painfully '' -- such expressions occurred in almost all the earlier reports .
None of the telegrams could have been written by an eyewitness of their advance .
The Sunday papers printed separate editions as further news came to hand , some even in default of it .
But there was practically nothing more to tell people until late in the afternoon , when the authorities gave the press agencies the news in their possession .
It was stated that the people of Walton and Weybridge , and all the district were pouring along the roads Londonward , and that was all .
My brother went to church at the Foundling Hospital in the morning , still in ignorance of what had happened on the previous night .
There he heard allusions made to the invasion , and a special prayer for peace .
Coming out , he bought a _Referee_ .
He became alarmed at the news in this , and went again to Waterloo station to find out if communication were restored .
The omnibuses , carriages , cyclists , and innumerable people walking in their best clothes seemed scarcely affected by the strange intelligence that the news venders were disseminating .
People were interested , or , if alarmed , alarmed only on account of the local residents .
At the station he heard for the first time that the Windsor and Chertsey lines were now interrupted .
The porters told him that several remarkable telegrams had been received in the morning from Byfleet and Chertsey stations , but that these had abruptly ceased .
My brother could get very little precise detail out of them .
Going on along the Strand to Trafalgar Square , the paper in his hand , my brother saw some of the fugitives from West Surrey .
There was a man with his wife and two boys and some articles of furniture in a cart such as greengrocers use .
He was driving from the direction of Westminster Bridge ; and close behind him came a hay waggon with five or six respectable-looking people in it , and some boxes and bundles .
The faces of these people were haggard , and their entire appearance contrasted conspicuously with the Sabbath-best appearance of the people on the omnibuses .
People in fashionable clothing peeped at them out of cabs .
They stopped at the Square as if undecided which way to take , and finally turned eastward along the Strand .
Some way behind these came a man in workday clothes , riding one of those old-fashioned tricycles with a small front wheel .
He was dirty and white in the face .
Up the street came galloping a closed carriage , bursting abruptly into noise at the corner , rising to a clattering climax under the window , and dying away slowly in the distance .
Close on the rear of this came a couple of cabs , the forerunners of a long procession of flying vehicles , going for the most part to Chalk Farm station , where the North-Western special trains were loading up , instead of coming down the gradient into Euston .
Unable from his window to learn what was happening , my brother went down and out into the street , just as the sky between the parapets of the houses grew pink with the early dawn .
The flying people on foot and in vehicles grew more numerous every moment .
`` Black Smoke ! ''
he heard people crying , and again `` Black Smoke ! ''
The contagion of such a unanimous fear was inevitable .
As my brother hesitated on the door-step , he saw another news vender approaching , and got a paper forthwith .
The man was running away with the rest , and selling his papers for a shilling each as he ran -- a grotesque mingling of profit and panic .
As my brother began to realise the import of all these things , he turned hastily to his own room , put all his available money -- some ten pounds altogether -- into his pockets , and went out again into the streets .
At this sight the curate cried faintly in his throat , and began running ; but I knew it was no good running from a Martian , and I turned aside and crawled through dewy nettles and brambles into the broad ditch by the side of the road .
He looked back , saw what I was doing , and turned to join me .
The two halted , the nearer to us standing and facing Sunbury , the remoter being a grey indistinctness towards the evening star , away towards Staines .
Now at the time we could not understand these things , but later I was to learn the meaning of these ominous kopjes that gathered in the twilight .
Each of the Martians , standing in the great crescent I have described , had discharged , by means of the gunlike tube he carried , a huge canister over whatever hill , copse , cluster of houses , or other possible cover for guns , chanced to be in front of him .
Some fired only one of these , some two -- as in the case of the one we had seen ; the one at Ripley is said to have discharged no fewer than five at that time .
These canisters smashed on striking the ground -- they did not explode -- and incontinently disengaged an enormous volume of heavy , inky vapour , coiling and pouring upward in a huge and ebony cumulus cloud , a gaseous hill that sank and spread itself slowly over the surrounding country .
And the touch of that vapour , the inhaling of its pungent wisps , was death to all that breathes .
By midnight the blazing trees along the slopes of Richmond Park and the glare of Kingston Hill threw their light upon a network of black smoke , blotting out the whole valley of the Thames and extending as far as the eye could reach .
And through this two Martians slowly waded , and turned their hissing steam jets this way and that .
They were sparing of the Heat-Ray that night , either because they had but a limited supply of material for its production or because they did not wish to destroy the country but only to crush and overawe the opposition they had aroused .
In the latter aim they certainly succeeded .
Sunday night was the end of the organised opposition to their movements .
After that no body of men would stand against them , so hopeless was the enterprise .
Even the crews of the torpedo-boats and destroyers that had brought their quick-firers up the Thames refused to stop , mutinied , and went down again .
The only offensive operation men ventured upon after that night was the preparation of mines and pitfalls , and even in that their energies were frantic and spasmodic .
One has to imagine , as well as one may , the fate of those batteries towards Esher , waiting so tensely in the twilight .
Survivors there were none .
One may picture the orderly expectation , the officers alert and watchful , the gunners ready , the ammunition piled to hand , the limber gunners with their horses and waggons , the groups of civilian spectators standing as near as they were permitted , the evening stillness , the ambulances and hospital tents with the burned and wounded from Weybridge ; then the dull resonance of the shots the Martians fired , and the clumsy projectile whirling over the trees and houses and smashing amid the neighbouring fields .
So you understand the roaring wave of fear that swept through the greatest city in the world just as Monday was dawning -- the stream of flight rising swiftly to a torrent , lashing in a foaming tumult round the railway stations , banked up into a horrible struggle about the shipping in the Thames , and hurrying by every available channel northward and eastward .
By ten o'clock the police organisation , and by midday even the railway organisations , were losing coherency , losing shape and efficiency , guttering , softening , running at last in that swift liquefaction of the social body .
So he got out of the fury of the panic , and , skirting the Edgware Road , reached Edgware about seven , fasting and wearied , but well ahead of the crowd .
Along the road people were standing in the roadway , curious , wondering .
He was passed by a number of cyclists , some horsemen , and two motor cars .
A mile from Edgware the rim of the wheel broke , and the machine became unridable .
He left it by the roadside and trudged through the village .
There were shops half opened in the main street of the place , and people crowded on the pavement and in the doorways and windows , staring astonished at this extraordinary procession of fugitives that was beginning .
He succeeded in getting some food at an inn .
As my brother 's party went on towards the crossroads to the south of Barnet they saw a woman approaching the road across some fields on their left , carrying a child and with two other children ; and then passed a man in dirty black , with a thick stick in one hand and a small portmanteau in the other .
Then round the corner of the lane , from between the villas that guarded it at its confluence with the high road , came a little cart drawn by a sweating black pony and driven by a sallow youth in a bowler hat , grey with dust .
There were three girls , East End factory girls , and a couple of little children crowded in the cart .
Two men came past them .
Then a dirty woman , carrying a heavy bundle and weeping .
A lost retriever dog , with hanging tongue , circled dubiously round them , scared and wretched , and fled at my brother 's threat .
One man 's hands pressed on the back of another .
My brother stood at the pony 's head .
Irresistibly attracted , he advanced slowly , pace by pace , down the lane .
The carts and carriages crowded close upon one another , making little way for those swifter and more impatient vehicles that darted forward every now and then when an opportunity showed itself of doing so , sending the people scattering against the fences and gates of the villas .
But varied as its composition was , certain things all that host had in common .
There were fear and pain on their faces , and fear behind them .
A tumult up the road , a quarrel for a place in a waggon , sent the whole host of them quickening their pace ; even a man so scared and broken that his knees bent under him was galvanised for a moment into renewed activity .
The heat and dust had already been at work upon this multitude .
Their skins were dry , their lips black and cracked .
They were all thirsty , weary , and footsore .
And amid the various cries one heard disputes , reproaches , groans of weariness and fatigue ; the voices of most of them were hoarse and weak .
Through it all ran a refrain :
`` They are coming , '' said a man on horseback , riding past along the lane .
One of the men came running to my brother .
`` Lord Garrick ! ''
said my brother ; `` the Chief Justice ? ''
`` The water ? ''
Then my brother 's attention was distracted by a bearded , eagle-faced man lugging a small handbag , which split even as my brother's eyes rested on it and disgorged a mass of sovereigns that seemed to break up into separate coins as it struck the ground .
They rolled hither and thither among the struggling feet of men and horses .
The man stopped and looked stupidly at the heap , and the shaft of a cab struck his shoulder and sent him reeling .
He gave a shriek and dodged back , and a cartwheel shaved him narrowly .
Then beyond the bend my brother stopped again .
Miss Elphinstone was white and pale , and her sister-in-law sat weeping , too wretched even to call upon `` George . ''
My brother was horrified and perplexed .
So soon as they had retreated he realised how urgent and unavoidable it was to attempt this crossing .
He turned to Miss Elphinstone , suddenly resolute .
Of the falling of the fifth cylinder I have presently to tell .
The sixth star fell at Wimbledon .
My brother , keeping watch beside the women in the chaise in a meadow , saw the green flash of it far beyond the hills .
On Tuesday the little party , still set upon getting across the sea , made its way through the swarming country towards Colchester .
The news that the Martians were now in possession of the whole of London was confirmed .
They had been seen at Highgate , and even , it was said , at Neasden .
But they did not come into my brother 's view until the morrow .
The sun sank into grey clouds , the sky flushed and darkened , the evening star trembled into sight .
It was deep twilight when the captain cried out and pointed .
My brother strained his eyes .
Something rushed up into the sky out of the greyness -- rushed slantingly upward and very swiftly into the luminous clearness above the clouds in the western sky ; something flat and broad , and very large , that swept round in a vast curve , grew smaller , sank slowly , and vanished again into the grey mystery of the night .
And as it flew it rained down darkness upon the land .
I suppose it was nearly eleven o'clock before we gathered courage to start again , no longer venturing into the road , but sneaking along hedgerows and through plantations , and watching keenly through the darkness , he on the right and I on the left , for the Martians , who seemed to be all about us .
In one place we blundered upon a scorched and blackened area , now cooling and ashen , and a number of scattered dead bodies of men , burned horribly about the heads and trunks but with their legs and boots mostly intact ; and of dead horses , fifty feet , perhaps , behind a line of four ripped guns and smashed gun carriages .
Our situation was so strange and incomprehensible that for three or four hours , until the dawn came , we scarcely moved .
And then the light filtered in , not through the window , which remained black , but through a triangular aperture between a beam and a heap of broken bricks in the wall behind us .
The interior of the kitchen we now saw greyly for the first time .
Abruptly the right interpretation dawned upon my mind .
`` God have mercy upon us ! ''
I heard him presently whimpering to himself .
I touched the curate 's leg , and he started so violently that a mass of plaster went sliding down outside and fell with a loud impact .
I gripped his arm , fearing he might cry out , and for a long time we crouched motionless .
Then I turned to see how much of our rampart remained .
The detachment of the plaster had left a vertical slit open in the debris , and by raising myself cautiously across a beam I was able to see out of this gap into what had been overnight a quiet suburban roadway .
Vast , indeed , was the change that we beheld .
The cylinder was already opened in the centre of the pit , and on the farther edge of the pit , amid the smashed and gravel-heaped shrubbery , one of the great fighting-machines , deserted by its occupant , stood stiff and tall against the evening sky .
At first I scarcely noticed the pit and the cylinder , although it has been convenient to describe them first , on account of the extraordinary glittering mechanism I saw busy in the excavation , and on account of the strange creatures that were crawling slowly and painfully across the heaped mould near it .
I recall particularly the illustration of one of the first pamphlets to give a consecutive account of the war .
The artist had evidently made a hasty study of one of the fighting-machines , and there his knowledge ended .
He presented them as tilted , stiff tripods , without either flexibility or subtlety , and with an altogether misleading monotony of effect .
The pamphlet containing these renderings had a considerable vogue , and I mention them here simply to warn the reader against the impression they may have created .
They were no more like the Martians I saw in action than a Dutch doll is like a human being .
To my mind , the pamphlet would have been much better without them .
And this was the sum of the Martian organs .
Strange as it may seem to a human being , all the complex apparatus of digestion , which makes up the bulk of our bodies , did not exist in the Martians .
They were heads -- merely heads .
Entrails they had none .
They did not eat , much less digest .
Instead , they took the fresh , living blood of other creatures , and _injected_ it into their own veins .
I have myself seen this being done , as I shall mention in its place .
But , squeamish as I may seem , I can not bring myself to describe what I could not endure even to continue watching .
Let it suffice to say , blood obtained from a still living animal , in most cases from a human being , was run directly by means of a little pipette into the recipient canal .
The bare idea of this is no doubt horribly repulsive to us , but at the same time I think that we should remember how repulsive our carnivorous habits would seem to an intelligent rabbit .
The physiological advantages of the practice of injection are undeniable , if one thinks of the tremendous waste of human time and energy occasioned by eating and the digestive process .
Our bodies are half made up of glands and tubes and organs , occupied in turning heterogeneous food into blood .
The digestive processes and their reaction upon the nervous system sap our strength and colour our minds .
Men go happy or miserable as they have healthy or unhealthy livers , or sound gastric glands .
But the Martians were lifted above all these organic fluctuations of mood and emotion .
In three other points their physiology differed strangely from ours .
Their organisms did not sleep , any more than the heart of man sleeps .
Since they had no extensive muscular mechanism to recuperate , that periodical extinction was unknown to them .
They had little or no sense of fatigue , it would seem .
On earth they could never have moved without effort , yet even to the last they kept in action .
In twenty-four hours they did twenty-four hours of work , as even on earth is perhaps the case with the ants .
The oscillatory motion was imparted to this by one tentacle of the handling-machine .
With two spatulate hands the handling-machine was digging out and flinging masses of clay into the pear-shaped receptacle above , while with another arm it periodically opened a door and removed rusty and blackened clinkers from the middle part of the machine .
Another steely tentacle directed the powder from the basin along a ribbed channel towards some receiver that was hidden from me by the mound of bluish dust .
From this unseen receiver a little thread of green smoke rose vertically into the quiet air .
As I looked , the handling-machine , with a faint and musical clinking , extended , telescopic fashion , a tentacle that had been a moment before a mere blunt projection , until its end was hidden behind the mound of clay .
In another second it had lifted a bar of white aluminium into sight , untarnished as yet , and shining dazzlingly , and deposited it in a growing stack of bars that stood at the side of the pit .
Between sunset and starlight this dexterous machine must have made more than a hundred such bars out of the crude clay , and the mound of bluish dust rose steadily until it topped the side of the pit .
I slid down the rubbish , struggled to my feet , clapped my hands over my ears , and bolted into the scullery .
The curate , who had been crouching silently with his arms over his head , looked up as I passed , cried out quite loudly at my desertion of him , and came running after me .
It was on the sixth day of our imprisonment that I peeped for the last time , and presently found myself alone .
Instead of keeping close to me and trying to oust me from the slit , the curate had gone back into the scullery .
I was struck by a sudden thought .
I went back quickly and quietly into the scullery .
In the darkness I heard the curate drinking .
I snatched in the darkness , and my fingers caught a bottle of burgundy .
On the eighth day he began to talk aloud instead of whispering , and nothing I could do would moderate his speech .
I put out my hand and felt the meat chopper hanging to the wall .
In a flash I was after him .
I was fierce with fear .
Before he was halfway across the kitchen I had overtaken him .
With one last touch of humanity I turned the blade back and struck him with the butt .
He went headlong forward and lay stretched on the ground .
I stumbled over him and stood panting .
In the darkness I could just see the thing -- like an elephant's trunk more than anything else -- waving towards me and touching and examining the wall , coals , wood and ceiling .
It was like a black worm swaying its blind head to and fro .
Once , even , it touched the heel of my boot .
I was on the verge of screaming ; I bit my hand .
For a time the tentacle was silent .
I could have fancied it had been withdrawn .
Presently , with an abrupt click , it gripped something -- I thought it had me !
-- and seemed to go out of the cellar again .
For a minute I was not sure .
Apparently it had taken a lump of coal to examine .
While I was still doubtful , it rapped smartly against the cellar door and closed it .
I heard it go into the pantry , and the biscuit-tins rattled and a bottle smashed , and then came a heavy bump against the cellar door .
Then silence that passed into an infinity of suspense .
On the twelfth day my throat was so painful that , taking the chance of alarming the Martians , I attacked the creaking rain-water pump that stood by the sink , and got a couple of glassfuls of blackened and tainted rain water .
I was greatly refreshed by this , and emboldened by the fact that no enquiring tentacle followed the noise of my pumping .
I listened -- I was not deaf -- but certainly the pit was still .
I heard a sound like the flutter of a bird 's wings , and a hoarse croaking , but that was all .
Slowly I thrust myself out through the red weed , and stood upon the mound of rubble .
I could see in any direction save behind me , to the north , and neither Martians nor sign of Martians were to be seen .
The pit dropped sheerly from my feet , but a little way along the rubbish afforded a practicable slope to the summit of the ruins .
My chance of escape had come .
I began to tremble .
But so soon as this strangeness had been realised it passed , and my dominant motive became the hunger of my long and dismal fast .
In the direction away from the pit I saw , beyond a red-covered wall , a patch of garden ground unburied .
This gave me a hint , and I went knee-deep , and sometimes neck-deep , in the red weed .
The density of the weed gave me a reassuring sense of hiding .
The wall was some six feet high , and when I attempted to clamber it I found I could not lift my feet to the crest .
So I went along by the side of it , and came to a corner and a rockwork that enabled me to get to the top , and tumble into the garden I coveted .
Here I found some young onions , a couple of gladiolus bulbs , and a quantity of immature carrots , all of which I secured , and , scrambling over a ruined wall , went on my way through scarlet and crimson trees towards Kew -- it was like walking through an avenue of gigantic blood drops -- possessed with two ideas : to get more food , and to limp , as soon and as far as my strength permitted , out of this accursed unearthly region of the pit .
I thought , surveying him .
`` It is you , '' said he ; `` the man from Woking .
And you were n't killed at Weybridge ? ''
`` Yes , '' he said , `` fly . ''
`` It 's all over , '' he said .
`` They 've lost _one_ -- just _one_ .
And they've made their footing good and crippled the greatest power in the world .
They 've walked over us .
The death of that one at Weybridge was an accident .
And these are only pioneers .
They kept on coming .
These green stars -- I 've seen none these five or six days , but I 've no doubt they 're falling somewhere every night .
Nothing 's to be done .
We 're beat ! ''
he said , with his eyes shining .
`` I 've thought it out , eh ? ''
`` No , '' I cried , `` that 's impossible !
No human being -- -- ''
`` If they come after me , '' he said ; `` Lord , if they come after me ! ''
and subsided into a grim meditation .
`` Oh , one ca n't always work , '' he said , and in a flash I saw the man plain .
He hesitated , holding his spade .
`` We ought to reconnoitre now , '' he said , `` because if any come near they may hear the spades and drop upon us unawares . ''
After an interminable string of games , we supped , and the artilleryman finished the champagne .
We went on smoking the cigars .
He was no longer the energetic regenerator of his species I had encountered in the morning .
He was still optimistic , but it was a less kinetic , a more thoughtful optimism .
I remember he wound up with my health , proposed in a speech of small variety and considerable intermittence .
I took a cigar , and went upstairs to look at the lights of which he had spoken that blazed so greenly along the Highgate hills .
After I had parted from the artilleryman , I went down the hill , and by the High Street across the bridge to Fulham .
The red weed was tumultuous at that time , and nearly choked the bridge roadway ; but its fronds were already whitened in patches by the spreading disease that presently removed it so swiftly .
Here I came once more upon the black powder in the streets and upon dead bodies .
I saw altogether about a dozen in the length of the Fulham Road .
They had been dead many days , so that I hurried quickly past them .
The black powder covered them over , and softened their outlines .
One or two had been disturbed by dogs .
In South Kensington the streets were clear of dead and of black powder .
It was near South Kensington that I first heard the howling .
It crept almost imperceptibly upon my senses .
It was a sobbing alternation of two notes , `` Ulla , ulla , ulla , ulla , '' keeping on perpetually .
When I passed streets that ran northward it grew in volume , and houses and buildings seemed to deaden and cut it off again .
It came in a full tide down Exhibition Road .
I stopped , staring towards Kensington Gardens , wondering at this strange , remote wailing .
It was as if that mighty desert of houses had found a voice for its fear and solitude .
I awoke to find that dismal howling still in my ears , `` Ulla , ulla , ulla , ulla . ''
It was now dusk , and after I had routed out some biscuits and a cheese in the bar -- there was a meat safe , but it contained nothing but maggots -- I wandered on through the silent residential squares to Baker Street -- Portman Square is the only one I can name -- and so came out at last upon Regent 's Park .
And as I emerged from the top of Baker Street , I saw far away over the trees in the clearness of the sunset the hood of the Martian giant from which this howling proceeded .
I was not terrified .
I came upon him as if it were a matter of course .
I watched him for some time , but he did not move .
He appeared to be standing and yelling , for no reason that I could discover .
I turned and looked down the slope of the hill to where , enhaloed now in birds , stood those other two Martians that I had seen overnight , just as death had overtaken them .
The one had died , even as it had been crying to its companions ; perhaps it was the last to die , and its voice had gone on perpetually until the force of its machinery was exhausted .
They glittered now , harmless tripod towers of shining metal , in the brightness of the rising sun .
All about the pit , and saved as by a miracle from everlasting destruction , stretched the great Mother of Cities .
Those who have only seen London veiled in her sombre robes of smoke can scarcely imagine the naked clearness and beauty of the silent wilderness of houses .
And now comes the strangest thing in my story .
Yet , perhaps , it is not altogether strange .
I remember , clearly and coldly and vividly , all that I did that day until the time that I stood weeping and praising God upon the summit of Primrose Hill .
And then I forget .
I followed them to my study , and found lying on my writing-table still , with the selenite paper weight upon it , the sheet of work I had left on the afternoon of the opening of the cylinder .
For a space I stood reading over my abandoned arguments .
It was a paper on the probable development of Moral Ideas with the development of the civilising process ; and the last sentence was the opening of a prophecy : `` In about two hundred years , '' I had written , `` we may expect -- -- '' The sentence ended abruptly .
I remembered my inability to fix my mind that morning , scarcely a month gone by , and how I had broken off to get my _Daily Chronicle_ from the newsboy .
I remembered how I went down to the garden gate as he came along , and how I had listened to his odd story of `` Men from Mars . ''
And there , amazed and afraid , even as I stood amazed and afraid , were my cousin and my wife -- my wife white and tearless .
She gave a faint cry .
The results of an anatomical examination of the Martians , so far as the prowling dogs had left such an examination possible , I have already given .
But everyone is familiar with the magnificent and almost complete specimen in spirits at the Natural History Museum , and the countless drawings that have been made from it ; and beyond that the interest of their physiology and structure is purely scientific .
The broadening of men 's views that has resulted can scarcely be exaggerated .
Before the cylinder fell there was a general persuasion that through all the deep of space no life existed beyond the petty surface of our minute sphere .
Now we see further .
If the Martians can reach Venus , there is no reason to suppose that the thing is impossible for men , and when the slow cooling of the sun makes this earth uninhabitable , as at last it must do , it may be that the thread of life that has begun here will have streamed out and caught our sister planet within its toils .
{ Lines from Second Edition only . }
[ The publication of a second and revised edition of this Part affords the author an opportunity of expressing his sense of the general kindliness of his reviewers , and the help they have him in improving this maiden effort .
To no one is there vouchsafed such a facility in the discovery of errors in a book as to its author , so soon as it has passed beyond his power of correction .
Hence the general tone of encouragement ( and in some cases the decided approval ) of the members of this termination to a period of considerable remorse and apprehension . ]
_External Form and General Considerations._
We may note here the meaning of certain terms we shall be constantly employing .
The head end of the rabbit is anterior , the tail end posterior , the backbone side of the body -- the upper side in life -- is dorsal , the breast and belly side , the lower side of the animal , is ventral .
If we imagine the rabbit sawn asunder , as it were , by a plane passing through the head and tail , that would be the median plane , and parts on either side of it are lateral , and left or right according as they lie to the animal 's left or right .
In a limb , or in the internal organs , the part nearest the central organ , or axis , is proximal , the more remote or terminal parts are distal .
For instance , the mouth is anteriorly placed , the tongue on its ventral wall ; the tongue is median , the eyes are lateral , and the fingers are distal to the elbow .
The student must accustom himself to these words , and avoid , in his descriptions , the use of such terms as `` above , '' `` below , '' `` outside , '' which vary with the position in which we conceive the animal placed .
Figure 1 represents the general anatomy of the rabbit , but is especially intended to show the alimentary ( = food ) canal , shortened to a certain extent , and with the proportions altered , in order to avoid any confusing complications .
It is evidently simply a coiled tube -- coiled for the sake of packing -- with occasional dilatations , and with one side-shunt , the caecum ( cae . )
, into which the food enters , and is returned to the main line , after probably absorbent action , imperfectly understood at present .
A spiral fold in this cul-de-sac { bottom-of-sack } , which is marked externally by constrictions , has a directive influence on the circulation of its contents .
The student should sketch Figure 1 once or twice , and make himself familiar with the order and names of the parts before proceeding .
We have , in succession , the mouth ( M. ) , separated from the nasal passage ( Na . )
above the palate ; the pharynx ( ph . )
, where the right and left nasal passages open by the posterior nares into the mouth ; the oesophagus ( oes . )
; the bag-like stomach , its left ( Section 6 ) end being called the cardiac ( cd.st . )
, and its right the pyloric end ( py . )
; the U-shaped duodenum ( ddnm . )
and the very long and greatly coiled ileum ( il. )
The duodenum and ileum together form the small intestine ; and the ileum is dilated at its distal end into a thick-walled sacculus rotundus ( s.r . )
, beyond which point comes the large intestine .
The colon ( co. ) and rectum ( r. ) continue the main line of the alimentary canal ; but , at the beginning of the large intestine , there is also inserted a great side-shunt , the caecum ( cae . )
, ending blindly in a fleshy vermiform appendix ( v.ap. )
The figure will indicate how the parts are related better than any verbal description can .
Between the coiling alimentary tube and the body walls is a space , into which the student cuts when he begins dissecting ; this is the peritoneal cavity ( pt. )
A thin , transparent membrane , the mesentery , holds the intestines in place , and binds them to the dorsal wall of this peritoneal space .
Emulsified fats pass into the chyle .
Water and diffusible salts certainly pass into the vein .
The course taken by the peptones is uncertain , but Professor Foster favours the chyle in the case of the rabbit -- the student should read his Text-book of Physiology , Part 2 , Chapter 1 , Section 11 , if interested in the further discussion of this question .
flat round discs , without a nucleus , the red corpuscles ( r.c . )
, greatly more numerous than the white .
The heart of the rabbit is divided by partitions into four chambers : two upper thin-walled ones , the auricles ( au . )
, and two lower ones , both , and especially the left , with very muscular walls , the ventricles ( vn. )
The right ventricle ( r.vn . )
and auricle ( r.au . )
communicate , and the left ventricle ( l.vn . )
and auricle ( l.au . )
The blood coming from all parts of the body , partly robbed of its oxygen and containing much carbon dioxide and other katastases , enters the right auricle of the heart through three great veins , the median vena cava inferior from the posterior parts of the body , and the paired venae cavae superiores from the anterior .
With the beating of the heart , described below , it is forced into the right ventricle and from there through the pulmonary artery ( p.a . )
seen in the figure passing under the loop of the aorta ( ao . )
Between the final branches of the arteries and the first fine factors of the veins , and joining them , come the systemic capillaries .
These smallest and ultimate ramifications of the circulation penetrate every living part of the animal , so that if we could isolate the vascular system we should have the complete form of the rabbit in a closely-meshed network .
It is in the capillaries that the exchange of gases occurs and that nutritive material passes out to the tissues and katastases in from them ; they are the essential factor in the circulatory system of the mammal -- veins , arteries , and heart simply exist to remove and replace their contents .
The details of the branching of the pulmonary artery and the pulmonary veins need not detain us now .
( a ) by the portal veins portal veins and
( b ) by the thoracic duct and left superior cava .
-Air_ { Nitrogen ... returned unchanged . }
{ Oxygen ... through Pulmonary Vein to -- } { see 3 . }
{ Left side of heart ; whence to Systemic Arteries and Capillaries . }
The liver is the most complicated gland in the body ( Figure X. )
The bile duct ( b.d . )
branches again and again , and ends at last in the final pits , the lobuli ( lb . )
, which are lined with secretory epithelium , and tightly packed , and squeeze each other into polygonal forms .
The blood supply from which the bile would appear to be mainly extracted , is brought by the portal vein , but this blood is altogether unfit for the nutrition of the liver tissue ; for this latter purpose a branch of the coeliac artery , the hepatic serves .
Hence in the tissue of the liver we have , branching and interweaving among the lobuli , the small branches of the bile duct ( b.d . )
, which carries away the bile formed , the portal vein ( p.v . )
, the hepatic artery ( h.a . )
, and the hepatic vein ( h.v. )
( Compare Section 45 . )
Figure X.b shows a lobule ; the portal vein and the artery ramify round the lobules -- are inter-lobular , that is ( inter , between ) ; the hepatic vein begins in the middle of the lobules ( intra-lobular ) , and receives their blood .
( Compare X.a . )
Besides its function in the manufacture of the excretory , digestive , and auxiliary bile , the liver performs other duties .
It appears to act as an inspector of the assimilation material brought in by the portal vein .
The villi , for instance , will absorb arsenic , but this is arrested and thrown down in the liver .
A third function is the formation of what would seem to be a store of carbo-hydrate , glycogen , mainly it would appear , from the sugar in the portal vein , though also , very probably , from nitrogenous material , though this may occur only under exceptional conditions .
Finally , the nitrogenous katastates , formed in the working of muscle and nerve , and returned by them to the blood for excretion , are not at that stage in the form of urea .
Whatever form they assume , they undergo a further metabolism into urea before leaving the body , and the presence of considerable quantities of this latter substance in the liver suggests this as a fourth function of this organ -- the elaboration of urea .
Similar from a physiological point of view , to the secretory glands which form the digestive fluids are those which furnish lubricating fluids , the lachrymal gland , and Harderian glands in the orbit internally to the eye , and posterior and anterior to it respectively , the sebaceous glands ( oil glands ) connected with the hair , and the anal and perineal glands .
The secretions of excretory glands are removed from the body ; chief among them are the sweat glands and kidneys .
The sweat glands are microscopic tubular glands , terminating internally in a small coil ( Figure VIII .
s.g. ) and are scattered thickly over the body , the water of their secretion being constantly removed by evaporation , and the small percentage of salt and urea remaining to accumulate as dirt , and the chief reasonable excuse for washing .
The kidney structure is shown diagrammatically in Figure 5 , Sheet 7 .
A great number of branching and straight looped , tubuli ( little tubes ) converge on an open space , the pelvis .
Towards the outer layers ( cortex ) of the kidney , these tubuli terminate in little dilatations into which tangled knots of blood-vessels project : the dilatations are called Bowman 's capsules ( B.c . )
, and each coil of bloodvessel a glomerulus ( gl. )
In the capsules , water is drained from the blood ; in the tubuli , urea and other salts in the urine are secreted from a branching network of vessels .
Within the connective tissue cells fat drops may be formed , as in Figure XV .
Adipose tissue is simply connective tissue loaded with fat-distended cells .
The tissue is , of course , a store form of hydro-carbon ( Section 17 ) provided against the possible misadventure of starvation .
With the exception of some hybernating animals , such store forms would seem to be of accidental importance only among animals , whereas among plants they are of invariable and necessary occurrence .
We now come to Bone , a tissue confined to the vertebrata , and typically shown only in the higher types .
As we descend in the scale from birds and mammals to lizards , amphibia ( frogs and toads ) and fish , we find cartilage continually more important , and the bony constituent of the skeleton correspondingly less so .
In such a type as the dog-fish , the skeleton is entirely cartilaginous , bone only occurs in connection with the animal's scales ; it must have been in connection with scales that bone first appeared in the vertebrate sub-kingdom .
In the frog we have a cartilaginous skeleton overlaid by numerous bony scutes ( shield-like plates ) which , when the student comes to study that type , he will perceive are equivalent to the bony parts of such scales as occur in the dog-fish , sunk inward , and plating over the cartilage ; and in the frog the cartilage also is itself , in a few places , replaced by bony tissue .
In the adult rabbit these two kinds of bone , the bone overlying what was originally cartilage ( membrane bone ) , and the bone replacing the cartilage ( cartilage bone ) have , between them , practically superseded the cartilage altogether .
The structure of the most characteristic kind of bone will be understood by reference to Figure XVI .
It is a simplified diagram of the transverse section of such a bone as the thigh bone .
is the central marrow cavity , H.v.
are cross sections of small bloodvessels , the Haversian vessels running more or less longitudinally through , the bone in canals , the Haversian canals .
Arranged round these vessels are circles of the formative elements , the bone corpuscles or osteoblasts ( b.c . )
each embedded in bony matrix in a little bed , the lacuna , and communicating one with another by fine processes through canaliculi in the matrix , which processes are only to be seen clearly in decalcified bone ( See Section 70 ) .
The osteoblasts are arranged in concentric series , and the matrix is therefore in concentric layers , or lamellae ( c.l. )
Without and within the zone of Haversian systems are ( o.l .
, the outer and inner lamellae .
The bone is surrounded by connective tissue , the periosteum .
In addition to this compact bone , there is a lighter and looser variety in which spicules and bars of bony tissue are loosely interwoven .
Many flat bones , the bones of the skull , for instance , consist of this spongy bone , plated ( as an electro spoon is plated ) with compact bone .
The matrix of bone differs from that of cartilage or of most other tissues in consisting chiefly of inorganic salts .
The chief of these is calcium phosphate , with which much smaller quantities of calcium carbonate , and magnesium phosphate and carbonate occur .
These inorganic salts can be removed by immersion of the bone in weak hydrochloric acid , and a flexible network of connecting tissue , Haversian vessels , bone corpuscles , and their processes remains .
This is decalcified bone alluded to above .
We may take the skeleton under five headings .
There is the central axis , the chain of little bones , the vertebrae , threaded on the spinal cord ( see Figure 1 and Section 1 ) ; the thorax , the box enclosed by ribs and sternum ; the fore-limb and bones connected with it ( pectoral girdle and limb ) , and the hind-limb and bones connected with it ( pelvic girdle ) .
Finally there is the skull , but following the London University syllabus , we shall substitute the skull of the dog for of that of the rabbit , as more typically mammalian ( Section 4 ) .
All the vertebrae join with their adjacent fellows through the intermediation of certain intervertebral pads , and also articulate by small processes at either end at the upper side of the arch , the zygapophyses .
The normals to the polished facets of these point , in the case of the anterior zygapophyses , up and in ( mnemonic : ant-up-in ) , and in the case of the posterior , down and out .
The student should make this , and the other features of vertebrae , out upon actual specimens .
The thorax is bounded dorsally by the vertebral column , and ventrally by the sternum .
The sternum consists of segments , the sternebrae ( st. ) ; anteriorly there is a bony manubrium ( mb . )
, posteriorly a thin cartilaginous plate , the xiphisternum ( xi. )
Seven pairs of ribs articulate by cartilaginous ends ( sternal ribs ) with the sternum directly , as indicated in the figure ; five ( false ) ribs are joined , to each other and to the seventh , and not to the sternum directly .
The last four ribs have no tuberculum ( Section 77 ) .
The pelvic girdle differs from the pectoral in most land vertebrata in being articulated with the vertebral column .
This difference does not exist in fishes .
It consist in the rabbit of four bones ; the ilium ( i . )
, the ischium ( is . )
, the pubis ( pb . )
, and the small cotyloid bone -- the first two and the latter one meeting in the acetabular fossa ( ac . )
in which the head of the femur works .
The pubes and ischia are fused along the mid-ventral line .
Many morphologists regard , the ilium as equivalent to , that is , strictly corresponding in its relation , to the scapula , the pubis to the cartilaginous substratum of the clavicle , and the ischium to the coracoid .
The following table presents these bones in something like their relative positions .
A closer approximation to the state of the case will be reached if the student will imagine the maxilla raised up so as to overlie and hide the palatine and presphenoid , the squamosal similarly overlying the periotic bone , and the jugal reaching between them .
Membrane bones are distinguished by capital letters .
Hidden by the bulla , and just external to the periotic bone , are the auditory ossicles , the incus , malleus , os orbiculare , and stapes .
These will be more explicitly treated when we discuss the ear .
In striated muscle extensive modifications mask the cell character .
Under a 1/4 inch objective , transverse striations of the fibres are also distinctly visible , and under a much higher power we discern in a fibre ( Sheet 7 ) transverse columns of rod-like sarcous elements ( s.e . )
, the columns separated by lines of dots , the membranes of Krause ( k.m . )
, and nuclei ( n. ) , flattened and separated into portions , and lying , in some cases , close to the sarcolemma ( sc . )
the connective tissue enclosing the fibre , in others scattered throughout the substance of the fibre .
The figure shows the fibre ruptured , in order to display the sarcolemma ; e.p .
is the end plate of a nerve ( n.v. ) , and fb .
are the fibrillae into which a fibre may be teased .
Unstriated muscle is sometimes called involuntary , and striated , voluntary muscle ; but there is really not the connexion with the will that these terms suggest .
We have just mentioned that the heart-muscle is striated , but who can alter the beating of the heart by force of will ?
And the striated muscles of the limbs perform , endless involuntary acts .
It would seem that unstriated muscle contracts slowly , and we find it especially among the viscera ; in the intestine for instance , where it controls that `` peristaltic '' movement which pushes the food forward .
Voluntary muscle , on the other hand , has a sharp contraction .
The muscle of the slow-moving snails , slugs , and mussels is unstriated ; all the muscle of the active insects and crustacea ( crabs , lobsters , and crayfish ) is striated .
Still if the student bears the exception of the heart in mind , and considers muscles as `` voluntary '' that his will can reach , the terms voluntary and involuntary will serve to give him an idea of the distribution of these two types of muscle in his own body , and in that of the rabbit .
The primary elements in the tissue of the nervous system are three ; nerve fibres , which are simply conducting threads , telegraph wires ; ganglion cells , which are the officials of the system ; and neuroglia , a fine variety of connective tissue which holds these other elements together , and may also possibly exercise a function in affecting impressions .
A message along a nerve to a ganglion cell is an afferent impression , from a cell to a muscle or other external end is an efferent impression .
The passage of an impression may be defined as a flash of kataboly along the nerve , and so every feeling , thought , and determination involves the formation of a certain quantity of katastases , and the necessity for air and nutrition .
The impressions of smell are conducted through the first nerve to the brain , and are first received by special hair-bearing cells in the olfactory mucous membrane of the upper part of the nasal passage .
The sense of taste has a special nerve in the ninth , the fibres of which terminate in special cells and cell aggregates in the little papillae ( velvet pile-like processes ) that cover the tongue .
Proceeding from the brain are twelve pairs of cranial nerves .
From the fore-brain spring two pairs , which differ from the rest of the cranial nerves in being , first of all , hollow outgrowths of the brain -- the others are from the beginning solid .
The first nerve is the olfactory lobe , which sends numerous filaments through the ethmoid bone to the olfactory organ .
The second is the optic nerve , the visual sensory nerve .
The rabbit is one of the vertebrata , and , in common with all the other animals collected under this head , it has --
* The frog shows indications of a sixth digit .
** The frog 's tadpole has a median fin , but no fin rays .
The meaning of ( b ) and ( c ) we shall explain to the student in the chapters on embryology .
We simply mention them here to render our table complete .
[ ( h ) A corpus callosum . ]
[ ( i ) A spirally coiled cochlea to the internal ear . ]
[ ( In respect to h and i also , the echidna and platypus are scarcely mammalinan . )
Describe the rabbit 's brain ( with diagrams ) .
Give a list of the cranial nerves of the rabbit , and note their origin in the brain .
Describe the structure of ( a ) blood , ( b ) hyaline cartilage , ( c ) bone , in the rabbit ; ( d ) point out the most important resemblances and differences between these tissues ; ( e ) state what you know of the development of the same tissues .
Dissect the rabbit provided so as to expose the abdominal viscera .
Mark with flag-labels the duct of the pancreas , the ureters , and the oviducts or the sperm ducts ( as the case may be ) .
[ Many of the above questions were actually set at London University Examinations in Biology . ]
{ In Both Editions . }
If we now compare the general anatomy of the frog ( vide Sheet 11 ) with that of the rabbit , we notice that the diaphragm is absent ( Rabbit , Section 4 ) , and the body cavity , or coelom , is , with the exception of the small bag of the pericardium round the heart , one continuous space .
The forked tongue is attached in front of the lower jaw , and can be flicked out and back with great rapidity in the capture of the small insects upon which the frog lives .
The posterior nares open into the front of the mouth -- there is no long nasal chamber , and no palate , and there is no long trachea between the epiglottis and the lungs .
The oesophagus is less distinct , and passes gradually , so far as external appearances go , into the bag-like stomach , which is much less inflated and transverse than that of the rabbit .
The duodenum is not a U-shaped loop , but makes one together with the stomach ; the pancreas lies between it and the stomach , and is more compact than the rabbit 's .
There is no separate pancreatic duct , but the bile duct runs through the pancreas , and receives a series of ducts from that gland as it does so .
The ileum is shorter , there is no sacculus rotundus , and the large intestine has no caecum , none of the characteristic sacculations of the rabbit 's colon , and does not loop back to the stomach before the rectum section commences .
The anus opens not upon the exterior , but into a cloacal chamber .
The urinary and genital ducts open separately into this cloaca , and dorsally and posteriorly to the anus .
The so-called urinary bladder is ventral to the intestine , in a position answering to that of the rabbit , but it has no connection with the ureters , and it is two-horned .
The spleen is a small , round body , not so intimately bound to the stomach as in the rabbit , but in essentially the same position .
Much that we knew of the physiology of the frog is arrived at mainly by inferences from our mammalian knowledge .
Its histology is essentially similar .
Ciliated epithelium is commoner and occurs more abundantly than in the rabbit , in the roof of the mouth for instance , and its red blood corpuscles are much larger , oval , and nucleated .
{ Lines from Second Edition only . }
[ The venous return to the heart , as in the rabbit , is by paired venae cavae anteriores and by a single vena cava inferior .
The factors of the anterior cava on either side are an external jugular ( ex.j . )
an innominate vein ( in.v . )
and subclavian ( scl.v. )
The last receives not only the brachial vein ( b.v. ) from the fore limb , but also a large vein bringing blood for the skin , the cutaneous ( p.v. )
The innominate vein has also two chief factors , the internal jugular ( l.i.j.v . )
and the subscapular ( s.s.v. )
The blood returns from each hind limb by a sciatic ( l.sc . )
or femoral ( f.m . )
vein , and either passes to a renal portal vein ( l.r.p . )
, which breaks into capillaries in the kidney , or by a paired pelvic vein ( l.p.v .
in Figures 1 and 3 ) which meets its fellow in the middle line to form the anterior abdominal vein ( a.ab.v . )
going forward and uniting with the ( median ) portal vein ( p.v . )
to enter the liver . ]
-The vessels are named in the references to the figure , which should be carefully copied and mastered .
Here we need only- [ Comparing with the rabbit , we would especially ] call attention to the fact that the vena cava inferior extends posteriorly only to the kidney , and that there is a renal portal system .
The blood from the hind limbs either flows by the anterior abdominal vein to the portal vein and liver , or it passes by the renal portal vein to the kidney .
There the vein breaks up , and we find in the frog 's kidney , just as we find in the frog 's and rabbit 's liver , a triple system of ( a ) nutritive arterial , ( b ) afferent* venous and ( c ) efferent** venous vessels .
We have already given a description of the mammalian skull , and we have stated where the origin of the several bones was in membrane , and where in cartilage ; but a more complete comprehension of the mammalian skull becomes possible with the handling of a lower type .
We propose now , first to give some short account of the development and structure of the skull of the frog , and then to show briefly how its development and adult arrangement demonstrate the mammalian skull to be a fundamentally similar structure , complicated and disguised by further development and re-adjustment .
Figure 2 shows a dorsal view of these structures in a young frog .
The parts corresponding to these in 1 , II .
will be easily made out , but now ossification has set in at various points of this cartilaginous cranium .
In front of the otic capsule is the paired pro-otic bone ( p.o . )
; behind it at the sides of the parachordal ring is the paired ex-occipital ( e.o . )
; in front of the cranium box , and behind the nasal capsules , is a ring of bone , the ( median , but originally paired ) sphenethmoid ( s.e. )
-A paired ossification appears in the palato-pterygoid cartilage the pterygoid bone ( pt . )
, while- A splint of bone , the quadrato-jugal , appears at the angle of articulation with the lower jaw .
These are all the cartilage bones that appear in the cranium and upper jaw of the frog .
Turning now to Figure 8 , I. , we have a side view of a tadpole 's skull .
On the ventral side of the head is a series of vertical cartilaginous bars , the visceral arches supporting the walls of the tadpole 's gill slits .
The first of these is called the hyoid arch ( c.h . )
, and the four following this , the first ( br.1 ) , second , third , and fourth ( br.4 ) , branchial arches .
Altogether there are four gill slits and between the hyoid arch and the jaw arch , as it is called ( = Meckel 's cartilage + the palato-pterygoid ) , is `` an imperforate slit , '' which becomes the ear-drum .
* The frog no longer breathes by gills , but by lungs , and the gills are lost , the gill slits closed , and the branchial arches consequently much reduced .
, and 8 , III.
, show stages in this reduction .
The hyoid arch becomes attached , to the otic capsule , and its median ventral plate , including also the vestiges of the first , second , and fourth branchial arches , is called the hyoid apparatus .
In Figure 5 , the apparatus is seen from the side ; c.h .
is called the ( right ) anterior cornu** of the hyoid .
The function of the hyoid apparatus in the frog is to furnish , a basis of attachment to the tongue muscles ; it remains cartilaginous , with the exception of the relic of one branchial arch , which ossifies as the thyro-hyal ( Figure 7 th.h. )
It will be noted that , as development proceeds , the angle of the jaw swings backward , and the hyoid apparatus , shifts relatively forward .
These changes of position are indicated in Figure 8 , III.
, by little arrow-heads .
-Points especially- [ Additional points ] to be noticed are :
( 1 ) The otic capsule ( = periotic bone ) of the dog ossifies from a number of centres , one of which is equivalent to the frog 's prootic .
The skin of the dog-fish is closely set with pointed tooth-like scales , the placoid scales , and these are continued over the lips into the mouth as teeth .
Each scale consists of a base of true bone , with a little tubercle of a harder substance , dentine , capped by a still denser covering , the enamel .
The enamel is derived from the outer layer of the embryonic dog-fish , the epiblast , which also gives rise to the epidermis ; while the dentine and bony base arise in the underlying mesoblast , the dermis .
A mammalian tooth has essentially the same structure : an outer coat of enamel , derived from epiblast , overlies a mass of dentine , resting on bone , but the dentine is excavated internally , to form a pulpcavity containing blood-vessels and nerves .
Most land animals , however , have teeth only in their mouths , and have lost altogether the external teeth which constitute the armour of the dog-fish .
Besides the teeth there perhaps remain relics of the placoid scales in the anatomy of the higher vertebrata , in the membrane bones .
How placoid scales may have given rise to these structures will be understood by considering such a bone as the vomer of the frog .
This bone lies on the roof of the frog 's mouth , and bears a number of denticles , and altogether there is a very strong resemblance in it to a number of placoid scales the bony bases of which have become confluent .
In the salamander , behind the teeth-bearing vomers comes a similar toothed parasphenoid bone .
The same bone occurs in a corresponding position in the frog , but without teeth .
In some tailed amphibians the vomers and splenials are known to arise by the fusion of small denticles .
These facts seem to point to stages in the fusion of placoid bases , and their withdrawal from the surface to become incorporated with the cranial apparatus as membrane bones , a process entirely completed in the mammalian type .
From the bulbus there branch , on either side , four arterial trunks , the first of which forks , so that altogether there are five afferent branchials ( a.br . )
taking blood to be aerated in the gills , here highly vascular filamentary outgrowths of the internal walls of the gill slits .
The fifth nerve , has , in the dog-fish , as in the rabbit , three chief branches .
V.2 and V.3 fork over the mouth just as they do in the mammal ; V.1 passes out of the cranium by a separate and more dorsal opening , and runs along a groove along the dorsal internal wall of the orbit , immediately beneath a similar branch of VII.
, which is not distinct in the rabbit .
The grooves are shown in the figure of the cranium , Sheet 18 ; the joint nerve thus compounded of V. and VII .
is called the ophthalmic ( oph. )
It is distributed to the skin above the nose and orbit .
When the student commences to dissect the head of a dog-fish he notices over the dorsal surface of the snout an exudation of a yellowish jelly-like substance , and on removing the tough skin over this region and over the centre of the skull he finds , lying beneath it , a quantity of coiling simple tubuli full of such yellowish matter .
These tubuli open on the surface by small pores , and the nerves terminate in hair-like extremities in their lining .
These sense tubes are peculiar to aquatic forms ; allied structures are found over the head and along a lateral line ( see below ) in the tadpole , but when the frog emerges from the water they are lost .
They , doubtless , indicate some unknown sense entirely beyond our experience , and either only possible or only necessary when the animal is submerged .
The ninth nerve forks over the first branchial cleft .
( b ) The uro-genital apertures , instead of meeting dorsally and posteriorly to the anus , to shift round that opening and meet anteriorly and ventrically to it .
Describe the auditory organ of the dog-fish .
What parts are added to this in the higher type ?
Having the notochord reaching in front of the brain .
* The anterior end of the notochord in the developing rabbit or dog lies where the middle of the basisphenoid bone is destined to be .
In the next , just above it ( at s.c. ) we find --
{ Lines from First Edition only . }
-When we remember that in the embryonic vertebrate the heart is at first a straight tube , this circulation appears even more strikingly vertebrate in its character than before.-
The method of examining cross-sections is an extremely convenient one in the study of such a type as Amphioxus .
The student should very carefully go over and copy the six sections on Sheet 20 , comparing Figure 1 as he goes .
He should do this before reading what follows .
One little matter must be borne in mind .
These figures are merely intended to convey the great structural ideas , and they are considerably simplified ; they must not be regarded as a substitute for the examination of microscopic sections .
[ He will notice a number of rounded masses from the body wall .
The ] -For instance , the body-wall- muscles of Amphioxus are arranged in bundles bent sharply in an arrow shape , the point forward .
-A number of these bundles are cut in any one section , and so the even shading of our diagrams , if they professed to be anything more than diagrams , should be broken up into masses.- These -bundles , we may mention- , are called myomeres , and they are indicated in Figure 1 by lines pointing acutely forward .
[ Several are consequently cut in any transverse section ( Sheet 20 ) , and these are the rounded masses he sees . ]
Similar myomeres , similarly situated , are found in fish , behind the head , and , less obviously , they occur with diminishing importance as the scale of the vertebrata is ascended .
If we compare the nervous system of amphioxus with that of any vertebrate , we find at once a number of striking differences .
In the first place , the skeletal covering of it , the cranium and the neural arches of vertebrae , are represented only by a greatly simplified connective tissue .
In the next , a simple and slight anterior dilatation alone represents the brain .
A patch of black pigment anterior to this ( e.s . )
may or may not be what its name implies an eye-spot .
There is a ciliated funnel , c.f .
( Figure 1 , Sheet 19 ) , opening on the left side , which has been assumed to be olfactory in its functions , and in the mouth chamber a ciliated pit ( c.p . )
, which may , or may not , be an organ of taste .
The ventral fissure of the spinal cord is absent .
The dorsal nerves are without ganglia , and do not come off in pairs , but alternately , one to the left , then one to the right , one to the left , one to the right , and so on .
The ventral nerves are very short , more numerous than the dorsal , and never unite with these latter to form mixed nerves .
* See Balfour 's Embryology , Volume 2 , and Quarterly Journal of Microscopical Science March , 1891 .
Draw diagrams , with the parts named , of the alimentary canal of ( a ) amphioxus , ( b ) any craniate ; ( c ) indicate very shortly the principal structural differences between the two .
We have now to consider how the body of the frog is built up out of the egg cell , but previously to doing so we must revert to the reproductive organs of our type .
The ovum next begins to divide .
A furrow cutting deeper and deeper divides it into two ; another follows at right angles to this , making the two four , and another equatorial furrow cuts off the animal pole from the yolk or vegetative pole .
( See Sheet 22 , Figures 1 , 2 , and 3 . )
And so segmentation ( = cleavage ) proceeds , and , at last , a hollow sphere , the blastosphere ( Figure 4 ) is formed , with a segmentation cavity ( s.c. ) .
But , because of the presence of the yolk at the vegetative pole of ovum , and of the mechanical resistance it offers to the force of segmentation , the protoplasm there is not nearly so finely divided -- the cells , that is to say , are much larger than at the animal pole .
The blastosphere of the frog is like what the blastosphere of amphioxus would be , if the future hypoblast cells were enormously larger through their protoplasm being diluted with yolk .
The next phase of development has an equally curious resemblance to and difference from what occurs in the case of the ova of animals which do not contain yolk .
In such types ( e.g.
, amphioxus ) a part of the blastosphere wall is tucked into the rest , and a gastrula formed by this process of invagination .
In the frog ( Figure 5 ) there is a tucking-in , but the part that should lie within the gastrula , the yolk-containing cells , are far larger than the epiblast ( ep . )
which should , form the outer layer of cells .
Hence the epiblast can only by continual growth accommodate what it must embrace , and the process of tucking-in is accompanied by one of growth of the epiblast , as shown by the unbarbed arrow , over the yolk .
This stage is called the gastrula stage ; ar .
is the cavity of the gastrula , the archenteron ; b.p .
is its opening or blastopore .
Such a gastrula , formed mainly by overgrowth of the epiblast , is called an epibolic gastrula , as distinguished from the invaginate gastrula of amphioxus .
The difference is evidently entirely due to the presence of yolk , and the consequent modification of invagination in the former case .
The development of the skull is entirely dissimilar to that of the vertebral column .
It is shown on Figures 1 and 8 , Sheet 14 ; and in the section devoted to the frog 's skull a very complete account of the process is given .
The process of ossification is described under the histology of the Rabbit .
In the female , the Mullerian duct increases greatly in length -- so that at sexual maturity its white coils appear thicker and longer than the intestine -- and becomes the oviduct ; the Wolffian duct is the ureter , and the mesonephros is not perverted in function from its primary renal duty .
The idea of this process of change may be perhaps rendered more vivid by giving an imaginary concrete instance of its working .
In the jungles of India , which preserve a state of things which has existed for immemorial years , we find the tiger , his stripes simulating jungle reeds , his noiseless approach learnt from nature in countless millions of lessons of success and failure , his perfectly powerful claws and execution methods ; and , living in the same jungle , and with him as one of the conditions of life , are small deer , alert , swift , light of build , inconspicuous of colour , sharp of hearing , keen-eyed , keen-scented -- because any downward variation from these attributes means swift and certain death .
To capture the deer is a condition , of the tiger 's life , to escape the tiger a condition of the deer 's ; and they play a great contest under these conditions , with life as the stake .
The most alert deer almost always escape ; the least so , perish .
Our little book is the merest beginning in zoology ; we have stated one or two groups of facts and made one or two suggestions .
The great things of the science of Darwin , Huxley , Wallace , and Balfour remain mainly untold .
In the book of nature there are written , for instance , the triumphs of survival , the tragedy of death and extinction , the tragi-comedy of degradation and inheritance , the gruesome lesson of parasitism , and the political satire of colonial organisms .
Zoology is , indeed , a philosophy and a literature to those who can read its symbols .
In the contemplation of beauty of form and of mechanical beauty , and in the intellectual delight of tracing and elucidating relationships and criticising appearances , there is also for many a great reward in zoological study .
With an increasing knowledge of the facts of the form of life , there gradually appears to the student the realization of an entire unity shaped out by their countless , and often beautiful , diversity .
And at last , in the place of the manifoldness of a fair or a marine store , the student of science perceives the infinite variety of one consistent and comprehensive Being -- a realization to which no other study leads him at present so surely .
Describe the structure and cleavage of the ovum ( a ) of the frog , ( b ) of the fowl , and ( c ) of the rabbit .
( d ) Explain as far as possible the differences in the cleavage of these three eggs .
( e ) Point out how the embryo is nourished in each case , and ( f ) describe the constitution of the placenta in the rabbit .
Give a short account , with illustrative figures , of the mode of formation of the primary germinal layers in amphioxus and in the frog .
What explanation can you give of the differences between the two cases ?
[ Most of these questions were actually set at the Biological Examinations of London University . ]
{ In Both Editions . }
Describe the mechanism of respiration in the adult frog , and contrast it with that of the tadpole .
Give a brief account of the physiology of respiration .
Describe fully the means by which respiration is effected in the following animals : -- frog , amphioxus , rabbit , and dog-fish .
Describe the minute structure of the blood of the rabbit , frog , and amphioxus .
Describe , with illustrative sketches , the structure of the connective tissue , cartilage , and muscular tissue of a frog .
Also describe the structure of the muscular tissue of the lobster and snail .
Describe and compare the structure of the renal organs in a frog and a rabbit .
In the frog 's fore-brain --
The pineal gland lies in the cranial wall and not deeply between the hemispheres , and its stalk is longer and tilts forward .
The optic lobes are two , instead of being corpora quadrigemina , and hollow .
The medulla is relatively larger .
The point of attachment of the jaw has shifted outward , and the original suspensorial cartilage ( the quadrate ) has taken on a new and minor function as the incus of the middle ear -- the squamosal superseding it as the suspensory part .
The frog has no lachrymal bone .
( j ) A microscope , with low power of 1 inch or 1/2 inch , and high power 1/6 inch or 1/4 inch .
Glass slips and cover glasses , and a bottle of very weak ( 1 per cent . )
May be killed by drowning in dilute methylated spirit , or by chloroform .
Take a recently-killed frog , and examine a drop of its blood , spread out on a glass slip , under the microscope ; compare it with your own .
Before using the high power , put a cover glass over the object , of course .
Scrape the roof of the mouth of the frog gently , to obtain ciliated epithelium ; and mount in very weak salt solution -- the cilia will still be active .
Squamous epithelium may be seen by the student similarly scraping the interior of his own cheek .
Take a piece of muscle from one of the frog 's limbs , tease out with needles upon a glass slip , and examine .
To see the striations clearly , the high power will be needed .
Compare a piece of muscle from the wall of the alimentary canal .
Similarly examine nerve and connective tissue .
- { Key for Dissection Sheets , and Abbreviations . }
-- n. , nucleus .
c.v. , contractile vacuole .
The kidney , we shall see later , is simply an aggregate of branching tubuli ( Sheet 7 ) .
{ Illustration : Diagram Sheet 5 . }
The Skull of Canis .
Section a little to the left of the nasal septum .
Lower jaw ( smaller ) 6 .
, body of the hyoid .
c. , condyle of the skull .
{ c.1 , c.4 , canines . }
, condylar foramen ( for XII. )
E.f. , Eustachian foramen .
, the anterior nares.- e.o.
, foramen lacerum anterius .
, foramen lacerum medium .
, foramen lacerum posterius ( for IX.
, X. , XI. )
{ i. , incisors . }
p.m.1 , p.m.4 , premolars .
, stylo-mastoid foramen ( for VII. )
, -black line indicating position of- vomer .
, zygomatic process of squamosal .
Striated muscle fibre ( of the Rabbit ) , ruptured to show sarcolemma .
, its end plate .
, membrane of Krause .
The Auditory structures of the Rabbit ( diagram ) .
See text , Section 115 .
The Retina ( diagram ) .
See text , Section 112 .
{ Figures 1-5 . }
, arrow in the iter .
a.c. , the anterior commissure , a thickening of the anterior wall of the third ventricle .
( right ) , flocculus of the cerebellum .
, left cerebral hemisphere ( =ch. )
, lateral lobe of cerebellum .
, ( right ) , optic thalamus .
, posterior commissure ( thickening of postero-dorsal wall of the third ventricle ) .
s.c. , thin roof of the fourth ventricle .
, vermis of cerebrum .
The Spinal Cord in section.
, the central canal .
, the dorsal fissure .
, the dorsal nerve root ; g. , its ganglion .
, the ventral fissure .
, the ventral nerve root .
P. , the penis .
, the scrotal sac , containing these ; r.v.d.
, the right vas deferens .
T. , is the testis .
, the uterus masculinus .
{ Illustration : Diagram Sheet 10 . }
General dissection of Frog ( male ) .
The circulatory system from the side .
, allantoic bladder ( = urinary bladder ) .
, cut end of the right clavicle .
v. , ventricle of heart .
c. , calcar ( ?
= a sixth digit ) .
, clavicle overlying a procoracoid cartilage .
{ Illustration : Diagram Sheet 13 . }
, early and late stages of the Tadpole 's chindrocranium .
Dorsal view of a young Frog 's cranium -- the membrane bones removed .
Figures 3 and 4 .
Dorsal and ventral views , respectively , of the Frog's skull -- the lower jaw removed .
Side view of the Frog 's skull .
Simplified and more typical fish circulation , in which the posterior cardinals have not coalesced in the median line .
The Cuvierian veins = the vena cava superior of the higher type ; the posterior cardinal is represented by the azygos vein in the Rabbit .
Compare Sheet 24 , Figure 7 , and Sheet 2 , Figure 2 .
, afferent branchial artery .
, anterior cardinal sinus ( = internal jugular vein ) .
, atrium ( auricle ) ( = the two auricles of higher forms ) .
a. , caudal artery .
, efferent branchial arteries .
, in position of gill slits .
, inferior jugular sinus ( = external jugular vein ) . ]
, ventral wall of oesophagus . ]
, posterior cardinal sinus .
, inferior ( = external ) jugular vein- .
Skeleton of pectoral limb , and girdle.
-- g. , the girdle ( also in Figure 3 ) .
, its dorsal portion .
{ Illustration : Diagram Sheet 16 . }
, h.c. , anterior , posterior , horizontal canal respectively .
, the ampullae . ]
, the ductus endo-lymphaticus .
, the sacculus ; c. , a small outgrowth of the latter , corresponding to the rabbit 's cochlea- .
Amphioxus , seen from the right side .
a -- -- b shows the natural size .
The animal is supposed to be clarified , and mounted in some highly refracting medium , so that it is practically transparent ; I. , II.
, refer to the section figured on Sheet 20 .
The Roman numerals indicate the corresponding region in Figure 1 , Sheet 19 .
The lettering is identical ; but note , in addition ; br.c.
, dorsal coelomic canal .
, for hepatic vein .
, oral cavity ( or hood ) .
Figures 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 .
Diagrammatic section of a later stage .
, the coelomic pouches .
n.c. , the notochord .
, the neural plate .
-The Development of the Frog_ .
Ventral view of a later tadpole .
-The Development of the Fowl_ .
About the twenty-fifth hour ; surface view ; longitudinal section to right and transverse above .
She _was_ dreaming , and in a sense she was thinking of beautiful things .
She was thinking how very much she would enjoy spending freely and vigorously , quite a considerable amount of money , -- heaps of money .
In another moment Marjorie was out of the train , had done the swift kissing proper to the occasion , and rolled a hand over Toupee's head -- Toupee , who , after a passionate lunge at a particularly savoury drover from the next compartment , was now frantically trying to indicate that Marjorie was the one human being he had ever cared for .
Brother and sister were both sketching out the state of affairs at Buryhamstreet Vicarage in rapid competitive jerks , each eager to tell things first -- and the whole party moved confusedly towards the station exit .
Things pelted into Marjorie 's mind .
`` I 'm all right , old Madge . ''
`` Every one 's all right , '' said Theodore ; `` if it was n't for that damned infernal net -- -- ''
Both sisters conveyed a grave and relentless disapproval .
`` Just as though a fellow could n't understand your kiddy little Italian , '' said Theodore , pulling Toupee 's ear .
`` Old Madge , '' they said ; and then throwing respect to the winds , `` Old Gargoo ! ''
which was Marjorie 's forbidden nickname , and short for gargoyle ( though surely only Victorian Gothic , ever produced a gargoyle that had the remotest right to be associated with the neat brightness of Marjorie 's face ) .
Mrs. Pope kissed her daughter with an air of having really wanted to kiss her half an hour ago , but of having been distracted since .
She was a fine-featured , anxious-looking little woman , with a close resemblance to all her children , in spite of the fact that they were markedly dissimilar one to the other , except only that they took their ruddy colourings from their father .
She was dressed in a neat blue dress that had perhaps been hurriedly chosen , and her method of doing her hair was a manifest compromise between duty and pleasure .
She embarked at once upon an exposition of the bedroom arrangements , which evidently involved difficult issues .
Marjorie was to share a room with Daffy -- that was the gist of it -- as the only other available apartment , originally promised to Marjorie , had been secured by Mr. Pope for what he called his `` matutinal ablutions , _videlicet_ tub . ''
`` He 'd hear far less of us if we went indoors , '' said Mrs. Pope .
`` Something attempted , something done , Has earned a night 's repose . ''
He cleared his throat , put on his spectacles , and emitted a long , flat preliminary note , rather like the sound of a child 's trumpet .
`` Er -- 'Dear Sir ! '
`` Do n't creak your chair , Rom , '' he said , `` when your mother tells you . ''
He refused however to regard his defeat as final , put great faith in the approaching exhaustion of the petrol supply , and talked in a manner that should have made the Automobile Association uneasy , of devoting the rest of his days to the purification of England from these aggressive mechanisms .
`` It was a mistake , '' he said , `` to let them in . ''
He became more frequent at his excellent West End club , and directed a certain portion of his capital to largely indecisive but on the whole unprofitable speculations in South African and South American enterprises .
He mingled a little in affairs .
He was a tough conventional speaker , rich in established phrases and never abashed by hearing himself say commonplace things , and in addition to his campaign against automobiles he found time to engage also in quasi-political activities , taking chairs , saying a few words and so on , cherishing a fluctuating hope that his eloquence might ultimately win him an invitation to contest a constituency in the interests of reaction and the sounder elements in the Liberal party .
But Daffy had gone to see that the pseudo-twins had done themselves justice in their muslin frocks and pink sashes ; they were apt to be a little sketchy with their less accessible buttons .
Marjorie became aware of two gentlemen with her mother on the lawn below .
`` Coming down ? ''
said Daffy , a vision of sulphur-yellow , appearing in the doorway .
This pleased Daffy and Marjorie , and their eyes met for a moment .
Marjorie did , and said so .
This baffled Mr. Pope , but Marjorie took it .
`` Or the short dry cough of a cliff , '' she said .
`` Exactly , '' said Mr. Wintersloan , and having turned a little deliberate close-lipped smile on her for a moment , resumed his wing .
Then Mrs. Pope asked Mr. Wintersloan , about his route to Buryhamstreet , and then Mr. Pope asked Mr .
Magnet whether he was playing at a new work or working at a new play .
And then for a time the men told stories as they came into their heads in an easy , irresponsible way .
Magnet spoke of the humour of the omnibus-driver who always dangled and twiddled his badge `` by way of a joke '' when he passed the conductor whose father had been hanged , and Mr. Pope , perhaps , a little irrelevantly , told the story of the little boy who was asked his father 's last words , and said `` mother was with him to the end , '' which particularly amused Mrs. Pope .
Mr. Wintersloan gave the story of the woman who was taking her son to the hospital with his head jammed into a saucepan , and explained to the other people in the omnibus : `` You see , what makes it so annoying , it 's me only saucepan ! ''
Then they came back to the Sense of Humour with the dentist who shouted with laughter , and when asked the reason by his patient , choked out : `` Wrong tooth ! ''
and then Mr. Pope reminded them of the heartless husband who , suddenly informed that his mother-in-law was dead , exclaimed `` Oh , do n't make me laugh , please , I 've got a split lip ... . ''
He had a twinge of surprise , and glanced at his own daughter as though he had never seen her before .
He perceived in a flash for the first time that this troublesome , clever , disrespectful child was tall and shapely and sweet , and indeed quite a beautiful young woman .
He forgot his anecdotes .
His being was suffused with pride and responsibility and the sense of virtue rewarded .
He did not reflect for a moment that Marjorie embodied in almost equal proportions the very best points in his mother and his mother-in-law , and avoided his own more salient characteristics with so neat a dexterity that from top to toe , except for the one matter of colour , not only did she not resemble him but she scarcely even alluded to him .
He thought simply that she was his daughter , that she derived from him , that her beauty was his .
She was the outcome of his meritorious preparations .
He recalled all the moments when he had been kind and indulgent to her , all the bills he had paid for her ; all the stresses and trials of the coach-building collapse , all the fluctuations of his speculative adventures , became things he had faced patiently and valiantly for her sake .
He forgot the endless times when he had been viciously cross with her , all the times when he had pished and tushed and sworn in her hearing .
He had on provocation and in spite of her mother 's protests slapped her pretty vigorously , but such things are better forgotten ; nor did he recall how bitterly he had opposed the college education which had made her now so clear in eye and thought , nor the frightful shindy , only three months since , about that identical green dress in which she now stood delightful .
He forgot these petty details , as an idealist should .
There she was , his daughter .
An immense benevolence irradiated his soul -- for Marjorie -- for Magnet .
His eyes were suffused with a not ignoble tenderness .
The man , he knew , was worth at least thirty-five thousand pounds , a discussion of investments had made that clear , and he must be making at least five thousand a year !
A beautiful girl , a worthy man !
A good fellow , a sound good fellow , a careful fellow too -- as these fellows went !
So for a time every one played a little game in which Mr. Pope was particularly proficient .
Indeed , it was rare that any one won but Mr. Pope .
It was called `` The Great Departed , '' and it had such considerable educational value that all the children had to play at it whenever he wished .
The letter was _D_ , and after Mr. Pope had rehearsed a tale of nine and twenty names , Mr. Wintersloan read out his list in that curious voice of his which suggested nothing so much as some mobile drink glucking out of the neck of a bottle held upside down .
`` Who was Dahl ? ''
`` Dam , '' said Mr. Wintersloan , and added after a slight pause : `` Anthony van . ''
He felt that Mr. Wintersloan had established an extraordinarily bad precedent .
`` It 's always just the time I particularly wish I was a man , '' she remarked after a brief return to meditation .
`` Fancy , no hair-pins , no brushing , no tie-up to get lost about , no strings .
I suppose they have n't strings ? ''
Of course there is love .
Of course she liked Mr .
She really did like Mr .
She had had her girlish dreams , had fallen in love with pictures of men and actors and a music master and a man who used to ride by as she went to school ; but was n't this desolating desire for self-abandonment rather silly ?
-- something that one left behind with much else when it came to putting up one 's hair and sensible living , something to blush secretly about and hide from every eye ?
Perhaps she did love him , and mistook the symptoms .
She did her best to mistake the symptoms .
But if she did truly love him , would it seem so queer and important and antagonistic as it did that his hair was rather thin upon the crown of his head ?
Marjorie very speedily found her disposition to take a detached and amused view of the entertainment in conflict with more urgent demands .
From the outset Mr .
Magnet loomed upon her -- he loomed nearer and nearer .
He turned his eye upon her as she came up to the wealthy expanse of Lady Petchworth 's presence , like some sort of obsolescent iron-clad turning a dull-grey , respectful , loving searchlight upon a fugitive torpedo boat , and thereafter he seemed to her to be looking at her without intermission , relentlessly , and urging himself towards her .
She wished he would n't .
She had n't at all thought he would on this occasion .
`` They 're looking at the goldfish , '' she said .
`` Let us join them . ''
`` Do n't _you_ play ? ''
said the undergraduate to Mr .
`` I love you very much , '' he said , at a loss .
`` I thought you cared for me a little . ''
Marjorie could only think that she was sorry again , but as she had already said that three times , she remained awkwardly silent .
`` I do n't think so , Mr .
Her words floated away into the stillness .
`` I wondered , '' said Mr .
Magnet , and paused again .
Then , almost breathlessly , `` I wondered if there should be perhaps -- some one else ? ''
She shook her head slowly .
`` I should know , '' she said .
`` I know I should know . ''
`` I am sure I should know .
A mother 's intuition -- -- ''
Marjorie was astonished and moved by her mother 's tone .
Her father , it appeared , had bought the ordinary shares of a Cuban railway very extensively , on the distinct understanding that they would improve .
In a decent universe , with a proper respect for meritorious gentlemen , these shares would have improved accordingly , but the weather had seen fit to shatter the wisdom of Mr. Pope altogether .
The sugar crop had collapsed , the bears were at work , and every morning now saw his nominal capital diminished by a dozen pounds or so .
I do not know what Mr. Pope would have done if he had not had his family to help him bear his trouble .
As it was he relieved his tension by sending Theodore from the table for dropping a knife , telling Rom when she turned the plate round to pick the largest banana that she had n't the self-respect of a child of five , and remarking sharply from behind the _Times_ when Daffy asked Marjorie if she was going to sketch : `` Oh , for God 's sake do n't _whisper !
_ '' Then when Mrs. Pope came round the table and tried to take his coffee cup softly to refill it without troubling him , he snatched at it , wrenched it roughly out of her hand , and said with his mouth full , and strangely in the manner of a snarling beast : `` No ' ready yet .
Half foo ' . ''
Marjorie wanted to know why every one did n't get up and leave the room .
She glanced at her mother and came near to speaking .
Marjorie had fallen into the net prepared for our sons and daughters by the delicate modesty of the Oxbridge authorities in money matters , and she was , for her circumstances , rather heavily in debt .
But I must admit that in Marjorie 's nature the Oxbridge conditions had found an eager and adventurous streak that rendered her particularly apt to these temptations .
She did n't dare think now of the total .
She lied even to herself about that .
She had fixed on fifty pounds as the unendurable maximum .
`` It is less than fifty pounds , '' she said , and added : `` _must_ be . ''
But something in her below the threshold of consciousness knew that it was more .
Aunt Plessington 's descent was due to her sudden discovery that Buryhamstreet was in close proximity to Summerhay Park , indeed only three miles away .
She had promised a lecture on her movement for Lady Petchworth 's village room in Summerhay , and she found that with a slight readjustment of dates she could combine this engagement with her promised visit to her husband 's sister , and an evening or so of influence for her little Madge .
So she had sent Hubert to telegraph at once , and `` here , '' she said triumphantly on the platform , after a hard kiss at Marjorie 's cheek , `` we are again . ''
`` A second 's good enough for me , Uncle Hubert , '' said Marjorie , and asked if they would rather walk or go in the donkey cart , which was waiting outside with Daffy .
Aunt Plessington , with an air of great _bonhomie_ said she 'd ride in the donkey cart , and they did .
But no pseudo-twins or Theodore came to meet this arrival , as both uncle and aunt had a way of asking how the lessons were getting on that they found extremely disagreeable .
Also , their aunt measured them , and incited them with loud encouraging noises to grow one against the other in an urgent , disturbing fashion .
Aunt Plessington 's being was consumed by thoughts of getting on .
She was like Bernard Shaw 's life force , and she really did not seem to think there was anything in existence but shoving .
She had no idea what a lark life can be , and occasionally how beautiful it can be when you do not shove , if only , which becomes increasingly hard each year , you can get away from the shovers .
She was one of an energetic family of eight sisters who had maintained themselves against a mutual pressure by the use of their elbows from the cradle .
They had all married against each other , all sorts of people ; two had driven their husbands into bishoprics and made quite typical bishop 's wives , one got a leading barrister , one a high war-office official , and one a rich Jew , and Aunt Plessington , after spending some years in just missing a rich and only slightly demented baronet , had pounced -- it 's the only word for it -- on Uncle Hubert .
`` A woman is nothing without a husband , '' she said , and took him .
He was a fairly comfortable Oxford don in his furtive way , and bringing him out and using him as a basis , she specialized in intellectual philanthropy and evolved her Movement .
It was quite remarkable how rapidly she overhauled her sisters again .
`` Yes , Aunt . ''
Marjorie indicated a more restrained success .
cried Aunt Plessington with a loud encouraging note , but evidently making the best of it , `` _that's_ better .
`` No , '' said the Rev .
Jopling Baynes , and shook his head with a kind of resignation .
`` They could laugh it out of existence , '' said Aunt Plessington .
`` We _do_ remember just what we can do either in the way of advertising or injury .
I do n't think you 'll find us up against any really _solid_ institutions . ''
`` I think we are all grateful to _Punch_ , '' said the Rev .
Jopling Baynes suddenly and sonorously , `` for its steady determination to direct our mirth into the proper channels .
I do not think that any one can accuse its editor of being unmindful of his great responsibilities -- -- ''
`` He 's rather -- grown up , '' said Marjorie .
`` Is n't that rather what he would like to do , aunt ? ''
`` That 's not _our_ business , Madge , '' said Aunt Plessington with humorous emphasis .
Later in the day the widening circle of aggressive urgency reached the kitchen , and at two the cook gave notice in order , she said , to better herself .
Jopling Baynes opened proceedings with a few well-chosen remarks , in which he complimented every one present either singly or collectively according to their rank and importance , and then Aunt Plessington came forward to the centre of the platform amidst a hectic flush of applause , and said `` Haw ! ''
in a loud clear ringing tone .
She spoke without resorting to the notes in Hubert 's little fist , very freely and easily .
Her strangulated contralto went into every corner of the room and positively seemed to look for and challenge inattentive auditors .
She had come over , she said , and she had been very glad to come over and talk to them that night , because it meant not only seeing them but meeting her very dear delightful friend Lady Petchworth ( loud applause ) and staying for a day or so with her brother-in-law Mr. Pope ( unsupported outburst of applause from Mr .
Magnet ) , to whom she and social reform generally owed so much .
She had come to talk to them that night about the National Good Habits Movement , which was attracting so much attention and which bore so closely on our National Life and Character ; she happened to be -- here Aunt Plessington smiled as she spoke -- a humble person connected with that movement , just a mere woman connected with it ; she was going to explain to them as well as she could in her womanly way and in the time at her disposal just what it was and just what it was for , and just what means it adopted and just what ends it had in view .
Well , they all knew what Habits were , and that there were Good Habits and Bad Habits , and she supposed that the difference between a good man and a bad man was just that the good man had good habits and the bad one had bad habits .
Everybody she supposed wanted to get on .
If a man had good habits he got on , and if he had bad habits he did n't get on , and she supposed it was the same with a country , if its people had good habits they got on , and if its people had bad habits they did n't get on .
For her own part she and her husband ( Hubert gave a little self-conscious jump ) had always cultivated good habits , and she had to thank him with all her heart for his help in doing so .
( Applause from the front seats . )
Now , the whole idea of her movement was to ask , how can we raise the standard of the national habits ?
how can we get rid of bad habits and cultivate good ones ?
... ( Here there was a slight interruption due to some one being suddenly pushed off the end of a form at the back , and coming to the floor with audible violence , after which a choked and obstructed tittering continued intermittently for some time . )
They came out into a luminous blue night , with a crescent young moon high overhead .
It was so fine that the Popes and the Plessingtons and Mr .
Magnet declined Lady Petchworth 's proffered car , and walked back to Buryhamstreet across the park through a sleeping pallid cornfield , and along by the edge of the pine woods .
Mr. Pope would have liked to walk with Mr .
Magnet and explain all that the pressure on his time had caused him to omit from his speech , and why it was he had seen fit to omit this part and include that .
Some occult power , however , baffled this intention , and he found himself going home in the company of his brother-in-law and Daffy , with Aunt Plessington and his wife like a barrier between him and his desire .
Marjorie , on the other hand , found Mr .
Magnet 's proximity inevitable .
They fell a little behind and were together again for the first time since her refusal .
He behaved , she thought , with very great restraint , and indeed he left her a little doubtful on that occasion whether he had not decided to take her decision as final .
He talked chiefly about the lecture , which had impressed him very deeply .
Mrs. Plessington , he said , was so splendid -- made him feel trivial .
He felt stirred up by her , wanted to help in this social work , this picking up of helpless people from the muddle in which they wallowed .
She had not heard .
Friday was Theodore 's birthday ; she knew it only too well because she had had to part with her stamp collection -- which very luckily had chanced to get packed and come to Buryhamstreet -- to meet its demand .
Magnet explained he had thought it might be fun to give a picnic in honour of the anniversary .
`` Theodore will think he is King of Surrey ! ''
They started with much whistling and circling , and went away up river under overhanging trees that sometimes swished the funnel , splashing the meadow path and making the reeds and bulrushes dance with their wash .
They went through a reluctant lock , steamed up a long reach , they passed the queerly painted Potwell Inn with its picturesque group of poplars and its absurd new notice-board of `` Omlets . ''
... Theodore was five stone of active happiness ; he and the pseudo-twins , strictly under his orders as the universal etiquette of birthdays prescribes , clambered round and round the boat , clutching the awning rail and hanging over the water in an entirely secure and perilous looking manner .
No one , unless his father happened to be upset by something , would check him , he knew , on this auspicious day .
Magnet sat with the grey eye on Marjorie and listened a little abstractedly to Mr. Pope , who was telling very fully what he would say if the Liberal party were to ask his advice at the present juncture .
Mrs. Pope attended discreetly , and Daffy and Marjorie with a less restrained interest , to Mr. Wintersloan , who showed them how to make faces out of a fist tied up in a pocket-handkerchief , how to ventriloquize , how to conjure with halfpence -- which he did very amusingly -- and what the buttons on a man 's sleeve were for ; Theodore clambering at his back discovered what he was at , and by right of birthday made him do all the faces and tricks over again .
Then Mr. Wintersloan told stories of all the rivers along which , he said , he had travelled in steamboats ; the Rhine , the Danube , the Hoogly and the Fall River , and particularly how he had been bitten by a very young crocodile .
`` It 's the smell of the oil brings it all back to me , '' he said .
`` And the kind of sway it gives you . ''
`` How about something to eat , Mr .
remarked Theodore suddenly , and everybody felt a little surprised when Mr .
Magnet answered : `` Who wants things to eat on your birthday , Theodore ? ''
But they saw the joke of that when they reached the castle ruins and found in the old tilting yard , with its ivy-covered arch framing a view of the town and stream , a table spread with a white cloth that shone in the sunshine , glittering with glass and silver and gay with a bowl of salad and flowers and cold pies and a jug of claret-cup and an ice pail -- a silver pail !
containing two promising looking bottles , in the charge of two real live waiters , in evening dress as waiters should be , but with straw hats to protect them from the sun and weather .
cried Mrs. Pope , `` what a _splendid_ idea , Mr .
Magnet , '' when the destination of the feast was perfectly clear , and even Theodore seemed a little overawed -- almost as if he felt his birthday was being carried too far and might provoke a judgment later .
Magnet must have ordered this in London , and have had it sent down , waiters and all !
Theodore knew he was a very wonderful little boy in spite of the acute criticism of four devoted sisters , and Mr .
Magnet had noticed him before at times , but this was , well , rather immense !
`` Look at the pie-crusts , old man ! ''
And on the pie-crusts , and on the icing of the cake , their munificent host had caused to be done in little raised letters of dough and chocolate the word `` Theodore . ''
`` Melon , '' cried Mr .
Magnet to the waiters , `` we 'll begin with the melon .
Have you ever tried melon with pepper and salt , Mrs .
`` Not till after lunch , Mr .
`` I think , '' said Mr .
Magnet looking at Marjorie , `` I shall go up .
I want to show Marjorie the view . ''
`` We 'll stay here , Mummy , eh ? ''
said Mr. Pope , with a quite unusual geniality , and suddenly put his arm round Mrs. Pope 's waist .
Her motherly eye sought Daffy 's , and indicated her mission .
`` I 'll come with you , Theodore , '' said Daffy .
`` There is n't room for everyone at once up that tower . ''
`` I 've always wanted to bring you here , '' he said , `` ever since I found it in the spring . ''
Saying he was kind and generous made her through some obscure association of ideas feel that he must have understanding .
She had an impulse to put her whole case before him frankly .
`` I wonder , '' she said , `` if you can understand what it is to be a girl . ''
Then she saw the absurdity of her idea , of any such miracle of sympathy .
He was entirely concentrated upon the appeal he had come prepared to make .
`` Let me be judge of that ! ''
`` But a kiss ! ''
She made no answer .
She submitted passively to his embrace , and then suddenly and dexterously disengaged herself from him , ran in , and without saying good-night to anyone went to her room to bed .
Then there was an appraising satisfaction in his eye .
`` Do n't you think this sort of thing is interesting ? ''
`` He makes a very good case . ''
`` He 's not sincere .
I doubt if you had a serious book on Municipal Trading , Magsy , whether you 'd make head or tail of it .
It 's a stiff subject .
Shaw just gets his chance for a smart thing or so ... .
I'd rather you read a good novel . ''
He really had the air of taking her reading in hand .
`` There 's a lot of things _you_ have to understand , '' he said , `` nearer home than this . ''
`` Here we are ! ''
he said , `` having a quarrel ! ''
`` Which is the favourite author now ? ''
asked Mrs. Pope , after a reflective pause , with a mother 's indulgent smile .
`` She 's frightfully loyal while it lasts , '' said Mrs. Pope .
`` No one dare say a word against them . ''
`` Let it go , '' said the tall young man , and Marjorie thanked heaven as the broken wing flapped down again .
`` He 's not hurt _much_ -- so far as I can see .
Have n't we made rather a mess of your lawn ? ''
`` Only want to be left alone , '' said Solomonson , and closed his heavy eyelids again .
I did a little at Sheppey , but it 's so hard for a poor man to get his hands on a machine .
And here was Solomonson , with this thing in his hangar , eating its head off .
Let 's take it out , '' I said , `` and go once round the park .
And here we are ... .
I thought it was n't wise for him to come ... . ''
At the sight of a stranger grouped in a popular manner beside the tea-things , he displayed a slight acerbity , which was if anything increased by the discovery of a prostrate person with large brown eyes and an expression of Oriental patience and disdain , in the shade of a bush near by .
At first he seemed scarcely to grasp Mrs. Pope's explanations , and regarded Sir Rupert with an expression that bordered on malevolence .
Then , when his attention was directed to the smashed machine upon the lawn , he broke out into a loud indignant : `` Good God !
`` He goes in the next ten minutes -- well , whenever the litter comes from the doctor 's .
Poor old Solomonson ! ''
`` Look at it ! ''
said Mr. Pope , with bitter hostility .
`` Look at it ! ''
`` There were n't engines like that twenty years ago . ''
Then her father and Mr .
Magnet appeared very far below , walking about and disapproving of her .
Magnet was shaking his head very , very sagely , and saying : `` Rather a stiff job for little Marjorie , '' and her father was saying she would be steadier when she married .
And then , she was n't clear how , the engine refused to work until her bills were paid , and she began to fall , and fall , and fall towards Mr .
She tried frantically to pay her bills .
She was falling down the fronts of skyscrapers and precipices -- and Mr .
Magnet was waiting for her below with a quiet kindly smile that grew wider and wider and wider ... .
`` We ought to make an effort , '' said Marjorie , cheerfully , and descended to lead the two beasts .
`` After the year before last . ''
He went on while Marjorie was still considering the proper response to this .
`` Does that strike you as a dull subject ? ''
`` Is there anything else so rich and beautiful in all the world ?
And every different mineral and every variety of that mineral has a different palette of colours , a different scheme of harmonies -- and is telling you something . ''
He smiled at her .
`` I ca n't help apologetics .
Most people think a professor of science is just -- -- ''
There was nothing to colour about , and yet Marjorie felt the warm flow in neck and cheek and brow .
She threw extraordinary quantities of candour into her manner .
`` I had a romantic adventure , '' she said rather quietly .
`` I was going to tell you . ''
The Lecture on the Characteristics of Humour had evidently been quite a serious affair , and a very imposing list of humorists and of prominent people associated with their industry had accepted the hospitality of the _Literati_ .
Marjorie ran her eyes over the Chairman 's flattering introduction , then with a queer faint flavour of hostility she reached her destined husband 's utterance .
She seemed to hear the flat full tones of his voice as she read , and automatically the desiccated sentences of the reporter filled out again into those rich quietly deliberate unfoldings of sound that were already too familiar to her ear .
Magnet arrived by the 2.27 , and to Marjorie 's eye his alighting presence had an effect of being not so much covered with laurels as distended by them .
His face seemed whiter and larger than ever .
He waved a great handful of newspapers .
She hesitated to open it .
It made everything so dreadfully concrete .
And this time the sense of meanness was altogether acuter .
He 'd bought this in London ; he 'd brought it down , hoping for her approval .
Yes , it was -- horrid .
But what was she to do ?
`` It 's -- awfully pretty , '' she said with the glittering symbol in her hand , and indeed he had gone to one of those artistic women who are reviving and improving upon the rich old Roman designs .
`` It 's so beautifully made . ''
The family was still seated at tea upon rugs and wraps , and still discussing humorists at play , when Professor Trafford appeared , leaning on a large stick and limping , but resolute , by the church gate .
Marjorie tried not to reveal a certain dismay , there was dumb , rich approval in Daphne 's eyes , and the pleasure of Theodore and the pseudo-twins was only too scandalously evident .
said Theodore , with ill-concealed relief .
`` I hope , '' he said , with obvious insincerity , `` I do n't invade you .
But Solomonson is frightfully concerned and anxious about your lawn , and whether his men cleared it up properly and put things right . ''
His eye went about the party and rested on Marjorie .
`` How are you ? ''
he said , in a friendly voice .
Daffy looked at Marjorie for an instant .
Mr. Trafford glanced at Mrs. Pope 's face , but her expression was impenetrable .
Trafford , like Marjorie , was another of those undisciplined young people our age has produced in such significant quantity .
He was just six-and-twenty , but the facts that he was big of build , had as an only child associated much with grown-up people , and was already a conspicuous success in the world of micro-chemical research , had given him the self-reliance and assurance of a much older man .
He had still to come his croppers and learn most of the important lessons in life , and , so far , he was n't aware of it .
He was naturally clean-minded , very busy and interested in his work , and on remarkably friendly and confidential terms with his mother who kept house for him , and though he had had several small love disturbances , this was the first occasion that anything of the kind had ploughed deep into his feelings and desires .
The situation perplexed him .
It was , had he known it , the beginning for him of a lifetime of problems and perplexities .
He was absolutely certain she did n't love Magnet .
Why , then , had she agreed to marry him ?
Such pressures and temptations as he could see about her seemed light to him in comparison with such an undertaking .
Marjorie , by the way of answer , hit her ball so that it jumped and missed his , ricochetted across the lawn and out of the ground on the further side .
They came together no more for a time , and Trafford , observant with every sense , found no clue to the riddle of her grave , intent bearing .
She played very badly , and with unusual care and deliberation .
He felt he had made a mess of things altogether , and suddenly found his leg was too painful to go on .
`` Partner , '' he asked , `` will you play out my ball for me ?
I ca n't go on .
I shall have to go . ''
After that Mr. Trafford had one clear desire in his being which ruled all his other desires .
He wanted a long , frank , unembarrassed and uninterrupted conversation with Marjorie .
He had a very strong impression that Marjorie wanted exactly the same thing .
For a week he besieged the situation in vain .
After the fourth day Solomonson was only kept in Buryhamstreet by sheer will-power , exerted with a brutality that threatened to end that friendship abruptly .
He went home on the sixth day in his largest car , but Trafford stayed on beyond the limits of decency to perform some incomprehensible service that he spoke of as `` clearing up . ''
`` Your bedroom 's always waiting for you at Riplings , '' he said , when at last he was going off ... .
`` He seems to be rather clever , '' said Mrs. Pope , `` though he certainly talks too much .
And after all it was Sir Rupert 's aeroplane .
_He_ was only driving it to oblige . ''
( But why she should be engaged to Magnet continued , nevertheless , to puzzle him extremely .
It was a puzzle to which no complete solution was ever to be forthcoming ... . )
She had it all prepared .
Mrs. Pope appeared outside her shop , and Trafford gesticulated a greeting with the syphons .
`` All right , '' he said to Marjorie .
`` I'm shopping , '' he cried as Mrs. Pope approached .
But Mr. Pope was giving himself up to a towering rage .
`` You damned scoundrel ! ''
`` What the devil are you doing ? ''
He seized Marjorie by the arm and drew her towards him .
`` My poor misguided girl ! ''
he said , and suddenly she was tensely alive , a little cry of horror in her throat , for her father , at a loss for words and full of heroic rage , had suddenly swung his stick with passionate force , and struck at Trafford's face .
She heard the thud , saw Trafford wince and stiffen .
For a perfectly horrible moment it seemed to her these men , their faces queerly distorted by the shadows of the branches in the slanting moonlight , might fight .
Then she heard Trafford 's voice , sounding cool and hard , and she knew that he would do nothing of the kind .
In that instant if there had remained anything to win in Marjorie it was altogether won .
`` I asked your daughter to meet me here , '' he said .
`` Will you be off , sir ?
And you , Marjorie -- will you go indoors ? ''
A perfectly motionless man is very disconcerting .
What an uncharted perplexity , for example , was the mind of that excellent woman Mrs. Pope !
He reflected through great intervals .
The night had no answer .
Directly she could disentangle herself from breakfast Mrs. Pope , with all her plans acute , went up to the girls ' room .
She found her daughter dressing in a leisurely and meditative manner .
She shut the door almost confidentially .
`` Marjorie , '' she said , `` I want you to tell me all about this . ''
`` Whatever he says . ''
She was overcome by a rush of emotion ; she turned to the bed and sat down .
`` I wo n't believe anything about Mr. Trafford , '' she said slowly , `` until I know -- -- ''
`` Look here , mother , I _may_ see Mr. Trafford again ?
I _may_ really speak to him ? ''
She sat down in the arm-chair beside the desk .
`` Yes , '' she answered with that skilful inconsecutiveness of hers , and let a brief silence touch his imagination .
`` Do you think that man means to come here again ? ''
She pressed her lips together firmly .
She seemed to be weighing things painfully .
`` I would n't , '' she said at last .
The queer string in her nature between religiosity and superstition began to vibrate .
Then she slipped upstairs , fastened the door , fell on her knees beside the bed and put the whole thing as acceptably as possible to Heaven in a silent , simple , but lucidly explanatory prayer ... .
Mr. Trafford 's exordium vanished from his mind , he was at a loss for words until spurred to speech by Mr. Pope 's almost truculent : `` Well ? ''
`` She never gave me that impression , anyhow , '' said the young man .
`` Again , '' said Mr. Pope , with great patience , and a slight forward bowing of the head , `` I beg to differ . ''
`` You really mean that ? ''
Marjorie did not answer for a little time ; she seemed to be weighing the exact force of all she was going to say .
`` I 've promised not to write or send to you , or -- think more than I can help of you , until I 'm twenty-one -- nearly two months from now . ''
`` One question , '' said Mr. Trafford .
`` Please , father ; '' said Marjorie , with unusual daring and in her mother's voice .
`` Mr. Trafford , after what I 've told you -- you must leave that to me . ''
Marjorie received the news of her severance from Oxbridge , Mrs. Pope thought , with a certain hardness .
She would not let herself believe that this Indian summer of her life could last for ever .
He was no passionless devotee of research , for all his silence and restraints .
She had seen him kindle with anger at obstacles and absurdities , and quicken in the presence of beauty .
She knew how readily and richly he responded to beauty .
Things happened to have run smoothly with him so far , that was all .
`` Of course , '' she said , `` he must fall in love .
It can not be long before he falls in love . ''
Once or twice that had seemed to happen , and then it had come to nothing ... .
At first , to Durgan 's infinite distress , he thought of her all day , and then , as the old familiar interests grappled him again , he thought of her in the morning and the evening and as he walked between his home and the laboratory and at all sorts of incidental times -- and even when the close-locked riddles of his research held the foreground and focus of his thoughts , he still seemed to be thinking of her as a radiant background to ions and molecules and atoms and interwoven systems of eddies and quivering oscillations deep down in the very heart of matter .
`` Yes , I 'm Mr .
Then she was back in his life like a lantern suddenly become visible in a wood at midnight .
It was like a little arrow of exquisite light shot into the very heart of his life .
`` Are you for meeting me then , Marjorie ? ''
They walked across the grass towards the chairs he had indicated , and both were full of the momentous things they were finding it impossible to say .
`` Me , '' she answered .
`` I want to tell you things , '' said Marjorie .
`` What are we to do ?
He told her , and they lapsed into silence .
She asked another question and he answered her , and the indifferent conversation ended again .
Then he plunged : `` I wonder , mother , if it would put you out very much if I brought home a wife to you ? ''
`` It 's so hard , mother , to explain these things , '' he began .
`` One doesn't half understand the things that are happening to one .
I want to make you in love with her , dear , just as I am .
And I do n't see how I can . ''
On one point she was very clear with him .
`` Not with you .
As near as you like .
But one house , one woman ... .
I'll have a little flat of my own -- for you both to come to me . ''
`` I do n't like this underhand preparation , '' he said .
`` It wo n't be dignified for father , '' said Marjorie , `` anyhow . ''
`` He is n't going to discuss his rights with you .
He _will_ object . ''
`` My dear , do as you please .
He 'll forbid and shout , and hit tables until things break .
Suppose he locks me up ! ''
She seemed to dismiss the question , and stood hand-in-hand with him in a state of glowing gravity .
She would n't see him again for four-and-twenty hours .
Then a thought came into her head -- a point of great practical moment .
Mr. Pope entered with a stern expression and a sentence prepared .
`` Well , sir , '' he said with a note of ironical affability , `` to what may I ascribe this -- intrusion ? ''
`` May I be allowed to judge what is or is not suitable companionship for my daughter -- and what may or may not be the present state of her affections ? ''
`` I 'll take the risk of that . ''
`` Be careful , sir ! ''
cried Mr. Pope , `` be careful ! ''
`` Does any decent man want the name of Trafford associated with his daughter .
Look at the hoardings , sir ! ''
A sudden horror of himself and Pope seized the younger man .
He stiffened and became silent .
Never in his life before had he been in a bawling quarrel .
He was amazed and ashamed .
`` Leave my house ! ''
cried Pope with an imperious gesture towards the door .
They made all their arrangements elaborately and carefully .
Trafford got a license to marry her ; she was to have a new outfit from top to toe to go away with on that eventful day .
It accumulated in the shop , and they marked the clothes _M.T._ She was watched , she imagined , but as her father did not know she had seen Trafford , nothing had been said to her , and no attempt was made to prohibit her going out and coming in .
Trafford entered into the conspiracy with a keen interest , a certain amusement , and a queer little feeling of distaste .
He hated to hide any act of his from any human being .
The very soul of scientific work , you see , is publication .
But Marjorie seemed to justify all things , and when his soul turned against furtiveness , he reminded it that the alternative was bawling .
Just for a moment taste the sweet Italian name upon your lips . )
These were the days before the funicular from Stresa , when one trudged up a rude path through the chestnuts and walnuts .
`` Adorable young people , '' he said .
`` Adorable happy young people ... .
`` Pride is such a good thing , my dear , clear , straight pride like theirs -- and they were both so proud !
`` I think fifty pounds will clear me , '' said Marjorie , clinging to her long-established total , `` if you 'll let me have that . ''
`` It 's the only decent way according to my ideas , '' said Trafford .
`` A man should n't marry when he ca n't trust . ''
`` Of course not , '' said Marjorie .
Something between fear and compunction wrung her .
`` Do you think you 'd better ? ''
she asked , very earnestly .
`` Mag , '' he said , `` has its drawbacks !
The street-boy in London says , 'Shut your mag . '
No , I think I shall stick to Marjorie ... . ''
Marjorie was so delighted with his approval that she determined to show Mrs. Trafford next day how prettily at least her son was going to live .
The good lady came and admired everything , and particularly the Bokhara hangings .
She did not seem to appraise , but something set Marjorie talking rather nervously of a bargain-hunter 's good fortune .
Mrs. Trafford glanced at the candlesticks and the low bookcase , and returned to the glowing piece of needlework that formed the symmetrical window curtain in the study .
She took it in her hand , and whispered , `` beautiful ! ''
He opened almost apropos of nothing .
`` Women , '' he said , `` are inferior -- and you ca n't get away from it . ''
Buzard 's voice clamoured that all would be different when women had the vote .
In many ways Marjorie 's marriage had been a great relief to her mother .
Particularly it had been a financial relief .
Marjorie had been the most expensive child of her family , and her cessation had led to increments both of Mrs. Pope 's and Daphne 's all too restricted allowances .
Mrs. Pope had been able therefore to relapse from the orthodox Anglicanism into which poverty had driven her , and indulge for an hour weekly in the consolations of Higher Thought .
These exercises in emancipated religiosity occurred at the house of Mr. Silas Root , and were greatly valued by a large circle of clients .
Essentially they were orgies of vacuity , and they cost six guineas for seven hours .
They did her no end of good .
All through the precious weekly hour she sat with him in a silent twilight , very , very still and feeling -- oh !
`` higher '' than anything , and when she came out she wore an inane smile on her face and was prepared not to worry , to lie with facility , and to take the easiest way in every eventuality in an entirely satisfactory and exalted manner .
Moreover he was `` treating '' her investments .
Acting upon his advice , and doing the whole thing quietly with the idea of preparing a pleasant surprise for her husband , she had sold out of certain Home Railway debentures and invested in a company for working the auriferous waste which is so abundant in the drainage of Philadelphia , a company whose shareholders were chiefly higher thought disciples and whose profits therefore would inevitably be greatly enhanced by their concerted mental action .
It was to the prospective profits in this that she owed the new black furs she was wearing .
In the bedroom , she spoke about Mr. Pope .
`` He was dreadfully upset , '' she said .
`` His first thought was to come after you both with a pistol .
If -- if _he_ had n't married you -- -- ''
She paused , and Marjorie , with a momentary flush of indignation in her cheeks , did not urge her to conclude her explanation .
`` I do n't think Rag would like him to , '' said Marjorie with an unreal serenity ; `` _ever_ . ''
`` For a time I 'm afraid he 'll refuse to see you .
He just wants to forget -- -- .
Mrs. Pope was only a day or so ahead of a cloud of callers .
The Carmel girls followed close upon her , tall figures of black fur , with costly-looking muffs and a rich glitter at neck and wrist .
Marjorie displayed her house , talking fluently about other things , and watching for effects .
The Carmel girls ran their swift dark eyes over her appointments , glanced quickly from side to side of her rooms , saw only too certainly that the house was narrow and small -- -- .
But did they see that it was clever ?
They saw at any rate that she meant it to be clever , and with true Oriental politeness said as much urgently and extravagantly .
Then there were the Rambord girls and their mother , an unobservant lot who chattered about the ice at Prince 's ; then Constance Graham came with a thoroughbred but very dirty aunt , and then Ottiline Winchelsea with an American minor poet , who wanted a view of mountains from the windows at the back , and said the bathroom ought to be done in pink .
Then Lady Solomonson came ; an extremely expensive-looking fair lady with an affectation of cynicism , a keen intelligence , acutely apt conversation , and a queer effect of thinking of something else all the time she was talking .
She missed nothing ... .
Hardly anybody failed to appreciate the charm and decision of Marjorie's use of those Bokhara embroideries .
Through soup and fish Marjorie occupied herself with the inflexible rigour of the young editor , who had brought her down .
When she could give her attention to the general conversation she discovered her husband a little flushed and tackling her aunt with an expression of quiet determination .
The phrenologist and the vegetarian health specialist were regarding him with amazement , the jam and pickle manufacturer 's wife was evidently deeply shocked .
He was refusing to believe in the value of the Movement , and Aunt Plessington was manifestly losing her temper .
`` But all their interests -- -- ''
Marjorie had never seen him so deeply affected by anything but herself .
It seemed to her he was needlessly disturbed by a trivial matter .
He sulked for a space , and then broke out again .
And then Marjorie wore the blue dress with great success at the Carmels ' .
The girls came and looked at it and admired it -- it was no mere politeness .
They admitted there was style about it , a quality -- there was no explaining .
`` You 're _wonderful_ , Madge ! ''
cried the younger Carmel girl .
The Carmel boy , seizing the opportunity of a momentary seclusion in a corner , ended a short but rather portentous silence with `` I say , you _do_ look ripping , '' in a voice that implied the keenest regret for the slacknesses of a summer that was now infinitely remote to Marjorie .
It was ridiculous that the Carmel boy should have such emotions -- he was six years younger than Trafford and only a year older than Marjorie , and yet she was pleased by his manifest wound ... .
`` Let 's make some , '' said Trafford .
`` It 's been horrible waiting , '' said Marjorie without moving ; `` horrible !
Where have you been ? ''
`` You see , '' he said , on his knees , `` I 'd really got hold of my work at last . ''
`` Yes , '' said Trafford slowly , jabbing a piece of firewood into the glow ; but it was chiefly present in his mind that much of that elaborate experimenting of his was n't at all a thing to be cut athwart by the exasperating gusts of a telephone bell clamouring for attention .
Hitherto the laboratory telephone had been in the habit of disconnecting itself early in the afternoon .
She bent to his ear and whispered .
`` I 'm going to overrun some more . ''
This remarkable young woman had become soft and wonderful as April hills across which clouds are sweeping .
Her face was as if he had never seen it before ; her eyes bright with tears .
For two days of abundant silences he had been preparing a statement of his case for her , he had been full of the danger to his research and all the waste of his life that her extravagance threatened .
He wanted to tell her just all that his science meant to him , explain how his income and life had all been arranged to leave him , mind and time and energy , free for these commanding investigations .
His life was to him the service of knowledge -- or futility .
He had perceived that she did not understand this in him ; that for her , life was a blaze of eagerly sought experiences and gratifications .
So far he had thought out things and had them ready for her .
But now all this impending discussion vanished out of his world .
Their love was to be crowned by the miracle of parentage .
This fact flooded his outlook and submerged every other consideration .
`` We will make it the most wonderful child in the world , '' said Marjorie .
what else can it be ? ''
Were they murdering her ?
It was incredible this torture could go on .
Somehow it must end .
Chiefly he wanted to go in and kill the doctor .
But it would do no good to kill the doctor !
At last the nurse came out , looking a little scared , to ask him to cycle three miles away and borrow some special sort of needle that the fool of a doctor had forgotten .
He went , outwardly meek , and returning was met by the little interested servant , very alert and excited and rather superior -- for here was something no man can do -- with the news that he had a beautiful little daughter , and that all was well with Marjorie .
Presently they brought out a strange , wizened little animal , wailing very stoutly , with a face like a very , very old woman , and reddish skin and hair -- it had quite a lot of wet blackish hair of an incredible delicacy of texture .
It kicked with a stumpy monkey 's legs and inturned feet .
He held it : his heart went out to it .
He pitied it beyond measure , it was so weak and ugly .
He was astonished and distressed by the fact of its extreme endearing ugliness .
He had expected something strikingly pretty .
It clenched a fist , and he perceived it had all its complement of fingers and ridiculous , pretentious little finger nails .
Inside that fist it squeezed his heart ... .
He did not want to give it back to them .
He wanted to protect it .
He felt they could not understand it or forgive , as he could forgive , its unjustifiable feebleness ... .
For weeks and weeks this astonishing and unprecedented being filled the Traffords ' earth and sky .
Very speedily its minute quaintness passed , and it became a vigorous delightful baby that was , as the nurse explained repeatedly and very explicitly , not only quite exceptional and distinguished , but exactly everything that a baby should be .
Its weight became of supreme importance ; there was a splendid week when it put on nine ounces , and an indifferent one when it added only one .
And then came a terrible crisis .
It was ill ; some sort of infection had reached it , an infantile cholera .
Its temperature mounted to a hundred and three and a half .
It became a flushed misery , wailing with a pathetic feeble voice .
Then it ceased to wail .
Marjorie became white-lipped and heavy-eyed from want of sleep , and it seemed to Trafford that perhaps his child might die .
It seemed to him that the spirit of the universe must be a monstrous calivan since children had to die .
He went for a long walk through the October beechwoods , under a windy sky , and in a drift of falling leaves , wondering with a renewed freshness at the haunting futilities of life ... .
Life was not futile -- anything but that , but futility seemed to be stalking it , waiting for it ... .
When he returned the child was already better , and in a few days it was well again -- but very light and thin .
It is only in romantic fiction that a man can work strenuously to the limit of his power and come home to be sweet , sunny and entertaining .
Trafford 's preoccupation involved a certain negligence of Marjorie , a certain indisposition to be amused or interested by trifling things , a certain irritability ... .
For this , indeed , is the truth of passionate love , that it works outs its purpose and comes to an end .
A day arrives in every marriage when the lovers must face each other , disillusioned , stripped of the last shred of excitement -- undisguisedly themselves .
And our two were married ; they had bound themselves together under a penalty of scandalous disgrace , to take the life-long consequences of their passionate association .
What had happened to them ?
What was the matter between himself and Marjorie that he could n't even intimate his sense of their divergence ?
He would have liked to discuss the whole thing with his mother , but somehow that seemed disloyal to Marjorie ... .
The transition from that attitude to ownership was amazingly rapid .
Then nothing remained but to wait for the picture .
She had dreaded a mistake , a blundering discord , but now with the thing hung she could see her quick eye had not betrayed her .
It was a mass of reds , browns , purples , and vivid greens and greys ; an effect of roof and brick house facing upon a Dutch canal , and it lit up the room and was echoed and reflected by all the rest of her courageous colour scheme , like a coal-fire amidst mahogany and metal .
It justified itself to her completely , and she faced her husband with a certain confidence .
Trafford looked at the painting with a reluctant admiration .
`` It was priced at thirteen , '' said Marjorie , ending a pause , and with a sinking heart .
`` But it 's _beautiful !
_ '' she said .
He felt now that he had to go on with these long-premeditated expostulations .
He was tired and dusty from his third-class carriage , his spirit was tired and dusty , and he said what he had to say without either breadth or power , an undignified statement of personal grievances , a mere complaint of the burthen of work that falls upon a man .
That she missed the high aim in him , and all sense of the greatness they were losing had vanished from his thoughts .
He had too heavy a share of the common burthen , and she pressed upon him unthinkingly ; that was all he could say .
He girded at her with a bitter and loveless truth ; it was none the less cruel that in her heart she knew these things he said were true .
But he went beyond justice -- as every quarrelling human being does ; he called the things she had bought and the harmonies she had created , `` this litter and rubbish for which I am wasting my life . ''
That stabbed into her pride acutely and deeply .
She knew anyhow that it was n't so simple and crude as that .
It was not mere witlessness she contributed to their trouble .
She tried to indicate her sense of that .
But she had no power of ordered reasoning , she made futile interruptions , she was inexpressive of anything but emotion , she felt gagged against his flow of indignant , hostile words .
She reviewed the chief contemporary Movements much as she might have turned over dress fabrics in a draper 's shop , weighing the advantages and disadvantages of each ... .
She proceeded to avow her passionate interest in the feminist movement of which this agitation for the vote was merely the symbol .
( A voice : `` No ! ''
) No one could be more aware of the falsity of woman 's position at the present time than she was -- she seemed to be speaking right across the room to Trafford -- they were neither pets nor partners , but something between the two ; now indulged like spoilt children , now blamed like defaulting partners ; constantly provoked to use the arts of their sex , constantly mischievous because of that provocation .
She caught her breath and stopped for a moment , as if she had suddenly remembered the meeting intervening between herself and Trafford .
No , she said , there was no more ardent feminist and suffragist than herself in the room .
She wanted the vote and everything it implied with all her heart .
With all her heart .
But every way to get a thing was n't the right way , and she felt with every fibre of her being that this petulant hostility to the census was a wrong way and an inconsistent way , and likely to be an unsuccessful way -- one that would lose them the sympathy and help of just that class of men they should look to for support , the cultivated and scientific men .
( A voice : `` _Do_ we want them ? ''
) What was the commonest charge made by the man in the street against women ?
-- that they were unreasonable and unmanageable , that it was their way to get things by crying and making an irrelevant fuss .
And here they were , as a body , doing that very thing !
Let them think what the census and all that modern organization of vital statistics of which it was the central feature stood for .
It stood for order , for the replacement of guesses and emotional generalization by a clear knowledge of facts , for the replacement of instinctive and violent methods , by which women had everything to lose ( a voice : `` No ! ''
) by reason and knowledge and self-restraint , by which women had everything to gain .
To her the advancement of science , the progress of civilization , and the emancipation of womanhood were nearly synonymous terms .
At any rate , they were different phases of one thing .
They were different aspects of one wider purpose .
When they struck at the census , she felt , they struck at themselves .
She glanced at Trafford as if she would convince him that this was the real voice of the suffrage movement , and sat down amidst a brief , polite applause , that warmed to rapture as Agatha Alimony , the deep-voiced , stirring Agatha , rose to reply .
Miss Alimony , who was wearing an enormous hat with three nodding ostrich feathers , a purple bow , a gold buckle and numerous minor ornaments of various origin and substance , said they had all of them listened with the greatest appreciation and sympathy to the speech of their hostess .
Their hostess was a newcomer to the movement , she knew she might say this without offence , and was passing through a phase , an early phase , through which many of them had passed .
This was the phase of trying to take a reasonable view of an unreasonable situation .
Their hostess had spoken of science , and no doubt science was a great thing ; but there was something greater than science , and that was the ideal .
It was woman 's place to idealize .
Sooner or later their hostess would discover , as they had all discovered , that it was not to science but the ideal that women must look for freedom .
Consider , she said , the scientific men of to-day .
Consider , for example , Sir James Crichton-Browne , the physiologist .
Was he on their side ?
On the contrary , he said the most unpleasant things about them on every occasion .
He went out of his way to say them .
Or consider Sir Almroth Wright , did he speak well of women ?
Or Sir Ray Lankester , the biologist , who was the chief ornament of the Anti-Suffrage Society .
Or Sir Roderick Dover , the physicist , who -- forgetting Madame Curie , a far more celebrated physicist than himself , she ventured to say ( Applause . )
had recently gone outside his province altogether to abuse feminine research .
There were your scientific men .
Mrs. Trafford had said their anti-census campaign would annoy scientific men ; well , under the circumstances , she wanted to annoy scientific men .
She wanted to annoy everybody .
Until women got the vote ( loud applause ) the more annoying they were the better .
When the whole world was impressed by the idea that voteless women were an intolerable nuisance , then there would cease to be voteless women .
Mr. Asquith had said --
It occurred suddenly to Trafford that he could go now ; that it would be better to go ; that indeed he _must_ go ; it was no doubt necessary that his mind should have to work in the same world as Buzard 's mental processes , but at any rate those two sets of unsympathetic functions need not go on in the same room .
Something might give way .
He got up , and with those elaborate efforts to be silent that lead to the violent upsetting of chairs , got himself out of the room and into the passage , and was at once rescued by the sympathetic cook-general , in her most generalized form , and given fresh tea in his study -- which impressed him as being catastrophically disarranged ... .
`` Well , if they talk about things -- Discussions like this clear up their minds . ''
`` Tell me what . ''
It 's your own ! ''
Talking one 's relations over is n't particularly easy between husband and wife at any time ; we are none of us so sure of one another as to risk loose phrases or make experiments in expression in matters so vital ; there is inevitably an excessive caution on the one hand and an abnormal sensitiveness to hints and implications on the other .
Marjorie 's bills were only an extreme instance of these unavoidable suppressions that always occur .
Moreover , when two people are continuously together , it is amazingly hard to know when and where to begin ; where intercourse is unbroken it is as a matter of routine being constantly interrupted .
You can not broach these broad personalities while you are getting up in the morning , or over the breakfast-table while you make the coffee , or when you meet again after a multitude of small events at tea , or in the evening when one is rather tired and trivial after the work of the day .
Then Miss Margharita Trafford permitted no sustained analysis of life in her presence .
She synthesized things fallaciously , but for the time convincingly ; she insisted that life was n't a thing you discussed , but pink and soft and jolly , which you crowed at and laughed at and addressed as `` Goo . ''
Even without Margharita there were occasions when the Traffords were a forgetfulness to one another .
After an ear has been pinched or a hand has been run through a man 's hair , or a pretty bare shoulder kissed , all sorts of broader interests lapse into a temporary oblivion .
They found discussion much more possible when they walked together .
A walk seemed to take them out of the everyday sequence , isolate them from their household , abstract them a little from one another .
They set out one extravagant spring Sunday to Great Missenden , and once in spring also they discovered the Waterlow Park .
On each occasion they seemed to get through an enormous amount of talking .
But the Great Missenden walk was all mixed up with a sweet keen wind , and beechwoods just shot with spring green and bursting hedges and the extreme earliness of honeysuckle , which Trafford noted for the first time , and a clamorous rejoicing of birds .
And in the Waterlow Park there was a great discussion of why the yellow crocus comes before white and purple , and the closest examination of the manner in which daffodils and narcissi thrust their green noses out of the garden beds .
Also they found the ugly , ill-served , aggressively propagandist non-alcoholic refreshment-room in that gracious old house a scandal and disappointment , and Trafford scolded at the stupidity of officialdom that can control so fine a thing so ill .
A copy of the _Scientific Bulletin_ fired the explosion .
He sat down at the breakfast-table with the heaviness of a rather overworked and worried man , tasted his coffee , tore open a letter and crumpled it with his hand , turned to the _Bulletin_ , regarded its list of contents with a start , opened it , read for a minute , and expressed himself with an extraordinary heat of manner in these amazing and unprecedented words :
`` Damn the whole scheme of things ! ''
he said , and met the blank amazement of Marjorie 's eye .
she echoed with a note of inquiry .
`` Is he discovering what you want to discover ? ''
_that's_ safe enough , and it does n't matter anyhow .
Confound the silly little F.R.S.
As if that mattered .
It 's seeing all my great openings -- misused .
It 's seeing all I might be doing .
This brings it all home to me .
Do n't you understand , Marjorie ?
Will you never understand ?
I 'm getting away from all _that !
_ I 'm being hustled away by all this work , this silly everyday work to get money .
Do n't you see that unless I can have time for thought and research , life is just darkness to me ?
I 've made myself master of that stuff .
I had at any rate .
No one can do what I can do there .
And when I find myself -- oh , shut out , shut out !
I come near raving .
As I think of it I want to rave again . ''
Then with a swift transition : `` I suppose I 'd better eat some breakfast .
Is that egg boiled ? ''
`` Confound it , Marjorie .
When I swear at Behrens I 'm not swearing at you . ''
`` It 's my fault .
All this is my fault .
I 'm eating you up .
What 's the good of your pretending , Rag .
You know it is .
When I married you I meant to make you happy , I had no thought but to make you happy , to give myself to you , my body , my brains , everything , to make life beautiful for you -- -- ''
`` I 've broken your back , '' she said .
She stood up , unlocked and opened her littered desk , turned and held out the key to him .
`` Nothing wrong ? ''
asked Daffy , surveying her .
`` I 'm all right , '' said Marjorie , getting her back to the light .
`` Want a holiday , perhaps .
How 's every one ? ''
And she loved him , she loved him -- _so_ .
She told herself in the presence of all these facts , and without a shadow of doubt in her mind that all she wanted in the world was to make him happy .
Meanwhile , as if it had been working at her problem all the time that this exciting farewell epistle had occupied the foreground of her thoughts , her natural lucidity emerged with the manifest conclusion that she had to alter her way of living .
She had been extraordinarily regardless of him , she only began to see that , and now she had to take up the problem of his necessities .
Her self-examination now that it had begun was thorough .
She had always told herself before that she had made a most wonderful and beautiful little home for him .
But had she made it for him ?
Had he as a matter of fact ever wanted it , except that he was glad to have it through her ?
No doubt it had given him delight and happiness , it had been a marvellous little casket of love for them , but how far did that outweigh the burthen and limitation it had imposed upon him ?
She had always assumed he was beyond measure grateful to her for his home , in spite of all her bills , but was he ?
It was like sticking a knife into herself to ask that , but she was now in a phase heroic enough for the task -- was he ?
She had always seen herself as the giver of bounties ; greatest bounty of all was Margharita .
She had faced pains and terrors and the shadow of death to give him Margharita .
Now with Daffy's illuminating conversation in her mind , she could turn the light upon a haunting doubt that had been lurking in the darkness for a long time .
Had he really so greatly wanted Margharita ?
Had she ever troubled to get to the bottom of that before ?
Had n't she as a matter of fact wanted Margharita ten thousand times more than he had done ?
Had n't she in effect imposed Margharita upon him , as she had imposed her distinctive and delightful home upon him , regardlessly , because these things were the natural and legitimate developments of herself ?
Spring and a renewed and deepened love for her husband were in Marjorie 's blood .
Her mind worked rapidly during the next few days , and presently she found herself clearly decided upon her course of action .
She had to pull herself together and help him , and if that meant a Spartan and strenuous way of living , then manifestly she must be Spartan and strenuous .
She must put an end once for all to her recurrent domestic deficits , and since this could only be done by getting rid of May , she must get rid of May and mind the child herself .
( Every day , thank Heaven !
Margharita became more intelligent , more manageable , and more interesting . )
Then she must also make a far more systematic and thorough study of domestic economy than she had hitherto done , and run the shopping and housekeeping on severer lines ; she bought fruit carelessly , they had far too many joints ; she never seemed able to restrain herself when it came to flowers .
And in the evenings , which would necessarily be very frequently lonely evenings if Trafford's researches were to go on , she would typewrite , and either acquire great speed at that or learn shorthand , and so save Trafford 's present expenditure on a typist .
That unfortunately would mean buying a typewriter .
She found one afternoon in a twopenny book-box , with which she was trying to allay her craving for purchases , a tattered little pamphlet entitled : `` Proposals for the Establishment of an Order of Samurai , '' which fell in very exactly with her mood .
The title `` dated '' ; it carried her mind back to her middle girlhood and the defeats of Kuropatki and the futile earnest phase in English thought which followed the Boer War .
The order was to be a sort of self-appointed nobility serving the world .
It shone with the light of a generous dawn , but cast , I fear , the shadow of the prig .
Its end was the Agenda Club ... .
She read and ceased to read -- and dreamt .
But it is hard to make a change in the colour of one 's life amidst the routine one has already established about oneself , in the house that is grooved by one 's weaknesses , amidst hangings and ornaments living and breathing with the life of an antagonistic and yet insidiously congenial ideal .
A great desire came upon Marjorie to go away with Trafford for a time , out of their everyday life into strange and cool and spacious surroundings .
She wanted to leave London and its shops , and the home and the movements and the callers and rivalries , and even dimpled little Margharita 's insistent claims , and get free and think .
It was the first invasion of their lives by this conception , a conception that was ever afterwards to leave them altogether , of retreat and reconstruction .
She knelt upon the white sheepskin hearthrug at Trafford 's feet one night , and told him of her desire .
He , too , was tired of his work and his vexations , and ripe for this suggestion of an altered life .
The Easter holiday was approaching , and nearly twenty unencumbered days .
Mrs. Trafford , they knew , would come into the house , meanwhile , and care for Margharita .
They would go away somewhere together and walk , no luggage but a couple of knapsacks , no hotel but some homely village inn .
They would be in the air all day , until they were saturated with sweet air and spirit of clean restraints .
They would plan out their new rule , concentrate their aims .
`` And I could think , '' said Trafford , `` of this new work I ca n't begin here .
I might make some notes . ''
Presently came the question of where the great walk should be .
Manifestly , it must be among mountains , manifestly , and Marjorie 's eye saw those mountains with snow upon their summits and cold glaciers on their flanks .
Could they get to Switzerland ?
If they travelled second class throughout , and took the cheaper way , as Samurai should ?
It rained in the morning of their eleventh day and then gave way to warmth and sunshine , so that they arrived at Les Avants in the afternoon a little muddy and rather hot .
At one of the tables under the trees outside the Grand Hotel was a small group of people dressed in the remarkable and imposing costume which still in those days distinguished the motorist .
They turned from their tea to a more or less frank inspection of the Traffords , and suddenly broke out into cries of recognition and welcome .
Solomonson -- for the most part brown leather -- emerged with extended hands , and behind him , nestling in the midst of immense and costly furs , appeared the kindly salience and brightness of his Lady 's face .
`` Good luck ! ''
Come and have tea with us !
But this is a happy encounter ! ''
`` You look , oh !
-- splendidly well , '' that Lady responded .
`` But the courage ! ''
said Lady Solomonson , and did not add , `` the tragic hardship ! ''
though her tone conveyed it .
She had all the unquestioning belief of her race in the sanity of comfort .
She had ingrained in her the most definite ideas of man 's position and woman 's , and that any one , man or woman , should walk in mud except under dire necessity , was outside the range of her philosophy .
She thought Marjorie 's thick boots and short skirts quite the most appalling feminine costume she had ever seen .
She saw only a ruined complexion and damaged womanhood in Marjorie 's rain-washed , sun-bit cheek .
Her benevolent heart rebelled at the spectacle .
It was dreadful , she thought , that nice young people like the Traffords should have come to this .
`` But really ! ''
She sought and met her husband 's astonishment with the faintest , remotest of smiles .
It seemed to him that never before had he appreciated her beauty .
His daily companion had become this splendour in the sky .
She came close by him with hand extended to greet Sir Philip Mottersham .
He was sensible of the glow of her , as it were of a scented aura about her .
He had a first full intimation of the cult and worship of woman and the magnificence of women , old as the Mediterranean and its goddesses , and altogether novel to his mind ... .
The child shot him a glance of passionate appreciation for this scrap of flattery .
`` May we come ? ''
`` Do you really care ? ''
`` You know , I 'm so proud of their nursery .
Would you care -- -- ?
Always I go up at this time . ''
`` I 've my little nursery , too , '' said Marjorie .
He had never asked himself before if it was fair to assume she would follow his purpose and his fortunes .
He had taken that for granted .
And she too had taken that for granted , which was so generously splendid of her .
All her disloyalties had been unintentional , indeed almost instinctive , breaches of her subordination to this aim which was his alone .
These breaches he realized had been the reality of her nature fighting against her profoundest resolutions .
The little passage looked very small and rather bare as the door shut behind them , and the worn places that had begun to be conspicuous during the last six months , and which they had forgotten during the Swiss holiday , reasserted themselves .
The dining-room , after spacious rooms flooded with sunshine , betrayed how dark it was , and how small .
Those Bokhara embroideries that had once shone so splendid , now , after Mrs. Lee 's rich and unlimited harmonies , seemed skimpy and insufficient , mere loin-cloths for the artistic nakedness of the home .
They felt , too , they were beginning to find out their post-impressionist picture .
They had not remembered it as nearly so crude as it now appeared .
The hole a flying coal had burnt in the unevenly faded dark-blue carpet looked larger than it had ever done before , and was indeed the only thing that did n't appear faded and shrunken .
The atmosphere of the Lees ' villa had disturbed Marjorie 's feelings and ideas even more than it had Trafford 's .
She came back struggling to recover those high resolves that had seemed so secure when they had walked down to Les Avantes .
There was a curiously tormenting memory of that vast , admirable nursery , and the princely procession of children that would not leave her mind .
No effort of her reason could reconcile her to the inferiority of Margharita 's equipment .
She had a detestable craving for a uniform for May .
But May was going ... .
`` I meant so well , '' she said and caught herself back into silence again .
She turned her face from him .
`` I meant so well , '' she sobbed .
I meant so well . ''
Still with an averted face her arms came out to him in a desperate , unreasoning appeal for love .
He took her and held her close to him .
`` Never mind , dear , '' he said .
`` Do n't mind . ''
Her passion now was unconstrained .
`` I thought -- '' he began , and left the thing unsaid .
`` But your work , '' she said ; `` your research ? ''
`` I must give up research , '' he said .
`` I had meant so well , '' she said .
`` I meant to work .
I meant to deny myself ... . ''
`` I 've thought it over . ''
He reflected , and then his bright eyes glanced up at Trafford .
`` I knew , '' he said , `` you would . ''
`` Suppose it did ! ''
He regarded Trafford over his cigar , drawing fiercely at it for some moments .
Then seeing Trafford on the point of speaking , he snatched it from his lips , demanded silence by waving it at his hearer , and went on .
`` They are n't arranged better now .
_Now_ , it 's a sort of paradox .
If you 've got big gifts and you choose to help forward the world , if you choose to tell all you know and give away everything you can do in the way of work , you 've got to give up the ideas of wealth and security , and that means fine women and children .
You 've got to be a _deprived_ sort of man .
'All right , ' you say , 'That 's me ! '
But how about your wife being a deprived sort of woman ?
That 's where it gets you !
And meanwhile , you know , while _you_ make your sacrifices and do your researches , there 'll be little mean sharp active beasts making money all over you like maggots on a cheese .
And if everybody who 'd got gifts and altruistic ideas gave themselves up to it , then evidently only the mean and greedy lot would breed and have the glory .
They 'd get everything .
There would n't be an option they did n't hold .
And the other chaps would produce the art and the science and the literature , as far as the men who 'd got hold of things would let 'em , and perish out of the earth altogether ... .
Still , that's how things are made ... . ''
BOOK THE THIRD MARJORIE AT LONELY HUT
It will be difficult in the future , when things now subtly or widely separated have been brought together by the receding perspectives of time , for the historian to realize just how completely out of the thoughts of such a young man as Trafford the millions of people who live and die in organized productive industry had been .
That vast world of toil and weekly anxiety , ill-trained and stupidly directed effort and mental and moral feebleness , had been as much beyond the living circle of his experience as the hosts of Genghis Khan or the social life of the Forbidden City .
Consider the limitations of his world .
In all his life hitherto he had never been beyond a certain prescribed area of London's immensities , except by the most casual and uninstructive straying .
He knew Chelsea and Kensington and the north bank and ( as a boy ) Battersea Park , and all the strip between Kensington and Charing Cross , with some scraps of the Strand as far as the Law Courts , a shop or so in Tottenham Court Road and fragments about the British Museum and Holborn and Regent 's Park , a range up Edgware Road to Maida Vale , the routes west and south-west through Uxbridge and Putney to the country , and Wimbledon Common and Putney Heath .
He had never been on Hampstead Heath nor visited the Botanical Gardens nor gone down the Thames below London Bridge , nor seen Sydenham nor Epping Forest nor the Victoria Park .
Take a map and blot all he knew and see how vast is the area left untouched .
All industrial London , all wholesale London , great oceans of human beings fall into that excluded area .
The homes he knew were comfortable homes , the poor he knew were the parasitic and dependent poor of the West , the shops , good retail shops , the factories for the most part engaged in dressmaking .
Presently he learnt from a Silvertown employer what that concealed aspect was .
Dowd was `` that sort of man who makes trouble , '' disposed to strike rather than not upon a grievance , with a taste for open-air meetings , a member , obstinately adherent in spite of friendly remonstrance , of the Social Democratic Party .
This in spite of his clear duty to a wife and two small white knobby children .
For a time he would not talk to Trafford of anything but business -- Trafford was so manifestly the enemy , not to be trusted , the adventurous plutocrat , the exploiter -- when at last Dowd did open out he did so defiantly , throwing opinions at Trafford as a mob might hurl bricks at windows .
At last they achieved a sort of friendship and understanding , an amiability as it were , in hostility , but never from first to last would he talk to Trafford as one gentleman to another ; between them , and crossed only by flimsy , temporary bridges , was his sense of incurable grievances and fundamental injustice .
He seemed incapable of forgetting the disadvantages of his birth and upbringing , the inferiority and disorder of the house that sheltered him , the poor food that nourished him , the deadened air he breathed , the limited leisure , the inadequate books .
Implicit in his every word and act was the assurance that but for this handicap he could have filled Trafford 's place , while Trafford would certainly have failed in his .
`` Dowd , '' said Trafford after a fair pause , `` What would you do if you were me ? ''
`` Well , is n't it ? ''
`` 'Directly , ' I said .
If we just stopped it -- over there -- there 'd be no improvement here .
In fact , for a time it would mean dislocations .
It might mean permanent , hopeless , catastrophic dislocation .
You know that as well as I do .
Suppose the West-end became -- Tolstoyan ; the East would become chaos . ''
`` Not much likelihood , '' sneered Dowd .
`` Socialism , '' said Dowd , `` is indicated . ''
Behind it was his grey-toned , intelligent , resentful face , his smouldering eyes , his slightly frayed collar and vivid , ill-chosen tie .
At times Trafford could almost hear his flat insistent voice , his measured h-less speech .
Dowd was so penetratingly right , -- and so ignorant of certain essentials , so wrong in his forecasts and ultimates .
It was true beyond disputing that Trafford as compared with Dowd had opportunity , power of a sort , the prospect and possibility of leisure .
He admitted the liability that followed on that advantage .
It expressed so entirely the spirit of his training that with Trafford the noble maxim of the older socialists ; `` from each according to his ability , to each according to his need , '' received an intuitive acquiescence .
He had no more doubt than Dowd that Dowd was the victim of a subtle evasive injustice , innocently and helplessly underbred , underfed , cramped and crippled , and that all his own surplus made him in a sense Dowd's debtor .
One might think such things had no practical significance .
And at the back of it all was Dowd , remarkably more impatient each year , confessing the failure of parliamentary methods , of trades unionism , hinting more and more plainly at the advent of a permanent guerilla war against capital , at the general strike and sabotage .
The quiet smile of the Christian Scientist was becoming now the fixed expression of Mrs. Pope 's face , and it scarcely relaxed for a moment as she surveyed her daughter 's splendours .
She had triumphantly refused to worry over a rather serious speculative disappointment , but her faith in her prophet 's spiritual power had been strengthened rather than weakened by the manifest insufficiency of his financial prestidigitations , and she was getting through life quite radiantly now , smiling at ( but not , of course , giving way to ) beggars , smiling at toothaches and headaches , both her own and other people 's , smiling away doubts , smiling away everything that bows the spirit of those who are still in the bonds of the flesh ... .
Trafford 's rapid prosperity and his implicit promise of still wider activities and successes brought him innumerable acquaintances and many friends .
He joined two or three distinguished clubs , he derived an uncertain interest from a series of week-end visits to ample , good-mannered households , and for a time he found a distraction in little flashes of travel to countries that caught at his imagination , Morocco , Montenegro , Southern Russia .
He had perceived the cessation of that first bright outbreak of self-revelation , this relapse into the secrecies of individuality , quite early in their married life .
I have already told of his first efforts to bridge their widening separation by walks and talks in the country , and by the long pilgrimage among the Alps that had ended so unexpectedly at Vevey .
In the retrospect the years seemed punctuated with phases when `` we must talk '' dominated their intercourse , and each time the impulse of that recognized need passed away by insensible degrees again -- with nothing said .
But he could not concentrate his mind , he could not think where to begin .
Day followed day , each with its attacks upon his intention , its petty just claims , its attractive novelties of aspect .
The telephone bell rang , the letters flopped into the hall , Malcom the butler seemed always at hand with some distracting oblong on his salver .
Dowd was developing ideas for a reconstructed organization of the factory , Solomonson growing enthusiastic about rubber-glass , his house seemed full of women , Marjorie had an engagement for him to keep or the children were coming in to say good-night .
To his irritated brain the whole scheme of his life presented itself at last as a tissue of interruptions which prevented his looking clearly at reality .
More and more definitely he realized he wanted to get away and think .
His former life of research became invested with an effect of immense dignity and of a steadfast singleness of purpose ... .
Blenkins , the gentlemanly colleague of Denton in the control of the _Old Country Gazette_ , appeared on his way to the pay-desk , gesticulating amiably _en-route_ to any possible friend .
Trafford returned his salutation , and pulled himself together immediately after in fear that he had scowled , for he hated to be churlish to any human being .
Blenkins , too , it might be , had sorrow and remorse and periods of passionate self-distrust and self-examination ; maybe Blenkins could weep salt tears , as Blenkins no doubt under suitable sword-play would reveal heart and viscera as quivering and oozy as any man 's .
Blenkins and Hart simulated interest .
`` It 's immoral , '' said Blenkins , `` for a man of your standing to keep out of politics . ''
Why , after all , should he go to Labrador at all ?
Why should n't he make a supreme effort here ?
Trafford surveyed the place ; it seemed to him to have shrunken a little in the course of the three years that had intervened since he resigned his position .
On the wall at the back there still hung , fly-blown and a little crumpled , an old table of constants he had made for his elasticity researches .
Lake had kept it there , for Lake was a man of generous appreciations , and rather proud to follow in the footsteps of an investigator of Trafford 's subtlety and vigor .
The old sink in the corner where Trafford had once swilled his watch glasses and filled his beakers had been replaced by one of a more modern construction , and the combustion cupboard was unfamiliar , until Durgan pointed out that it had been enlarged .
The ground-glass window at the east end showed still the marks of an explosion that had banished a clumsy student from this sanctuary at the very beginning of Trafford 's career .
`` You did , sir , '' said Durgan .
His mood of wondering at familiar things was still upon him .
It came to him as a thing absurd and incongruous that this should be his home .
It was all wonderfully arranged into one dignified harmony , but he felt now that at a touch of social earthquake , with a mere momentary lapse towards disorder , it would degenerate altogether into litter , lie heaped together confessed the loot it was .
He came to a stop opposite one of the Rogersons , a stiffly self-conscious shop girl in her Sunday clothes , a not unsuccessful emulation of Nicholson 's wonderful Mrs. Stafford of Paradise Row .
Regarded as so much brown and grey and amber-gold , it was coherent in Marjorie 's design , but regarded as a work of art , as a piece of expression , how madly irrelevant was its humour and implications to that room and the purposes of that room !
Rogerson was n't perhaps trying to say much , but at any rate he was trying to say something , and Redwood too was asserting freedom and adventure , and the thought of that Florentine of the bust , and the patient , careful Indian potter , and every maker of all the little casual articles about him , produced an effect of muffled , stifled assertions .
Against this subdued and disciplined background of muted , inarticulate cries , -- cries for beauty , for delight , for freedom , Marjorie and her world moved and rustled and chattered and competed -- wearing the skins of beasts , the love-plumage of birds , the woven cocoon cases of little silkworms ... .
He went to the window and stared out ; turned about and regarded the gracious variety of that long , well-lit room again , then strolled thoughtfully upstairs .
He reached the door of his study , and a sound of voices from the schoolroom -- it had recently been promoted from the rank of day nursery to this level -- caught his mood .
He changed his mind , crossed the landing , and was welcomed with shouts .
`` I just wo n't . ''
`` No , '' said Trafford , with sudden fierce resentment .
`` I 've overtaken you and beaten you there , Marjorie . ''
She stared at the harsh bitterness of his voice .
She was about to speak when the door opened , and Malcom ushered in Aunt Plessington and Uncle Hubert .
Husband and wife hung for a moment , and then realized their talk was at an end ... .
`` Is n't it a lark ? ''
began Aunt Plessington , with something like a note of apprehension in her highpitched voice , and speaking almost from the doorway , `` we 're making a call together .
It 's an attack in force . ''
`` We want you to do something for us , '' said Aunt Plessington , taking two hands with two hands ... .
She took her letter into the hall and returned to him , closing the door behind her .
Their eyes met for a moment .
`` The best part of a year . ''
The tea-things came before mother and son were back at essentials again .
Then she asked abruptly : `` Why are you going away like this ? ''
`` I 'm tired of all this business and finance , '' he said after a pause .
`` I thought you would be , '' she answered as deliberately .
She felt they both hung away from the essential aspect .
Either he or she must approach it .
She decided that she would , that it was a less difficult thing for her than for him .
`` And Marjorie ? ''
He looked into his mother 's eyes very quietly .
`` You see , '' he went on deliberately disregarding her question , `` I 'm beached .
I'm spoilt now for the old researches -- spoilt altogether .
And I do n't like this life I 'm leading .
While I was struggling it had a kind of interest .
There was an excitement in piling up the first twenty thousand .
It 's empty , it 's aimless , it 's incessant ... . ''
`` But she does n't show it .
She wants things and wants things -- -- ''
`` Find out -- what it all means , my boy ? ''
`` And then -- -- ? ''
He did n't answer .
She went and stood beside him , leaning upon the mantel .
`` Godwin , '' she said , `` she 'd only be further behind ... .
You 've got to take her with you . ''
`` Then you ought to go away with her -- -- '' She stopped .
`` I 've thought so much of these things , '' she said with the milk-jug in her hand .
`` It 's not only you two , but others .
And all the movement about us ... .
Marriage is n't what it was .
It 's become a different thing because women have become human beings .
Only -- -- You know , Godwin , all these things are so difficult to express .
Woman 's come out of being a slave , and yet she is n't an equal ... .
We 've had a sort of sham emancipation , and we have n't yet come to the real one . ''
She put down the milk-jug on the tray with an air of grave deliberation .
`` If you go away from her and make the most wonderful discoveries about life and yourself , it 's no good -- unless she makes them too .
It 's no good at all ... .
You ca n't live without her in the end , any more than she can live without you .
You may think you can , but I 've watched you .
You don't want to go away from her , you want to go away from the world that 's got hold of her , from the dresses and parties and the competition and all this complicated flatness we have to live in ... .
It would n't worry you a bit , if it had n't got hold of her .
You do n't want to get out of it for your own sake .
You _are_ out of it .
You are as much out of it as any one can be .
Only she holds you in it , because she is n't out of it .
Your going away will do nothing .
She 'll still be in it -- and still have her hold on you ... .
You 've got to take her away .
Or else -- if you go away -- in the end it will be just like a ship , Godwin , coming back to its moorings . ''
`` She wo n't come , '' said Trafford , after considering it .
`` I do n't think you know Marjorie as well as I do . ''
They dined at the Loretto Restaurant with the Bernards and Richard Hampden and Mrs. Godwin Capes , the dark-eyed , quiet-mannered wife of the dramatist , a woman of impulsive speech and long silences , who had subsided from an early romance ( Capes had been divorced for her while she was still a mere girl ) into a markedly correct and exclusive mother of daughters .
Through the dinner Marjorie was watching Trafford and noting the deep preoccupation of his manner .
He talked a little to Mrs. Bernard until it was time for Hampden to entertain her , then finding Mrs. Capes was interested in Bernard , he lapsed into thought .
Presently Marjorie discovered his eyes scrutinizing herself .
`` He does n't seem to care to see his things , '' his wife explained .
The play was in fact an admirable piece of English stagecraft , and it dealt exclusively with that unreal other world of beings the English theatre has for its own purposes developed .
Just as Greece through the ages evolved and polished and perfected the idealized life of its Homeric poems , so the British mind has evolved their Stage Land to embody its more honourable dreams , full of heroic virtues , incredible honour , genial worldliness , childish villainies , profound but amiable waiters and domestics , pathetic shepherds and preposterous crimes .
Capes , needing an income , had mastered the habits and customs of this imagined world as one learns a language ; success endorsed his mastery ; he knew exactly how deeply to underline an irony and just when it is fit and proper for a good man to call upon `` God ! ''
or cry out `` Damn ! ''
In this play he had invented a situation in which a charming and sympathetic lady had killed a gross and drunken husband in self-defence , almost but not quite accidentally , and had then appealed to the prodigious hero for assistance in the resulting complications .
At a great cost of mental suffering to himself he had told his First and Only Lie to shield her .
Then years after he had returned to England -- the first act happened , of course in India -- to find her on the eve of marrying , without any of the preliminary confidences common among human beings , an old school friend of his .
( In plays all Gentlemen have been at school together , and one has been the other 's fag . )
The audience had to be interested in the problem of what the prodigious hero was to do in this prodigious situation .
Should he maintain a colossal silence , continue his shielding , and let his friend marry the murderess saved by his perjury , or -- -- ?
Indeed , the absolute -- inconvenience !
`` Oh , because the one we have bores me , and the next one will bore me more . ''
`` I do n't want to . ''
`` I 'm going to open out , '' she said .
`` A four-footman place ? ''
He pulled up the bearskin over his knees .
`` You see -- -- We are n't going to do any of those things at all ... .
`` I 've got into this stupid struggle for winning money , '' he went on , `` and I feel like a woman must feel who 's made a success of prostitution .
I feel like some one fallen and diseased ... .
Business and prostitution ; they 're the same thing .
All business is a sort of prostitution , all prostitution is a sort of business .
Why should one sell one 's brains any more than one sells one 's body ?
It 's so easy to succeed if one has good brains and cares to do it , and does n't let one's attention or imagination wander -- and it 's so degrading .
I 'm sick of this life , Marjorie .
_I_ do n't want to buy things .
I 'm sick of buying .
I 'm at an end .
I 'm clean at an end .
It's exactly as though suddenly in walking through a great house one came on a passage that ended abruptly in a door , which opened -- on nothing !
`` We 've got to live as well as think . ''
`` But one must do something . ''
`` No , '' he said `` that 's the universal blunder nowadays .
One must do the right thing .
And we do n't know the right thing , Marjorie .
That 's the very heart of the trouble ... .
Does this life satisfy _you ?
_ If it did would you always be so restless ?
`` But , '' she said , `` think of the good things in life ? ''
`` But -- -- Has it been love ?
Love is a thing that grows .
But we took it -- as people take flowers out of a garden , cut them off , put them in water ... .
How much of our daily life has been love ?
How much of it mere consequences of the love we 've left behind us ?
... We 've just cohabited and 'made love ' -- you and I -- and thought of a thousand other things ... . ''
She was still for a moment , then knelt very swiftly before him and held out her arms .
`` My dear , '' he cried , `` my dear !
why do you always want to turn love into -- touches ?
Stand up there , my dear ; do n't think I 've ceased to love you , but stand up there and let me talk to you as one man to another .
If we let this occasion slide to embraces ... . ''
`` We might go away -- to Switzerland . ''
`` We _went_ to Switzerland .
Did n't we agree -- it was our second honeymoon .
It is n't a honeymoon we need .
No , we 'll have to go further than that . ''
`` Ever so much further . ''
She moved impulsively and checked herself and crouched away from him .
`` I must n't touch your hand , '' she whispered .
`` You 've got to explain . ''
He leant forward with his elbows on his knees and his hands extended , explanatory .
He wanted intensely that she should understand and agree and his desire made him clumsy , now slow and awkward , now glibly and unsatisfyingly eloquent .
But she comprehended his quality better than he knew .
They were to go away to Labrador , this snowy desert of which she had scarcely heard , to camp in the very heart of the wilderness , two hundred miles or more from any human habitation -- --
`` But how long ? ''
`` _Is_ it a mother 's duty always to keep with her children ?
They will be looked after , their lives are organized , there is my mother close at hand ... .
What is the good of having children at all -- unless their world is to be better than our world ?
... What are we doing to save them from the same bathos as this -- to which we have come ?
We give them food and health and pictures and lessons , that 's all very well while they are just little children ; but we 've got no religion to give them , no aim , no sense of a general purpose .
What is the good of bread and health -- and no worship ?
... What can we say to them when they ask us why we brought them into the world ?
-- _We_ happened -- _you_ happened .
What are we to tell them when they demand the purpose of all this training , all these lessons ?
When they ask what we are preparing them for ?
Just that _you_ , too , may have children !
Is that any answer ?
Marjorie , it 's common-sense to try this over -- to make this last supreme effort -- just as it will be common-sense to separate if we ca n't get the puzzle solved together . ''
We can afford it .
Of course , we shall separate . ''
He faced her protest squarely .
`` Life is not worth living , '' he said , `` unless it has more to hold it together than ours has now .
If we can not escape together , then -- _I will go alone_ .
`` This is something final , '' she said .
`` I was stiffer before I bathed , '' he said .
He spoke again presently .
`` We do n't turn back for soap , '' he said .
The dawn broke upon a tearing race of waves and a wild drift of slanting rain sweeping across the lake before a gale .
Marjorie peered out at this as one peers out under the edge of an umbrella .
It was manifestly impossible to go on , and they did nothing that day but run up a canvas shelter for the men and shift the tent behind a thicket of trees out of the full force of the wind .
The men squatted stoically , and smoked and yarned .
Everything got coldly wet , and for the most part the Traffords sat under the tent and stared blankly at this summer day in Labrador .
`` Here presently , '' said Trafford , `` we shall be in peace . ''
Noyes would stand , holding a hammer and staring at the narrow little berth he was fixing together .
`` They 'll come right up to the door here .
Winter makes 'em hidjus bold . ''
`` It 's that cold I 've known a man have his nose froze while he lay in bed , '' said Noyes .
A sort of propagandist enthusiasm grew up in the men .
They felt it incumbent upon them to persuade the Traffords to return .
They reasoned with them rather as one does with wilful children .
They tried to remind them of the delights and securities of the world they were deserting .
Noyes drew fancy pictures of the pleasures of London by way of contrast to the bitter days before them .
`` You 've got everything there , everything .
Suppose you feel a bit ill , you go out , and every block there 's a drug store got everything -- all the new rem'dies -- p'raps twenty , thirty sorts of rem'dy .
Lit up , nice .
And chaps in collars -- like gentlemen .
Or you feel a bit dully and you go into the streets and there 's people .
when I was in New York I used to spend hours looking at the people .
And everything lit up , too .
You can spend hours and hours in New York -- -- ''
`` By telephone , '' confirmed Noyes .
`` When I was in New York there was a telephone in each room in the hotel .
I did n't use it ever , except once when they did n't answer -- but there it was .
I know about telephones all right ... . ''
Why had they come here ?
None of the men were clear about that .
Marjorie and Trafford would overhear them discussing this question at their fire night after night ; they seemed to talk of nothing else .
They indulged in the boldest hypotheses , even in the theory that Trafford knew of deposits of diamonds and gold , and would trust no one but his wife with the secret .
They seemed also attracted by the idea that our two young people had `` done something . ''
Lean , with memories of some tattered sixpenny novel that had drifted into his hands from England , had even some notion of an elopement , of a pursuing husband or a vindictive wife .
He was young and romantic , but it seemed incredible he should suggest that Marjorie was a royal princess .
Yet there were moments when his manner betrayed a more than personal respect ... .
`` I ca n't stand that , '' said Marjorie .
`` It touches my pride .
I 've stood a good deal .
The voice at the men 's fire stopped and a black head turned around .
`` What is it , Mrs .
`` We wanted to be alone together .
There was too much -- over there -- too much everything . ''
Both Marjorie and Trafford felt a queer emotion , a sense of loss and desertion , a swelling in the throat , as that file of men receded over the rocky slopes , went down into a dip , reappeared presently small and remote cresting another spur , going on towards the little wood that hid the head of the rapids .
They halted for a moment on the edge of the wood and looked back , then turned again one by one and melted stride by stride into the trees .
Noyes was the last to go .
He stood , in an attitude that spoke as plainly as words , `` I do n't care to leave ye . ''
Something white waved and flickered ; he had whipped out the letters they had given him for England , and he was waving them .
Then , as if by an effort , he set himself to follow the others , and the two still watchers on the height above saw him no more .
`` These things are so infernally interesting , '' said Trafford , surveying the row of miscellaneous cans upon the stove he had packed with disarticulated goose .
`` But we did n't come here to picnic .
All this is eating us up .
I have a memory of some immense tragic purpose -- -- ''
`` We 'll keep the wolf from the door , '' he said .
`` Do n't talk of wolves ! ''
`` It is only when men have driven away the wolf from the door -- oh !
altogether away , that they find despair in the sky ?
I wonder -- -- ''
`` I 'm afraid .
And I long for the children .
And the wind _nips_ . ''
But with you ... .
Have we , after all , got out of things at all ?
I said coming up , perhaps we were leaving our own problem behind .
In exchange for other problems -- old problems men have had before .
We 've got nearer necessity ; that 's all .
Things press on us just as much .
There's nothing more fundamental in wild nature , nothing profounder -- only something earlier .
One does n't get out of life by going here or there ... .
But I wanted to get you away -- from all things that had such a hold on you ... .
One morning Trafford found the footmarks of some catlike creature in the snow near the bushes where he was accustomed to get firewood ; they led away very plainly up the hill , and after breakfast he took his knife and rifle and snowshoes and went after the lynx -- for that he decided the animal must be .
There was no urgent reason why he should want to kill a lynx , unless perhaps that killing it made the store shed a trifle safer ; but it was the first trail of any living thing for many days ; it promised excitement ; some primordial instinct perhaps urged him .
The morning was a little overcast , and very cold between the gleams of wintry sunshine .
`` Good-bye , dear wife ! ''
he said , and then as she remembered afterwards came back a dozen yards to kiss her .
`` I 'll not be long , '' he said .
`` The beast 's prowling , and if it does n't get wind of me I ought to find it in an hour . ''
He hesitated for a moment .
`` I 'll not be long , '' he repeated , and she had an instant 's wonder whether he hid from her the same dread of loneliness that she concealed .
Or perhaps he only knew her secret .
Up among the tumbled rocks he turned , and she was still watching him .
he cried and waved , and the willow thickets closed about him .
Prompt come an answering shot .
Marjorie had an instinctive fear of wild animals , and it still seemed dreadful to her that they should go at large , uncaged .
She suddenly wanted Trafford violently , wanted him by her side .
Also she thought of leaving the trail , going back to the bushes .
She had to take herself in hand .
In the wastes one did not fear wild beasts .
One had no fear of them .
But why not fire a shot to let him know she was near ?
She stared up at the darkling sky with its grey promise of snow , and down the slopes of the mountain .
Clearly they must stay the night here .
They were too high for wood among these rocks , but three or four hundred yards below there were a number of dwarfed fir trees .
She had brought an axe , so that a fire was possible .
Should she go back to camp and get the tent ?
He nodded his head and winced .
`` Build a fire . ''
`` Two bits of wood tied on my leg -- splints .
Then I can drag myself .
Like a blessed old walrus . ''
He smiled , and she kissed his bandaged face again .
She stood up again , thought , put his rifle and knife to his hand for fear of that lurking wolf , abandoning her own rifle with an effort , and went striding and leaping from rock to rock towards the trees below .
She made the chips fly , and was presently towing three venerable pine dwarfs , bumping over rock and crevice , back to Trafford .
She flung them down , stood for a moment bright and breathless , then set herself to hack off the splints he needed from the biggest stem .
`` Now , '' she said , coming to him .
She felt a passionate desire to pray ... .
Soon her back and shoulders were aching violently , and the rope across her chest was tugging like some evil-tempered thing .
But she did not dare to rest .
The snow was now falling thick and fast , the flakes traced white spirals and made her head spin , so that she was constantly falling away to the south-westward and then correcting herself by the compass .
She tried to think how this zig-zagging might affect her course , but the snow whirls confused her mind and a growing anxiety would not let her pause to think .
She felt blinded ; it seemed to be snowing inside her eyes so that she wanted to rub them .
Soon the ground must rise to the ridge , she told herself ; it must surely rise .
Then the sledge came bumping at her heels and she perceived she was going down hill .
She consulted the compass , and she found she was facing south .
She turned sharply to the right again .
The snowfall became a noiseless , pitiless torture to sight and mind .
The sledge behind her struggled to hold her back , and the snow balled under her snowshoes .
She wanted to stop and rest , take thought , sit for a moment .
She struggled with herself and kept on .
She tried walking with shut eyes , and tripped and came near sprawling .
`` Oh God ! ''
she cried , `` oh God ! ''
too stupefied for more articulate prayers .
Ten seconds , twenty seconds , and then so loud and near it amazed her , came his answering shot .
It sounded like the hillside bursting .
In another moment she had discovered the trail she had made overnight and that morning by dragging firewood .
It was now a shallow soft white trench .
Instantly her despair and fatigue had gone from her .
Should she take a load of wood with her ?
she asked herself , in addition to the weight behind her , and had a better idea .
She would unload and pile her stuff here , and bring him down on the sledge closer to the wood .
She looked about and saw two rocks that diverged with a space between .
She would trample the snow hard and flat , put her sledge on it , pile boughs and make a canopy of blanket overhead and behind .
Then a fire in front .
She found him markedly recovered , weak and quiet , with snow drifting over his feet , his rifle across his knees , and his pipe alight .
`` Back already , '' he said , `` but -- -- ''
His voice varied , now high and clear , now mumbling , now vexed and expostulating , now rich with deep feeling , now fagged and slow ; his matter varied , too ; now he talked like one who is inspired , and now like one lost and confused , stupidly repeating phrases , going back upon a misleading argument , painfully , laboriously beginning over and over again .
Marjorie sat before the stove watching it burn and sink , replenishing it , preparing food , and outside the bitter wind moaned and blew the powdery snow before it , and the shortening interludes of pallid , diffused daylight which pass for days in such weather , came and went .
Intense cold had come now with leaden snowy days and starless nights .
Afterwards he came back to that .
`` That was a good image , '' he said , `` something trying to exist , which is n't substance , does n't belong to space or time , something stifled and enclosed , struggling to get through .
Just confused birth cries , eyes that hardly see , deaf ears , poor little thrusting hands .
A thing altogether blind at first , a twitching and thrusting of protoplasm under the waters , and then the plants creeping up the beaches , the insects and reptiles on the margins of the rivers , beasts with a flicker of light in their eyes answering the sun .
And at last , out of the long interplay of desire and fear , an ape , an ape that stared and wondered , and scratched queer pictures on a bone ... . ''
`` Only I 've forgotten . ''
`` Understanding spreading like a dawn ... .
`` Logic and language , clumsy implements , but rising to our needs , rising to our needs , thought clarified , enriched , reaching out to every man alive -- some day -- presently -- touching every man alive , harmonizing acts and plans , drawing men into gigantic co-operations , tremendous co-operations ... .
`` Until man shall stand upon this earth as upon a footstool and reach out his hand among the stars ... .
He came back to that several times before he seemed able to go on from it .
He spoke slowly , as though he traced things carefully .
`` Before I met her I suppose I was n't half alive .
Yet I do n't remember I felt particularly incomplete .
Women were interesting , of course ; they excited me at times , that girl at Yonkers !
I stuck to my work .
It was fine work , I forget half of it now , the half-concealed intimations I mean -- queer how one forgets !
-- but I know I felt my way to wide , deep things .
It was like exploring caves -- monstrous , limitless caves .
Very still -- underground .
Wonderful and beautiful ... .
They're lying there now for other men to seek .
Other men will find them ... .
Then _she_ came , as though she was taking possession .
The beauty of her , oh !
the life and bright eagerness , and the incompatibility !
That 's the riddle !
I 've loved her always .
When she came to my arms it seemed to me the crown of life .
Nothing else seemed to matter .
All sorts of things did .
I found that out soon enough .
And when that first child was born .
That for a time was supreme ... .
Yes -- she 's the quintessence of life , the dear greed of her , the appetite , the clever appetite for things .
She 's so damned clever !
The light in her eyes !
Her quick sure hands !
... Only my work was crowded out of my life and ended , and she did n't seem to feel it , she did n't seem to mind it .
There was a sort of disregard .
As though all that did n't really matter ... . ''
I 've a vague sort of memory of preaching and preaching in a kind of black , empty place , where there was n't anything ... .
A fury of exposition ... a kind of argument ... .
-- Is there such a thing in the world as a new-laid egg -- and some bread-and-butter ? ''
`` How long has it been ? ''
How long can it have been ? ''
From that hour Trafford mended .
He remained clear-minded , helpful , sustaining .
His face healed daily .
Marjorie had had to cut away great fragments of gangrenous frozen flesh , and he was clearly destined to have a huge scar over forehead and cheek , but in that pure , clear air , once the healing had begun it progressed swiftly .
His leg had set , a little shorter than its fellow and with a lump in the middle of the shin , but it promised to be a good serviceable leg none the less .
They examined it by the light of the stove with their heads together , and discussed when it would be wise to try it .
How do doctors tell when a man may stand on his broken leg ?
She had a vague impression you must wait six weeks , but she could not remember why she fixed upon that time .
She sat back on the floor and regarded him .
`` You do n't remember things you said -- when you were delirious ? ''
`` I do n't .
I 've found my place .
I 've been making my master my servant .
We women -- we 've been looting all the good things in the world , and helping nothing .
You 've carried me on your back until you are loathing life .
I 've been making you fetch and carry for me , love me , dress me , keep me and my children , minister to my vanities and greeds ... .
No ; let me go on .
I 'm so penitent , my dear , so penitent I want to kneel down here and marry you all over again , heal up your broken life and begin again .
Marjorie confessed the habit of sharing his pipe was growing on her .
`` What shall we do in Tyburnia ! ''
she said , and left it to the imagination .
`` If ever we get back there , '' he said .
`` And we will go back , '' she whispered , `` with a work -- -- ''
She disengaged herself from his arm , and sat close to him upon the floor .
`` I think I can see what you will do , '' she said .
`` For the first time I begin to see things as they may be for us .
I begin to see a life ahead .
For the very first time . ''
She sprang to her feet .
There came a sound of wind outside , a shifting of snow on the roof , and the door creaked .
`` Half-past eleven , '' she exclaimed looking at the watch that hung in the light of the stove door .
`` I do n't want to sleep yet ; do you ?
I 'm going to brew some tea -- make a convivial drink .
And then we will go on talking .
It 's so good talking to you .
I 've an idea !
Do n't you think on this special day , it might run to a biscuit ? ''
Her face was keenly anxious .
`` One biscuit each , '' she said , trying to rob her voice of any note of criminality .
`` Just one , you know , wo n't matter . ''
And now Marjorie 's mind was teaming with thoughts of this new conception of a life lived for understanding .
As she went about the preparation of the tea , her vividly concrete imagination was active with the realization of the life they would lead on their return .
She could not see it otherwise than framed in a tall , fine room , a study , a study in sombre tones , with high , narrow , tall , dignified bookshelves and rich deep green curtains veiling its windows .
There should be a fireplace of white marble , very plain and well proportioned , with furnishings of old brass , and a big desk towards the window beautifully lit by electric light , with abundant space for papers to lie .
And she wanted some touch of the wilderness about it ; a skin perhaps ... .
The tea was still infusing when she had determined upon an enormous paper-weight of that iridescent Labradorite that had been so astonishing a feature of the Green River Valley .
She would have it polished on one side only -- the other should be rough to show the felspar in its natural state ... .
It was n't that she did n't feel and understand quite fully the intention and significance of all he had said , but that in these symbols of texture and equipment her mind quite naturally clothed itself .
And while this room was coming into anticipatory being in her mind , she was making the tea very deftly and listening to Trafford 's every word .
`` While you were asleep the other night , '' Trafford began one day as they sat spinning out their mid-day meal , `` I was thinking how badly I had expressed myself when I talked to you the other day , and what a queer , thin affair I made of the plans I wanted to carry out .
As a matter of fact , they 're neither queer nor thin , but they are unreal in comparison with the common things of everyday life , hunger , anger , all the immediate desires .
They only begin when those others are at peace .
It 's hard to set out these things ; they 're complicated and subtle , and one can not simplify without falsehood .
I do n't want to simplify .
The world has gone out of its way time after time through simplifications and short cuts .
Save us from epigrams !
And when one thinks over what one has said , at a little distance , -- one wants to go back to it , and say it all again .
I seem to be not so much thinking things out as reviving and developing things I 've had growing in my mind ever since we met .
It 's as though an immense reservoir of thought had filled up in my mind at last and was beginning to trickle over and break down the embankment between us .
This conflict that has been going on between our life together and my -- my intellectual life ; it 's only just growing clear in my own mind .
Yet it 's just as if one turned up a light on something that had always been there ... .
`` Who knows how long or how far ?
Are n't you at any rate here , dear woman of mine ... .
( _Surely you are here_ ) . ''
She looked round at him .
`` You said something like that when you were delirious , '' she answered , after a little pause .
`` It 's one of the ideas that you 're struggling with .
You go on , old man , and _talk_ .
We've months -- for repetitions . ''
`` Not a bit of it .
I 'm a very different Rag with a very different Marjorie .
Things -- are graver .
-- I 'm lame for life -- and I 've a scar .
The very _look_ of things is changed ... . ''
He stared at her face and said : `` You 've hidden the looking-glass and you think I haven't noted it -- -- ''
It was only after they had been doing it for a week or so that they remarked how steadily they gravitated to reminiscences , suggestions , descriptions and long discussions of eatables -- sound , solid eatables .
They told over the particulars of dinners they had imagined altogether forgotten ; neither hosts nor conversations seemed to matter now in the slightest degree , but every item in the menu had its place .
They nearly quarrelled one day about _hors-d'oeuvre_ .
Trafford wanted to dwell on them when Marjorie was eager for the soup .
`` Oh , but there 's no reason , '' said Trafford , `` why you should n't take a lot of _hors-d'oeuvre_ .
Three or four sardines , and potato salad and a big piece of smoked salmon , and some of that Norwegian herring , and so on , and keep the olives by you to pick at .
It 's a beginning . ''
`` _I 'd -- I 'd like to eat a mutton chop like that_ , '' said Marjorie .
After he had sat at their fire for an hour and eaten and drunk , his purpose in coming thawed out .
He explained he had just come on to them to see how they were .
He was , he said , a planter furring ; he had a line of traps , about a hundred and twenty miles in length .
The nearest trap in his path before he turned northward over the divide was a good forty miles down the river .
He had come on from there .
Just to have a look .
His name , he said , was Louis Napoleon Partington .
He had carried a big pack , a rifle and a dead marten , -- they lay beside him -- and out of his shapeless mass of caribou skins and woolen clothing and wrappings , peeped a genial , oily , brown face , very dirty , with a strand of blue-black hair across one eye , irregular teeth in its friendly smile , and little , squeezed-up eyes .
Louis Napoleon 's eye brightened , but his face preserved its Indian calm .
`` Think what he 's doing ! ''
said Trafford , as they sat together under the lee of a rock waiting for him .
`` We imagined this was a free , simple-souled man leading an unsophisticated life on the very edge of humanity , and really he is as much a dependant of your woman 's world , Marjorie , as any sweated seamstress in a Marylebone slum .
how far those pretty wasteful hands of women reach !
All these poor broken and starving beasts he finds and slaughters are , from the point of view of our world , just furs .
Poor little snarling unfortunates !
Their pelts will be dressed and prepared because women who have never dreamt of this bleak wilderness desire them .
They will get at last into Regent Street shops , and Bond Street shops , and shops in Fifth Avenue and in Paris and Berlin , they will make delightful deep muffs , with scent and little bags and powder puffs and all sorts of things tucked away inside , and long wraps for tall women , and jolly little frames of soft fur for pretty faces , and dainty coats and rugs for expensive little babies in Kensington Gardens .
He looked at her with eyes of quiet amusement .
`` The old Adam is with her , '' said Trafford .
`` He 's wanting to give it her ... .
We do n't cease to be human , Madge , you know , because we 've got an idea now of just where we are .
I wonder , which would you like ?
I dare say we could arrange it . ''
`` I 'd like to , '' said Trafford .
He had got a silver fox , a beautifully marked silver fox , the best luck of Labrador !
One goes for years without one , in hope , and when it comes , it pays the trapper 's debts , it clears his life -- for years !
They tried poor inadequate congratulation ... .
`` Marjorie , '' he shouted , `` d'you remember ?
Old donkey cart ? ''
THE NEW MACHIAVELLI by H. G. Wells CONTENTS BOOK THE FIRST THE MAKING OF A MAN I .
CONCERNING A BOOK THAT WAS NEVER WRITTEN II .
BROMSTEAD AND MY FATHER III .
ADOLESCENCE BOOK THE SECOND MARGARET I. MARGARET IN STAFFORDSHIRE II .
MARGARET IN LONDON III .
MARGARET IN VENICE IV .
THE HOUSE IN WESTMINSTER BOOK THE THIRD THE HEART OF POLITICS I .
THE RIDDLE FOR THE STATESMAN II .
THE BESETTING OF SEX BOOK THE FOURTH ISABEL I .
LOVE AND SUCCESS II .
THE IMPOSSIBLE POSITION III .
THE BREAKING POINT BOOK THE FIRST : THE MAKING OF A MAN CHAPTER THE FIRST ~~ CONCERNING A BOOK THAT WAS NEVER WRITTEN 1 Since I came to this place I have been very restless , wasting my energies in the futile beginning of ill-conceived books .
One does not settle down very readily at two and forty to a new way of living , and I have found myself with the teeming interests of the life I have abandoned still buzzing like a swarm of homeless bees in my head .
My mind has been full of confused protests and justifications .
In any case I should have found difficulties enough in expressing the complex thing I have to tell , but it has added greatly to my trouble that I have a great analogue , that a certain Niccolo Machiavelli chanced to fall out of politics at very much the age I have reached , and wrote a book to engage the restlessness of his mind , very much as I have wanted to do .
He wrote about the relation of the great constructive spirit in politics to individual character and weaknesses , and so far his achievement lies like a deep rut in the road of my intention .
It has taken me far astray .
It is a matter of many weeks now -- diversified indeed by some long drives into the mountains behind us and a memorable sail to Genoa across the blue and purple waters that drowned Shelley -- since I began a laboured and futile imitation of `` The Prince . ''
I sat up late last night with the jumbled accumulation ; and at last made a little fire of olive twigs and burnt it all , sheet by sheet -- to begin again clear this morning .
But incidentally I have re-read most of Machiavelli , not excepting those scandalous letters of his to Vettori , and it seems to me , now that I have released myself altogether from his literary precedent , that he still has his use for me .
In spite of his vast prestige I claim kindred with him and set his name upon my title-page , in partial intimation of the matter of my story .
He takes me with sympathy not only by reason of the dream he pursued and the humanity of his politics , but by the mixture of his nature .
His vices come in , essential to my issue .
He is dead and gone , all his immediate correlations to party and faction have faded to insignificance , leaving only on the one hand his broad method and conceptions , and upon the other his intimate living personality , exposed down to its salacious corners as the soul of no contemporary can ever be exposed .
Of those double strands it is I have to write , of the subtle protesting perplexing play of instinctive passion and desire against too abstract a dream of statesmanship .
But things that seemed to lie very far apart in Machiavelli 's time have come near to one another ; it is no simple story of white passions struggling against the red that I have to tell .
The state-making dream is a very old dream indeed in the world's history .
It plays too small a part in novels .
Plato and Confucius are but the highest of a great host of minds that have had a kindred aspiration , have dreamt of a world of men better ordered , happier , finer , securer .
They imagined cities grown more powerful and peoples made rich and multitudinous by their efforts , they thought in terms of harbours and shining navies , great roads engineered marvellously , jungles cleared and deserts conquered , the ending of muddle and diseases and dirt and misery ; the ending of confusions that waste human possibilities ; they thought of these things with passion and desire as other men think of the soft lines and tender beauty of women .
Thousands of men there are to-day almost mastered by this white passion of statecraft , and in nearly every one who reads and thinks you could find , I suspect , some sort of answering response .
But in every one it presents itself extraordinarily entangled and mixed up with other , more intimate things .
It was so with Machiavelli .
I picture him at San Casciano as he lived in retirement upon his property after the fall of the Republic , perhaps with a twinge of the torture that punished his conspiracy still lurking in his limbs .
Such twinges could not stop his dreaming .
Then it was `` The Prince '' was written .
All day he went about his personal affairs , saw homely neighbours , dealt with his family , gave vent to everyday passions .
He would sit in the shop of Donato del Corno gossiping curiously among vicious company , or pace the lonely woods of his estate , book in hand , full of bitter meditations .
In the evening he returned home and went to his study .
At the entrance , he says , he pulled off his peasant clothes covered with the dust and dirt of that immediate life , washed himself , put on his `` noble court dress , '' closed the door on the world of toiling and getting , private loving , private hating and personal regrets , sat down with a sigh of contentment to those wider dreams .
I like to think of him so , with brown books before him lit by the light of candles in silver candlesticks , or heading some new chapter of `` The Prince , '' with a grey quill in his clean fine hand .
So writing , he becomes a symbol for me , and the less none because of his animal humour , his queer indecent side , and because of such lapses into utter meanness as that which made him sound the note of the begging-letter writer even in his `` Dedication , '' reminding His Magnificence very urgently , as if it were the gist of his matter , of the continued malignity of fortune in his affairs .
These flaws complete him .
They are my reason for preferring him as a symbol to Plato , of whose indelicate side we know nothing , and whose correspondence with Dionysius of Syracuse has perished ; or to Confucius who travelled China in search of a Prince he might instruct , with lapses and indignities now lost in the mists of ages .
They have achieved the apotheosis of individual forgetfulness , and Plato has the added glory of that acquired beauty , that bust of the Indian Bacchus which is now indissolubly mingled with his tradition .
They have passed into the world of the ideal , and every humbug takes his freedoms with their names .
But Machiavelli , more recent and less popular , is still all human and earthly , a fallen brother -- and at the same time that nobly dressed and nobly dreaming writer at the desk .
That vision of the strengthened and perfected state is protagonist in my story .
But as I re-read `` The Prince '' and thought out the manner of my now abandoned project , I came to perceive how that stir and whirl of human thought one calls by way of embodiment the French Revolution , has altered absolutely the approach to such a question .
Machiavelli , like Plato and Pythagoras and Confucius two hundred odd decades before him , saw only one method by which a thinking man , himself not powerful , might do the work of state building , and that was by seizing the imagination of a Prince .
Directly these men turned their thoughts towards realisation , their attitudes became -- what shall I call it ?
Machiavelli , it is true , had some little doubts about the particular Prince he wanted , whether it was Caesar Borgia of Giuliano or Lorenzo , but a Prince it had to be .
Before I saw clearly the differences of our own time I searched my mind for the modern equivalent of a Prince .
At various times I redrafted a parallel dedication to the Prince of Wales , to the Emperor William , to Mr. Evesham , to a certain newspaper proprietor who was once my schoolfellow at City Merchants ' , to Mr. J. D. Rockefeller -- all of them men in their several ways and circumstances and possibilities , princely .
Yet in every case my pen bent of its own accord towards irony because -- because , although at first I did not realise it , I myself am just as free to be a prince .
The appeal was unfair .
The old sort of Prince , the old little principality has vanished from the world .
The commonweal is one man 's absolute estate and responsibility no more .
In Machiavelli 's time it was indeed to an extreme degree one man's affair .
But the days of the Prince who planned and directed and was the source and centre of all power are ended .
We are in a condition of affairs infinitely more complex , in which every prince and statesman is something of a servant and every intelligent human being something of a Prince .
No magnificent pensive Lorenzos remain any more in this world for secretarial hopes .
In a sense it is wonderful how power has vanished , in a sense wonderful how it has increased .
I sit here , an unarmed discredited man , at a small writing-table in a little defenceless dwelling among the vines , and no human being can stop my pen except by the deliberate self-immolation of murdering me , nor destroy its fruits except by theft and crime .
No King , no council , can seize and torture me ; no Church , no nation silence me .
Such powers of ruthless and complete suppression have vanished .
But that is not because power has diminished , but because it has increased and become multitudinous , because it has dispersed itself and specialised .
It is no longer a negative power we have , but positive ; we can not prevent , but we can do .
This age , far beyond all previous ages , is full of powerful men , men who might , if they had the will for it , achieve stupendous things .
In Machiavelli 's outlook the interest of womanhood was in a region of life almost infinitely remote from his statecraft .
They were the vehicle of children , but only Imperial Rome and the new world of to-day have ever had an inkling of the significance that might give them in the state .
They did their work , he thought , as the ploughed earth bears its crops .
Apart from their function of fertility they gave a humorous twist to life , stimulated worthy men to toil , and wasted the hours of Princes .
He left the thought of women outside with his other dusty things when he went into his study to write , dismissed them from his mind .
But our modern world is burthened with its sense of the immense , now half articulate , significance of women .
They stand now , as it were , close beside the silver candlesticks , speaking as Machiavelli writes , until he stays his pen and turns to discuss his writing with them .
They were big clumsy residences in the earliest Victorian style , interminably high and with deep damp basements and downstairs coal-cellars and kitchens that suggested an architect vindictively devoted to the discomfort of the servant class .
If so , he had overreached himself and defeated his end , for no servant would stay in them unless for exceptional wages or exceptional tolerance of inefficiency or exceptional freedom in repartee .
Every storey in the house was from twelve to fifteen feet high ( which would have been cool and pleasant in a hot climate ) , and the stairs went steeply up , to end at last in attics too inaccessible for occupation .
The ceilings had vast plaster cornices of classical design , fragments of which would sometimes fall unexpectedly , and the wall-papers were bold and gigantic in pattern and much variegated by damp and ill-mended rents .
I do not remember anything of my father 's earlier and more energetic time .
I was the child of my parents ' middle years ; they married when my father was thirty-five and my mother past forty , and I saw only the last decadent phase of his educational career .
A garden , even when it is not exasperated by intensive methods , is a thing as exacting as a baby , its moods have to be watched ; it does not wait upon the cultivator 's convenience , but has times of its own .
Intensive culture greatly increases this disposition to trouble mankind ; it makes a garden touchy and hysterical , a drugged and demoralised and over-irritated garden .
My father got at cross purposes with our two patches at an early stage .
Everything grew wrong from the first to last , and if my father 's manures intensified nothing else , they certainly intensified the Primordial Curse .
The peas were eaten in the night before they were three inches high , the beans bore nothing but blight , the only apparent result of a spraying of the potatoes was to develop a PENCHANT in the cat for being ill indoors , the cucumber frames were damaged by the catapulting of boys going down the lane at the back , and all your cucumbers were mysteriously embittered .
That lane with its occasional passers-by did much to wreck the intensive scheme , because my father always stopped work and went indoors if any one watched him .
His special manure was apt to arouse a troublesome spirit of inquiry in hardy natures .
In the end the affair irritated him beyond endurance .
Never was a man less horticulturally-minded .
The clamour of these vegetables he had launched into the world for his service and assistance , wore out his patience .
He would walk into the garden the happiest of men after a day or so of disregard , talking to me of history perhaps or social organisation , or summarising some book he had read .
He talked to me of anything that interested him , regardless of my limitations .
Then he would begin to note the growth of the weeds .
`` This wo n't do , '' he would say and pull up a handful .
At last with the failure of the lettuces came the breaking point .
I was in the little arbour learning Latin irregular verbs when it happened .
I can see him still , his peculiar tenor voice still echoes in my brain , shouting his opinion of intensive culture for all the world to hear , and slashing away at that abominable mockery of a crop with a hoe .
We had tied them up with bast only a week or so before , and now half were rotten and half had shot up into tall slender growths .
He had the hoe in both hands and slogged .
Great wipes he made , and at each stroke he said , `` Take that ! ''
The air was thick with flying fragments of abortive salad .
It was a fantastic massacre .
It was the French Revolution of that cold tyranny , the vindictive overthrow of the pampered vegetable aristocrats .
After he had assuaged his passion upon them , he turned for other prey ; he kicked holes in two of our noblest marrows , flicked off the heads of half a row of artichokes , and shied the hoe with a splendid smash into the cucumber frame .
Something of the awe of that moment returns to me as I write of it .
That afternoon 's walk sticks in my memory for many reasons .
One is that we went further than I had ever been before ; far beyond Keston and nearly to Seven-oaks , coming back by train from Dunton Green , and the other is that my father as he went along talked about himself , not so much to me as to himself , and about life and what he had done with it .
He monologued so that at times he produced an effect of weird world-forgetfulness .
I listened puzzled , and at that time not understanding many things that afterwards became plain to me .
It is only in recent years that I have discovered the pathos of that monologue ; how friendless my father was and uncompanioned in his thoughts and feelings , and what a hunger he may have felt for the sympathy of the undeveloped youngster who trotted by his side .
That something was machinery and a vague energetic disposition to improve material things .
In another part of England ingenious people were beginning to use coal in smelting iron , and were producing metal in abundance and metal castings in sizes that had hitherto been unattainable .
Without warning or preparation , increment involving countless possibilities of further increment was coming to the strength of horses and men .
`` Power , '' all unsuspected , was flowing like a drug into the veins of the social body .
It is difficult to disentangle now what I understood at this time and what I have since come to understand , but it seems to me that even in those childish days I was acutely aware of an invading and growing disorder .
The serene rhythms of the old established agriculture , I see now , were everywhere being replaced by cultivation under notice and snatch crops ; hedges ceased to be repaired , and were replaced by cheap iron railings or chunks of corrugated iron ; more and more hoardings sprang up , and contributed more and more to the nomad tribes of filthy paper scraps that flew before the wind and overspread the country .
The outskirts of Bromstead were a maze of exploitation roads that led nowhere , that ended in tarred fences studded with nails ( I don't remember barbed wire in those days ; I think the Zeitgeist did not produce that until later ) , and in trespass boards that used vehement language .
Broken glass , tin cans , and ashes and paper abounded .
Cheap glass , cheap tin , abundant fuel , and a free untaxed Press had rushed upon a world quite unprepared to dispose of these blessings when the fulness of enjoyment was past .
I suppose one might have persuaded oneself that all this was but the replacement of an ancient tranquillity , or at least an ancient balance , by a new order .
Only to my eyes , quickened by my father 's intimations , it was manifestly no order at all .
It was a multitude of incoordinated fresh starts , each more sweeping and destructive than the last , and none of them ever really worked out to a ripe and satisfactory completion .
Each left a legacy of products , houses , humanity , or what not , in its wake .
It was a sort of progress that had bolted ; it was change out of hand , and going at an unprecedented pace nowhere in particular .
The same idea came to me also .
I ran to her .
I cried , pale to the depths of my spirit , `` IS HE DEAD ? ''
She had married late and she had , I think , become mentally self-subsisting before her marriage .
Even in those Herne Hill days I used to wonder what was going on in her mind , and I find that old speculative curiosity return as I write this .
She took a considerable interest in the housework that our generally servantless condition put upon her -- she used to have a charwoman in two or three times a week -- but she did not do it with any great skill .
She covered most of our furniture with flouncey ill-fitting covers , and she cooked plainly and without very much judgment .
The Penge house , as it contained nearly all our Bromstead things , was crowded with furniture , and is chiefly associated in my mind with the smell of turpentine , a condiment she used very freely upon the veneered mahogany pieces .
My mother had an equal dread of `` blacks '' by day and the `` night air , '' so that our brightly clean windows were rarely open .
So she whose blood fed me , whose body made me , lies in my memory as I saw her last , fixed , still , infinitely intimate , infinitely remote ... .
These cramping cults do indeed take an enormous toll of human love and happiness , and not only that but what we Machiavellians must needs consider , they make frightful breaches in human solidarity .
I suppose I am a deeply religious man , as men of my quality go , but I hate more and more , as I grow older , the shadow of intolerance cast by religious organisations .
All my life has been darkened by irrational intolerance , by arbitrary irrational prohibitions and exclusions .
Mahometanism with its fierce proselytism , has , I suppose , the blackest record of uncharitableness , but most of the Christian sects are tainted , tainted to a degree beyond any of the anterior paganisms , with this same hateful quality .
It is their exclusive claim that sends them wrong , the vain ambition that inspires them all to teach a uniform one-sided God and be the one and only gateway to salvation .
Deprecation of all outside the household of faith , an organised undervaluation of heretical goodness and lovableness , follows , necessarily .
Every petty difference is exaggerated to the quality of a saving grace or a damning defect .
Elaborate precautions are taken to shield the believer 's mind against broad or amiable suggestions ; the faithful are deterred by dark allusions , by sinister warnings , from books , from theatres , from worldly conversation , from all the kindly instruments that mingle human sympathy .
For only by isolating its flock can the organisation survive .
`` One wants , '' he said , pitching himself as he supposed in my key , `` to put constructive ideas into our readers , but they are narrow , you know , very narrow .
He made his moustache and lips express judicious regret .
`` One has to consider them carefully , one has to respect their attitudes .
One dare not go too far with them .
One has to feel one 's way . ''
`` Look here ! ''
`` I saw that kid pick it up .
It IS my knife . ''
It was when I was nearly fifteen this happened .
It is inseparably connected in my mind with the dusk of warm September evenings .
I never met the girl I loved by daylight , and I have forgotten her name .
It was some insignificant name .
We met , covered from each other , with all the nets of civilisation keeping us apart .
We walked side by side .
It led to scarcely more than that .
I think we met four or five times altogether , and always with her nearly silent elder sister on the other side of her .
We walked on the last two occasions arm in arm , furtively caressing each other 's hands , we went away from the glare of the shops into the quiet roads of villadom , and there we whispered instead of talking and looked closely into one another 's warm and shaded face .
`` Dear , '' I whispered very daringly , and she answered , `` Dear ! ''
We had a vague sense that we wanted more of that quality of intimacy and more .
We wanted each other as one wants beautiful music again or to breathe again the scent of flowers .
I hesitate and add here one other confession .
I want to tell this thing because it seems to me we are altogether too restrained and secretive about such matters .
The cardinal thing in life sneaks in to us darkly and shamefully like a thief in the night .
My memory of school has indeed no hint whatever of that quality of elucidation it seems reasonable to demand from it .
Here all about me was London , a vast inexplicable being , a vortex of gigantic forces , that filled and overwhelmed me with impressions , that stirred my imagination to a perpetual vague enquiry ; and my school not only offered no key to it , but had practically no comment to make upon it at all .
We were within three miles of Westminster and Charing Cross , the government offices of a fifth of mankind were all within an hour 's stroll , great economic changes were going on under our eyes , now the hoardings flamed with election placards , now the Salvation Army and now the unemployed came trailing in procession through the winter-grey streets , now the newspaper placards outside news-shops told of battles in strange places , now of amazing discoveries , now of sinister crimes , abject squalor and poverty , imperial splendour and luxury , Buckingham Palace , Rotten Row , Mayfair , the slums of Pimlico , garbage-littered streets of bawling costermongers , the inky silver of the barge-laden Thames -- such was the background of our days .
We went across St. Margaret 's Close and through the school gate into a quiet puerile world apart from all these things .
We joined in the earnest acquirement of all that was necessary for Greek epigrams and Latin verse , and for the rest played games .
We dipped down into something clear and elegantly proportioned and time-worn and for all its high resolve of stalwart virility a little feeble , like our blackened and decayed portals by Inigo Jones .
Marks , shindies , prayers and punishments , all flavoured with the leathery stuffiness of time-worn Big Hall ... .
He had indeed an effect not of a man directing a school , but of a man captured and directed by a school .
Dead and gone Elizabethans had begotten a monster that could carry him about in its mouth .
`` I do n't wish to innovate unduly , '' he used to say .
`` But we ought to get in some German , you know , -- for those who like it .
The army men will be wanting it some of these days . ''
`` There was a TATLER before that , '' said Britten , sitting on the writing table at the window that was closed to deaden the cries of the Lower School at play , and clashing his boots together .
I still held out for CITY MERCHANDIZE , which had taken my fancy .
`` Some of the chaps ' people wo n't like it , '' said Naylor , `` certain not to .
And it sounds Rum . ''
`` I vote we ask old Topham to see us through , '' said Naylor .
Britten groaned aloud and every one regarded him .
`` Greek epigrams on the fellows ' names , '' he said .
`` Small beer in ancient bottles .
Let 's get a stuffed broody hen to SIT on the magazine . ''
Britten writhed , appreciating the image .
`` There 's to be a section of sports .
YOU must do that . ''
I looked at Britten .
Hitherto we had not considered Cossington mattered very much in the world .
I recall phases of deep speculation , doubts and even prayers by night , and strange occasions when by a sort of hypnotic contemplation of nothingness I sought to pierce the web of appearances about me .
It is hard to measure these things in receding perspective , and now I can not trace , so closely has mood succeeded and overlaid and obliterated mood , the phases by which an utter horror of death was replaced by the growing realisation of its necessity and dignity .
Difficulty of the imagination with infinite space , infinite time , entangled my mind ; and moral distress for the pain and suffering of bygone ages that made all thought of reformation in the future seem but the grimmest irony upon now irreparable wrongs .
Many an intricate perplexity of these broadening years did not so much get settled as cease to matter .
Life crowded me away from it .
I have confessed myself a temerarious theologian , and in that passage from boyhood to manhood I ranged widely in my search for some permanently satisfying Truth .
That , too , ceased after a time to be urgently interesting .
I came at last into a phase that endures to this day , of absolute tranquillity , of absolute confidence in whatever that Incomprehensible Comprehensive which must needs be the substratum of all things , may be .
Feeling OF IT , feeling BY IT , I can not feel afraid of it .
I think I had got quite clearly and finally to that adjustment long before my Cambridge days were done .
I am sure that the evil in life is transitory and finite like an accident or distress in the nursery ; that God is my Father and that I may trust Him , even though life hurts so that one must needs cry out at it , even though it shows no consequence but failure , no promise but pain ... .
I was afraid to think either of sex or ( what I have always found inseparable from a kind of sexual emotion ) beauty .
Even as a boy I knew the thing as a haunting and alluring mystery that I tried to keep away from .
Its dim presence obsessed me none the less for all the extravagant decency , the stimulating silences of my upbringing ... .
All this was a thing apart from the rest of my life , a locked avoided chamber ... .
A small fresh-coloured man in grey objected .
`` Well , '' exploded Hatherleigh , `` if that is n't so what the deuce are we up here for ?
Instead of working in mines ?
If some things are n't to be thought about ever !
We 've got the privilege of all these extra years for getting things straight in our heads , and then we wo n't use 'em .
what do you think a university 's for ?
Esmeer 's idea came with an effect of real emancipation to several of us .
We were not going to be afraid of ideas any longer , we were going to throw down every barrier of prohibition and take them in and see what came of it .
We became for a time even intemperately experimental , and one of us , at the bare suggestion of an eminent psychic investigator , took hashish and very nearly died of it within a fortnight of our great elucidation .
It was our affectation to be a little detached from the main stream of undergraduate life .
We worked pretty hard , but by virtue of our beer , our socialism and suchlike heterodoxy , held ourselves to be differentiated from the swatting reading man .
None of us , except Baxter , who was a rowing blue , a rather abnormal blue with an appetite for ideas , took games seriously enough to train , and on the other hand we intimated contempt for the rather mediocre , deliberately humorous , consciously gentlemanly and consciously wild undergraduate men who made up the mass of Cambridge life .
After the manner of youth we were altogether too hard on our contemporaries .
We battered our caps and tore our gowns lest they should seem new , and we despised these others extremely for doing exactly the same things ; we had an idea of ourselves and resented beyond measure a similar weakness in these our brothers .
`` The Pinky Dinky shakes his head and says : 'I 'm afraid I shall never be a responsible being . '
And he really IS frivolous . ''
`` Pinky Dinkys become playful at the sight of women . ''
`` He COULD N'T tell you . ''
He boasted he took no exercise , and also of his knowledge of port wine .
Of other wines he confessed quite frankly he had no `` special knowledge . ''
Beyond these things he had little pride except that he claimed to have read every novel by a woman writer that had ever entered the Union Library .
This , however , he held to be remarkable rather than ennobling , and such boasts as he made of it were tinged with playfulness .
Certainly he had a scholar 's knowledge of the works of Miss Marie Corelli , Miss Braddon , Miss Elizabeth Glyn and Madame Sarah Grand that would have astonished and flattered those ladies enormously , and he loved nothing so much in his hours of relaxation as to propound and answer difficult questions upon their books .
Tusher of King 's was his ineffectual rival in this field , their bouts were memorable and rarely other than glorious for Codger ; but then Tusher spread himself too much , he also undertook to rehearse whole pages out of Bradshaw , and tell you with all the changes how to get from any station to any station in Great Britain by the nearest and cheapest routes ... .
I think this statement does my boyhood justice , and yet I have my doubts .
It is so hard now to say what one understood and what one did not understand .
It is n't only that every day changed one 's general outlook , but also that a boy fluctuates between phases of quite adult understanding and phases of tawdrily magnificent puerility .
Sometimes I myself was in those tumbrils that went along Cheapside to the Mansion House , a Sydney Cartonesque figure , a white defeated Mirabean ; sometimes it was I who sat judging and condemning and ruling ( sleeping in my clothes and feeding very simply ) the soul and autocrat of the Provisional Government , which occupied , of all inconvenient places !
the General Post Office at St .
At Cambridge my ideas ceased to live in a duologue ; in exchange for Britten , with whom , however , I corresponded lengthily , stylishly and self-consciously for some years , I had now a set of congenial friends .
I got talk with some of the younger dons , I learnt to speak in the Union , and in my little set we were all pretty busily sharpening each other's wits and correcting each other 's interpretations .
Cambridge made politics personal and actual .
At City Merchants ' we had had no sense of effective contact ; we boasted , it is true , an under secretary and a colonial governor among our old boys , but they were never real to us ; such distinguished sons as returned to visit the old school were allusive and pleasant in the best Pinky Dinky style , and pretended to be in earnest about nothing but our football and cricket , to mourn the abolition of `` water , '' and find a shuddering personal interest in the ancient swishing block .
At Cambridge I felt for the first time that I touched the thing that was going on .
Real living statesmen came down to debate in the Union , the older dons had been their college intimates , their sons and nephews expounded them to us and made them real to us .
They invited us to entertain ideas ; I found myself for the first time in my life expected to read and think and discuss , my secret vice had become a virtue .
The Ambassador of the Workers stirred his tea earnestly through an uncomfortable pause .
( Well , did they ?
That was the gist of my perplexity . )
`` I do n't follow that , '' said Chris Robinson .
`` We do n't propose anything futile , so far as I can see . ''
The prevailing force in my undergraduate days was not Socialism but Kiplingism .
Our set was quite exceptional in its socialistic professions .
And we were all , you must understand , very distinctly Imperialists also , and professed a vivid sense of the `` White Man's Burden . ''
`` The 'eathen in 'is blindness bows down to wood an ' stone ; 'E do n't obey no orders unless they is 'is own ; 'E keeps 'is side-arms awful : 'e leaves 'em all about An ' then comes up the regiment an ' pokes the 'eathen out .
All along o ' dirtiness , all along o ' mess , All along o ' doin ' things rather-more-or-less , All along of abby-nay , kul , an ' hazar-ho , Mind you keep your rifle an ' yourself jus ' so ! ''
As I write of that long tramp of ours , something of its freshness and enlargement returns to me .
I feel again the faint pleasant excitement of the boat train , the trampling procession of people with hand baggage and laden porters along the platform of the Folkestone pier , the scarcely perceptible swaying of the moored boat beneath our feet .
Then , very obvious and simple , the little emotion of standing out from the homeland and seeing the long white Kentish cliffs recede .
One walked about the boat doing one 's best not to feel absurdly adventurous , and presently a movement of people directed one 's attention to a white lighthouse on a cliff to the east of us , coming up suddenly ; and then one turned to scan the little different French coast villages , and then , sliding by in a pale sunshine came a long wooden pier with oddly dressed children upon it , and the clustering town of Boulogne .
Next morning we were breathing a thin exhilarating air that seemed to have washed our very veins to an incredible cleanliness , and eating hard-boiled eggs in a vast clear space of rime-edged rocks , snow-mottled , above a blue-gashed glacier .
All about us the monstrous rock surfaces rose towards the shining peaks above , and there were winding moraines from which the ice had receded , and then dark clustering fir trees far below .
And our thoughts were as comprehensive as our impressions .
Willersley's mind abounded in historical matter ; he had an inaccurate abundant habit of topographical reference ; he made me see and trace and see again the Roman Empire sweep up these winding valleys , and the coming of the first great Peace among the warring tribes of men ... .
In the retrospect each of us seems to have been talking about our outlook almost continually .
Each of us , you see , was full of the same question , very near and altogether predominant to us , the question : `` What am I going to do with my life ? ''
He saw it almost as importantly as I , but from a different angle , because his choice was largely made and mine still hung in the balance .
We planned half in earnest and half Utopianising , a League of Social Service .
Men are egotistical even in devotion .
All our splendid projects were thickset with the first personal pronoun .
We both could write , and all that we said in general terms was reflected in the particular in our minds ; it was ourselves we saw , and no others , writing and speaking that moving word .
We had already produced manuscript and passed the initiations of proof reading ; I had been a frequent speaker in the Union , and Willersley was an active man on the School Board .
Our feet were already on the lower rungs that led up and up .
He was six and twenty , and I twenty-two .
We intimated our individual careers in terms of bold expectation .
I had prophetic glimpses of walls and hoardings clamorous with `` Vote for Remington , '' and Willersley no doubt saw himself chairman of this committee and that , saying a few slightly ironical words after the declaration of the poll , and then sitting friendly beside me on the government benches .
There was nothing impossible in such dreams .
Why not the Board of Education for him ?
My preference at that time wavered between the Local Government Board -- I had great ideas about town-planning , about revisions of municipal areas and re-organised internal transit -- and the War Office .
I swayed strongly towards the latter as the journey progressed .
My educational bias came later .
The women in that valley are very beautiful -- women vary from valley to valley in the Alps and are plain and squat here and divinities five miles away -- and as we came down we passed a group of five or six of them resting by the wayside .
Their burthens were beside them , and one like Ceres held a reaping hook in her brown hand .
She watched us approaching and smiled faintly , her eyes at mine .
`` Damn agricultural work ! ''
I said , and broke out into a vigorous cursing of all I held dear .
`` Fettered things we are ! ''
`` I wonder why I stand it ! ''
`` Why do n't I go back and make love to those girls and let the world and you and everything go hang ?
Deep breasts and rounded limbs -- and we poor emasculated devils go tramping by with the blood of youth in us !
Along the hot and dusty lower road between the Orrido of Traffiume and Cannobio Willersley had developed his first blister .
And partly because of that and partly because there was a bag at the station that gave us the refreshment of clean linen and partly because of the lazy lower air into which we had come , we decided upon three or four days ' sojourn in the Empress Hotel .
Willersley wanted to go for an expedition across the lake that afternoon , but I refused .
He made some other proposals that I rejected abruptly .
`` I shall write in my room , '' I said .
I did not feel a bit like a lover , I felt like a burglar with the safe-door nearly opened .
`` Come in , '' I said almost impatiently , for anyone might be in the passage , and I gripped her wrist and drew her towards me .
That evening I came down to dinner a monster of pride , for behold !
I was a man .
I felt myself the most wonderful and unprecedented of adventurers .
It was hard to believe that any one in the world before had done as much .
My mistress and I met smiling , we carried things off admirably , and it seemed to me that Willersley was the dullest old dog in the world .
I wanted to give him advice .
I wanted to give him derisive pokes .
After dinner and coffee in the lounge I was too excited and hilarious to go to bed , I made him come with me down to the cafe under the arches by the pier , and there drank beer and talked extravagant nonsense about everything under the sun , in order not to talk about the happenings of the afternoon .
All the time something shouted within me : `` I am a man !
I am a man !
`` I 'm for loafing , '' I said .
`` Let 's row in the morning and spend to-morrow afternoon just as we did to-day . ''
She interested me in her lonely dissatisfied life ; she was childless and had no hope of children , and her husband was the only son of a rich meat salesman , very mean , a mighty smoker -- '' he reeks of it , '' she said , `` always '' -- and interested in nothing but golf , billiards ( which he played very badly ) , pigeon shooting , convivial Free Masonry and Stock Exchange punting .
Mostly they drifted about the Riviera .
Her mother had contrived her marriage when she was eighteen .
They were the first samples I ever encountered of the great multitude of functionless property owners which encumbers modern civilisation -- but at the time I did n't think much of that aspect of them ... .
He had said all that he had forced himself to say .
But first I must tell of my Staffordshire cousins and the world that served as a foil for her .
I first went to stay with my cousins when I was an awkward youth of sixteen , wearing deep mourning for my mother .
My uncle wanted to talk things over with me , he said , and if he could , to persuade me to go into business instead of going up to Cambridge .
I remember that visit on account of all sorts of novel things , but chiefly , I think , because it was the first time I encountered anything that deserves to be spoken of as wealth .
For the first time in my life I had to do with people who seemed to have endless supplies of money , unlimited good clothes , numerous servants ; whose daily life was made up of things that I had hitherto considered to be treats or exceptional extravagances .
My cousins of eighteen and nineteen took cabs , for instance , with the utmost freedom , and travelled first-class in the local trains that run up and down the district of the Five Towns with an entire unconsciousness of the magnificence , as it seemed to me , of such a proceeding .
That upturned sightless white eye of his took possession of my imagination .
I do n't think that even then I was swayed by any crude melodramatic conception of injustice .
I was quite prepared to believe the card was n't a punctiliously accurate statement of fact , and that a case could be made out for Lord Pandram .
Still there in the muddy gutter , painfully and dreadfully , was the man , and he was smashed and scalded and wretched , and he ground his dismal hurdygurdy with a weary arm , calling upon Heaven and the passer-by for help , for help and some sort of righting -- one could not imagine quite what .
There he was as a fact , as a by-product of the system that heaped my cousins with trinkets and provided the comic novels and the abundant cigars and spacious billiard-room of my uncle 's house .
I could n't disconnect him and them .
My uncle 's views about Cambridge , however , were perfectly clear and definite .
It was waste of time and money .
It was all damned foolery .
Did they make a man a better business man ?
Not a bit of it .
It spoilt a man for business by giving him `` false ideas . ''
Some men said that at college a man formed useful friendships .
What use were friendships to a business man ?
He might get to know lords , but , as my uncle pointed out , a lord 's requirements in his line of faience were little greater than a common man 's .
If college introduced him to hotel proprietors there might be something in it .
Perhaps it helped a man into Parliament , Parliament still being a confused retrogressive corner in the world where lawyers and suchlike sheltered themselves from the onslaughts of common-sense behind a fog of Latin and Greek and twaddle and tosh ; but I was n't the sort to go into Parliament , unless I meant to be a lawyer .
Did I mean to be a lawyer ?
It cost no end of money , and was full of uncertainties , and there were no judges nor great solicitors among my relations .
`` Young chaps think they get on by themselves , '' said my uncle .
`` It is n't so .
Not unless they take their coats off .
I took mine off before I was your age by nigh a year . ''
Whereupon I found I had tapped the ruling grievance of my uncle's life .
He hated leadless glazes more than he hated anything , except the benevolent people who had organised the agitation for their use .
`` Leadless glazes ai n't only fit for buns , '' he said .
`` Let me tell you , my boy -- ''
He began in a voice of bland persuasiveness that presently warmed to anger , to explain the whole matter .
I had n't the rights of the matter at all .
Firstly , there was practically no such thing as lead poisoning .
Secondly , not everyone was liable to lead poisoning , and it would be quite easy to pick out the susceptible types -- as soon as they had it -- and put them to other work .
Thirdly , the evil effects of lead poisoning were much exaggerated .
Fourthly , and this was in a particularly confidential undertone , many of the people liked to get lead poisoning , especially the women , because it caused abortion .
I might not believe it , but he knew it for a fact .
Fifthly , the work-people simply would not learn the gravity of the danger , and would eat with unwashed hands , and incur all sorts of risks , so that as my uncle put it : `` the fools deserve what they get . ''
Sixthly , he and several associated firms had organised a simple and generous insurance scheme against lead-poisoning risks .
Seventhly , he never wearied in rational ( as distinguished from excessive , futile and expensive ) precautions against the disease .
Eighthly , in the ill-equipped shops of his minor competitors lead poisoning was a frequent and virulent evil , and people had generalised from these exceptional cases .
The small shops , he hazarded , looking out of the cracked and dirty window at distant chimneys , might be advantageously closed ... .
`` They 'll get a strike one of these days , of employers , and then we'll see a bit , '' he said .
`` They 'll drive Capital abroad and then they'll whistle to get it back again .
I paid several short visits to Staffordshire during my Cambridge days , and always these relations of mine produced the same effect of hardness .
My uncle 's thoughts had neither atmosphere nor mystery .
He lived in a different universe from the dreams of scientific construction that filled my mind .
He could as easily have understood Chinese poetry .
His motives were made up of intense rivalries with other men of his class and kind , a few vindictive hates springing from real and fancied slights , a habit of acquisition that had become a second nature , a keen love both of efficiency and display in his own affairs .
He seemed to me to have no sense of the state , no sense and much less any love of beauty , no charity and no sort of religious feeling whatever .
He had strong bodily appetites , he ate and drank freely , smoked a great deal , and occasionally was carried off by his passions for a `` bit of a spree '' to Birmingham or Liverpool or Manchester .
The indulgences of these occasions were usually followed by a period of reaction , when he was urgent for the suppression of nudity in the local Art Gallery and a harsh and forcible elevation of the superficial morals of the valley .
And he spoke of the ladies who ministered to the delights of his jolly-dog period , when he spoke of them at all , by the unprintable feminine equivalent .
My aunt he treated with a kindly contempt and considerable financial generosity , but his daughters tore his heart ; he was so proud of them , so glad to find them money to spend , so resolved to own them , so instinctively jealous of every man who came near them .
My uncle has been the clue to a great number of men for me .
He was an illuminating extreme .
I have learnt what not to expect from them through him , and to comprehend resentments and dangerous sudden antagonisms I should have found incomprehensible in their more complex forms , if I had not first seen them in him in their feral state .
A motor-car appeared , I think in my second visit , a bottle-green affair that opened behind , had dark purple cushions , and was controlled mysteriously by a man in shiny black costume and a flat cap .
The high tea had been shifted to seven and rechristened dinner , but my uncle would not dress nor consent to have wine ; and after one painful experiment , I gathered , and a scene , he put his foot down and prohibited any but high-necked dresses .
Of the quality of their private imagination I never learnt anything ; I suppose it followed the lines of the fiction they read and was romantic and sentimental .
So far as marriage went , the married state seemed at once very attractive and dreadfully serious to them , composed in equal measure of becoming important and becoming old .
I do n't know what they thought about children .
I doubt if they thought about them at all .
It was very secret if they did .
The next day matters came to a crisis in the little upstairs sitting-room which had been assigned me as a study during my visit .
I was working up there , or rather trying to work in spite of the outrageous capering of some very primitive elements in my brain , when she came up to me , under a transparent pretext of looking for a book .
`` How COULD you ? ''
she said ; `` I did n't mean that ! ''
`` Why are men so silly ? ''
said cousin Sybil next morning , wriggling back with down-bent head to release herself from what should have been a compelling embrace .
I was still in the full glare of this disillusionment when Gertrude awoke from some preoccupation to an interest in my existence .
She developed a disposition to touch my hand by accident , and let her fingers rest in contact with it for a moment , -- she had pleasant soft hands ; -- she began to drift into summer houses with me , to let her arm rest trustfully against mine , to ask questions about Cambridge .
They were much the same questions that Sybil had asked .
But I controlled myself and maintained a profile of intelligent and entirely civil indifference to her blandishments .
It was against this harsh and crude Staffordshire background that I think I must have seen Margaret for the first time .
I say I think because it is quite possible that we had passed each other in the streets of Cambridge , no doubt with that affectation of mutual disregard which was once customary between undergraduates and Newnham girls .
But if that was so I had noted nothing of the slender graciousness that shone out so pleasingly against the bleaker midland surroundings .
The Seddons had a big old farmhouse modified to modern ideas of comfort on the road out towards Misterton , with an orchard that had been rather pleasantly subdued from use to ornament .
It had rich blossoming cherry and apple trees .
Large patches of grass full of nodding yellow trumpets had been left amidst the not too precisely mown grass , which was as it were grass path with an occasional lapse into lawn or glade .
And Margaret , hatless , with the fair hair above her thin , delicately pink face very simply done , came to meet our rather too consciously dressed party , -- we had come in the motor four strong , with my aunt in grey silk .
Margaret wore a soft flowing flowered blue dress of diaphanous material , all unconnected with the fashion and tied with pretty ribbons , like a slenderer , unbountiful Primavera .
It was one of those May days that ape the light and heat of summer , and I remember disconnectedly quite a number of brightly lit figures and groups walking about , and a white gate between orchard and garden and a large lawn with an oak tree and a red Georgian house with a verandah and open French windows , through which the tea drinking had come out upon the moss-edged flagstones even as Mrs. Seddon had planned .
Gertrude , looking bright and confident , came to join our talk from the shrubbery ; the initial , a little flushed and evidently in a state of refreshed relationship , came with her , and a cheerful lady in pink and more particularly distinguished by a pink bonnet joined our little group .
Gertrude had been sipping admiration and was not disposed to play a passive part in the talk .
The little curate looked at it for a moment .
`` Precisely , '' he said explosively , and turned stirring and with his head a little on one side , to hear what Margaret was saying .
I perceived we were embarked upon a discussion of the elements .
We began an interesting little wrangle one of those crude discussions of general ideas that are dear to the heart of youth .
I and Margaret supported one another as socialists , Gertrude and Sybil and the initial maintained an anti-socialist position , the curate attempted a cross-bench position with an air of intending to come down upon us presently with a casting vote .
He reminded us of a number of useful principles too often overlooked in argument , that in a big question like this there was much to be said on both sides , that if every one did his or her duty to every one about them there would be no difficulty with social problems at all , that over and above all enactments we needed moral changes in people themselves .
My cousin Gertrude was a difficult controversialist to manage , being unconscious of inconsistency in statement and absolutely impervious to reply .
Her standpoint was essentially materialistic ; she did n't see why she should n't have a good time because other people did n't ; they would have a good time , she was sure , if she did n't .
She said that if we did give up everything we had to other people , they would n't very likely know what to do with it .
She asked if we were so fond of work-people , why we did n't go and live among them , and expressed the inflexible persuasion that if we HAD socialism , everything would be just the same again in ten years ' time .
She also threw upon us the imputation of ingratitude for a beautiful world by saying that so far as she was concerned she did n't want to upset everything .
She was contented with things as they were , thank you .
The discussion led in some way that I do n't in the least recall now , and possibly by abrupt transitions , to a croquet foursome in which Margaret involved the curate without involving herself , and then stood beside me on the edge of the lawn while the others played .
We watched silently for a moment .
`` I suppose I could n't , '' she answered , after a thoughtful moment .
`` I suppose it would come to nothing .
And yet I feel there is so much to be done for the world , so much one ought to be doing ... .
I want to do something for the world . ''
I sat with him in the smoking-room , propounding what I considered to be the most indisputable and non-contentious propositions conceivable -- until , to my infinite amazement , he exploded and called me a `` damned young puppy . ''
he said , with an averted face , and nodded , leaning forward over his cigar .
`` You 'll be making out I organised that business down there -- by chance -- next , '' said my uncle , his voice thick with challenge .
Well , why should n't I talk my mind to him ?
He 'd never had an outside view of himself for years , and I resolved to stand up to him .
We went at it hammer and tongs !
It became clear that he supposed me to be a Socialist , a zealous , embittered hater of all ownership -- and also an educated man of the vilest , most pretentiously superior description .
His principal grievance was that I thought I knew everything ; to that he recurred again and again ... .
We had been maintaining an armed truce with each other since my resolve to go up to Cambridge , and now we had out all that had accumulated between us .
There had been stupendous accumulations ... .
I write rather doubtfully of my growing during this period .
Indeed I find it hard to judge whether I can say that I grew at all in any real sense of the word , between three and twenty and twenty-seven .
It seems to me now to have been rather a phase of realisation and clarification .
All the broad lines of my thought were laid down , I am sure , by the date of my Locarno adventure , but in those five years I discussed things over and over again with myself and others , filled out with concrete fact forms I had at first apprehended sketchily and conversationally , measured my powers against my ideals and the forces in the world about me .
It was evident that many men no better than myself and with no greater advantages than mine had raised themselves to influential and even decisive positions in the worlds of politics and thought .
I was gathering the confidence and knowledge necessary to attack the world in the large manner ; I found I could write , and that people would let me write if I chose , as one having authority and not as the scribes .
Socially and politically and intellectually I knew myself for an honest man , and that quite without any deliberation on my part this showed and made things easy for me .
People trusted my good faith from the beginning -- for all that I came from nowhere and had no better position than any adventurer .
But the growth process was arrested , I was nothing bigger at twenty-seven than at twenty-two , however much saner and stronger , and any one looking closely into my mind during that period might well have imagined growth finished altogether .
It is particularly evident to me now that I came no nearer to any understanding of women during that time .
That Locarno affair was infinitely more to me than I had supposed .
It ended something -- nipped something in the bud perhaps -- took me at a stride from a vague , fine , ignorant , closed world of emotion to intrigue and a perfectly definite and limited sensuality .
It ended my youth , and for a time it prevented my manhood .
I had never yet even peeped at the sweetest , profoundest thing in the world , the heart and meaning of a girl , or dreamt with any quality of reality of a wife or any such thing as a friend among womanhood .
My vague anticipation of such things in life had vanished altogether .
I turned away from their possibility .
It seemed to me I knew what had to be known about womankind .
I wanted to work hard , to get on to a position in which I could develop and forward my constructive projects .
Women , I thought , had nothing to do with that .
It seemed clear I could not marry for some years ; I was attractive to certain types of women , I had vanity enough to give me an agreeable confidence in love-making , and I went about seeking a convenient mistress quite deliberately , some one who should serve my purpose and say in the end , like that kindly first mistress of mine , `` I 've done you no harm , '' and so release me .
It seemed the only wise way of disposing of urgencies that might otherwise entangle and wreck the career I was intent upon .
The Baileys , under whose auspices I met Margaret again , were in the sharpest contrast with the narrow industrialism of the Staffordshire world .
They were indeed at the other extreme of the scale , two active self-centred people , excessively devoted to the public service .
It was natural I should gravitate to them , for they seemed to stand for the maturer , more disciplined , better informed expression of all I was then urgent to attempt to do .
The bulk of their friends were politicians or public officials , they described themselves as publicists -- a vague yet sufficiently significant term .
They lived and worked in a hard little house in Chambers Street , Westminster , and made a centre for quite an astonishing amount of political and social activity .
The room was one of those long apartments once divided by folding doors , and reaching from back to front , that are common upon the first floors of London houses .
Its walls were hung with two or three indifferent water colours , there was scarcely any furniture but a sofa or so and a chair , and the floor , severely carpeted with matting , was crowded with a curious medley of people , men predominating .
Several were in evening dress , but most had the morning garb of the politician ; the women were either severely rational or radiantly magnificent .
Willersley pointed out to me the wife of the Secretary of State for War , and I recognised the Duchess of Clynes , who at that time cultivated intellectuality .
I looked round , identifying a face here or there , and stepping back trod on some one 's toe , and turned to find it belonged to the Right Hon .
G. B. Mottisham , dear to the PUNCH caricaturists .
He received my apology with that intentional charm that is one of his most delightful traits , and resumed his discussion .
Beside him was Esmeer of Trinity , whom I had not seen since my Cambridge days ... .
Their effect upon me was from the outset very considerable .
Altiora , I remember , maintained that there existed a great army of such constructive-minded people as ourselves -- as yet undiscovered by one another .
`` We have read your book , '' each began -- as though it had been a joint function .
`` And we consider -- ''
`` They did not consider , '' said Altiora , raising her voice and going right over me , `` that I had allowed sufficiently for the inevitable development of an official administrative class in the modern state . ''
I stuck to my argument .
Altiora , I remember , preluded Margaret 's reappearance by announcing her as a `` new type . ''
cried Altiora turning , and with a high note of welcome , `` HERE you are ! ''
Other guests arrived -- it was one of Altiora 's boldly blended mixtures of people with ideas and people with influence or money who might perhaps be expected to resonate to them .
Bailey came down late with an air of hurry , and was introduced to Margaret and said absolutely nothing to her -- there being no information either to receive or impart and nothing to do -- but stood snatching his left cheek until I rescued him and her , and left him free to congratulate the new Lady Snape on her husband 's K. C. B .
`` Do you find London , '' I asked , `` give you more opportunity for doing things and learning things than Burslem ? ''
`` I 'm going to a good many lectures , and perhaps I shall take up a regular course at the Westminster School of Politics and Sociology .
But Mrs. Bailey does n't seem to believe very much in that either . ''
I admired Margaret very much , I was fully aware of all that she and I might give each other ; indeed so far as Altiora went we were quite in agreement .
But what seemed solid ground to Altiora and the ultimate footing of her emasculated world , was to me just the superficial covering of a gulf -- oh !
abysses of vague and dim , and yet stupendously significant things .
How ugly it is to recall ; ugly and shameful now without qualification !
Yet at the time there was surely something not altogether ugly in it -- something that has vanished , some fine thing mortally ailing .
I suppose it was because I had so great a need of such help as her whiteness proffered , that I could ascribe impossible perfections to her , a power of intellect , a moral power and patience to which she , poor fellow mortal , had indeed no claim .
If only a few of us WERE angels and freed from the tangle of effort , how easy life might be !
I wanted her so badly , so very badly , to be what I needed .
I wanted a woman to save me .
I forced myself to see her as I wished to see her .
Her tepidities became infinite delicacies , her mental vagueness an atmospheric realism .
The harsh precisions of the Baileys and Altiora 's blunt directness threw up her fineness into relief and made a grace of every weakness .
She seemed about to speak , but I interrupted .
`` I 'm not telling you , '' I said , `` what I meant to tell you .
I want you to know clearly that there is another side to my life , a dirty side .
Deliberately I say , dirty .
It did n't seem so at first -- ''
`` Did you imagine , '' she began , `` that I thought you -- that I expected -- ''
`` But how can you know ? ''
She looked up and smiled as though we had exchanged some acceptable commonplaces .
`` Poor dear ! ''
she said , dismissing everything , and put out her arms , and it seemed to me that I could hear the Lettish girl in the background -- doomed safety valve of purity in this intolerable world -- telling something in indistinguishable German -- I know not what nor why ... .
That holiday in Venice is set in my memory like a little artificial lake in uneven confused country , as something very bright and skylike , and discontinuous with all about it .
The faded quality of the very sunshine of that season , the mellow discoloured palaces and places , the huge , time-ripened paintings of departed splendours , the whispering , nearly noiseless passage of hearse-black gondolas , for the horrible steam launch had not yet ruined Venice , the stilled magnificences of the depopulated lagoons , the universal autumn , made me feel altogether in recess from the teeming uproars of reality .
There was not a dozen people all told , no Americans and scarcely any English , to dine in the big cavern of a dining-room , with its vistas of separate tables , its distempered walls and its swathed chandeliers .
We went about seeing beautiful things , accepting beauty on every hand , and taking it for granted that all was well with ourselves and the world .
It was ten days or a fortnight before I became fretful and anxious for action ; a long tranquillity for such a temperament as mine .
`` My dear ! ''
`` I suppose one ought not to be so happy , '' she said .
`` Everything has been so beautiful and so simple and splendid .
It has been just With You -- the time of my life .
It 's a pity such things must end .
But the world is calling you , dear ... .
I ought not to have forgotten it .
I thought you were resting -- and thinking .
But if you are rested.
-- Would you like us to start to-morrow ? ''
`` Altiora has things hard . ''
`` We will buy a picture just now and then , '' she said , `` sometimes -- when we see one . ''
She would come to the hearthrug .
I look back now across the detaching intervention of sixteen crowded years , critically and I fancy almost impartially , to those beginnings of my married life .
I try to recall something near to their proper order the developing phases of relationship .
I am struck most of all by the immense unpremeditated , generous-spirited insincerities upon which Margaret and I were building .
I have told how I loved Margaret and how I came to marry her .
Perhaps already unintentionally I have indicated the quality of the injustice our marriage did us both .
There was no kindred between us and no understanding .
We were drawn to one another by the unlikeness of our quality , by the things we misunderstood in each other .
I know a score of couples who have married in that fashion .
Modern conditions and modern ideas , and in particular the intenser and subtler perceptions of modern life , press more and more heavily upon a marriage tie whose fashion comes from an earlier and less discriminating time .
When the wife was her husband 's subordinate , meeting him simply and uncritically for simple ends , when marriage was a purely domestic relationship , leaving thought and the vivid things of life almost entirely to the unencumbered man , mental and temperamental incompatibilities mattered comparatively little .
But now the wife , and particularly the loving childless wife , unpremeditatedly makes a relentless demand for a complete association , and the husband exacts unthought of delicacies of understanding and co-operation .
These are stupendous demands .
People not only think more fully and elaborately about life than they ever did before , but marriage obliges us to make that ever more accidented progress a three-legged race of carelessly assorted couples ... .
Our very mental texture was different .
I was rough-minded , to use the phrase of William James , primary and intuitive and illogical ; she was tender-minded , logical , refined and secondary .
She was loyal to pledge and persons , sentimental and faithful ; I am loyal to ideas and instincts , emotional and scheming .
My imagination moves in broad gestures ; her 's was delicate with a real dread of extravagance .
My quality is sensuous and ruled by warm impulses ; hers was discriminating and essentially inhibitory .
I like the facts of the case and to mention everything ; I like naked bodies and the jolly smells of things .
She abounded in reservations , in circumlocutions and evasions , in keenly appreciated secondary points .
Perhaps the reader knows that Tintoretto in the National Gallery , the Origin of the Milky Way .
It is an admirable test of temperamental quality .
In spite of my early training I have come to regard that picture as altogether delightful ; to Margaret it has always been `` needlessly offensive . ''
In that you have our fundamental breach .
She had a habit , by no means rare , of damning what she did not like or find sympathetic in me on the score that it was not my `` true self , '' and she did not so much accept the universe as select from it and do her best to ignore the rest .
And also I had far more initiative than had she .
This is no catalogue of rights and wrongs , or superiorities and inferiorities ; it is a catalogue of differences between two people linked in a relationship that constantly becomes more intolerant of differences .
My opponent was a quite undistinguished Major-General who relied upon his advocacy of Protection , and was particularly anxious we should avoid `` personalities '' and fight the constituency in a gentlemanly spirit .
He was always writing me notes , apologising for excesses on the part of his supporters , or pointing out the undesirability of some course taken by mine .
And then after a toilsome troubled morning we came , rather cross from the strain of sustained amiability , to Sir Graham Rivers ' house .
It seemed all softness and quiet -- I recall dead white panelling and oval mirrors horizontally set and a marble fireplace between white marble-blind Homer and marble-blind Virgil , very grave and fine -- and how Isabel came in to lunch in a shapeless thing like a blue smock that made her bright quick-changing face seem yellow under her cloud of black hair .
Her step-sister was there , Miss Gamer , to whom the house was to descend , a well-dressed lady of thirty , amiably disavowing responsibility for Isabel in every phrase and gesture .
And there was a very pleasant doctor , an Oxford man , who seemed on excellent terms with every one .
It was manifest that he was in the habit of sparring with the girl , but on this occasion she was n't sparring and refused to be teased into a display in spite of the taunts of either him or her father .
She was , they discovered with rising eyebrows , shy .
It seemed an opportunity too rare for them to miss .
They proclaimed her enthusiasm for me in a way that brought a flush to her cheek and a look into her eye between appeal and defiance .
They declared she had read my books , which I thought at the time was exaggeration , their dry political quality was so distinctly not what one was accustomed to regard as schoolgirl reading .
Miss Gamer protested to protect her , `` When once in a blue moon Isabel is well-behaved ... .
`` We 'll do things , '' said Isabel .
`` Mr. Remington stands for construction , order , education , discipline . ''
`` Liberty under the law , '' I said , with an unexpected approving murmur from Margaret , and took up the defence .
`` The old Liberal definition of liberty was a trifle uncritical .
Privilege and legal restrictions are not the only enemies of liberty .
An uneducated , underbred , and underfed propertyless man is a man who has lost the possibility of liberty .
There 's no liberty worth a rap for him .
A man who is swimming hopelessly for life wants nothing but the liberty to get out of the water ; he'll give every other liberty for it -- until he gets out . ''
She seemed at that time unconscious of sex , though she has told me since how full she was of protesting curiosities and restrained emotions .
She spoke , as indeed she has always spoken , simply , clearly , and vividly ; schoolgirl slang mingled with words that marked ample voracious reading , and she moved quickly with the free directness of some graceful young animal .
She took many of the easy freedoms a man or a sister might have done with me .
She would touch my arm , lay a hand on my shoulder as I sat , adjust the lapel of a breast-pocket as she talked to me .
She says now she loved me always from the beginning .
I doubt if there was a suspicion of that in her mind those days .
I used to find her regarding me with the clearest , steadiest gaze in the world , exactly like the gaze of some nice healthy innocent animal in a forest , interested , inquiring , speculative , but singularly untroubled ... .
Isabel , flushed but not out of breath , Heaven knows where she had sprung from at that time of night !
was running her hand down my sleeve almost caressingly , with the innocent bold affection of a girl .
`` Got you in ! ''
`` It 's been no end of a lark . ''
`` You must come out with me , '' I answered , putting my arm through hers , and felt someone urging me to the French windows that gave on the balcony .
`` What do they want ? ''
`` Little peculiarities of costume count for a great deal .
I could name one man who spent three years living down a pair of spatterdashers .
On the other hand -- a thing like that -- if it catches the eye of the PUNCH man , for example , may be your making . ''
At last , in a leisurely muddled manner we got to the Address ; and I found myself packed in a dense elbowing crowd to the right of the Speaker 's chair ; while the attenuated Opposition , nearly leaderless after the massacre , tilted its brim to its nose and sprawled at its ease amidst its empty benches .
`` Good God ! ''
I said in hot reaction , `` what am I doing here ? ''
I went out by myself with my thoughts into the night .
It was a chilling night , and rare spots of rain were falling .
I glanced over my shoulder at the lit windows of the Lords .
I walked , I remember , westward , and presently came to the Grosvenar Embankment and followed it , watching the glittering black rush of the river and the dark , dimly lit barges round which the water swirled .
Across the river was the hunched sky-line of Doulton 's potteries , and a kiln flared redly .
Dimly luminous trams were gliding amidst a dotted line of lamps , and two little trains crawled into Waterloo station .
Mysterious black figures came by me and were suddenly changed to the commonplace at the touch of the nearer lamps .
It was a big confused world , I felt , for a man to lay his hands upon .
I remember I crossed Vauxhall Bridge and stood for a time watching the huge black shapes in the darkness under the gas-works .
A shoal of coal barges lay indistinctly on the darkly shining mud and water below , and a colossal crane was perpetually hauling up coal into mysterious blacknesses above , and dropping the empty clutch back to the barges .
Just one or two minute black featureless figures of men toiled amidst these monster shapes .
They did not seem to be controlling them but only moving about among them .
These gas-works have a big chimney that belches a lurid flame into the night , a livid shivering bluish flame , shot with strange crimson streaks ... .
-- was that the truth of it all ?
BOOK THE THIRD : THE HEART OF POLITICS
We did very continually and faithfully serve our joint career .
I thought about it a great deal , and did and refrained from doing ten thousand things for the sake of it .
I kept up a solicitude for it , as it were by inertia , long after things had happened and changes occurred in me that rendered its completion impossible .
Under certain very artless pretences , we wanted steadfastly to make a handsome position in the world , achieve respect , SUCCEED .
Enormous unseen changes had been in progress for years in my mind and the realities of my life , before our general circle could have had any inkling of their existence , or suspected the appearances of our life .
Then suddenly our proceedings began to be deflected , our outward unanimity visibly strained and marred by the insurgence of these so long-hidden developments .
On this occasion Altiora was absent , and to qualify our Young Liberal bleakness we had Mrs. Millingham , with her white hair and her fresh mind and complexion , and Esmeer .
Willie Crampton was with us , but not his wife , who was having her third baby on principle ; his brother Edward was present , and the Lewises , and of course the Bunting Harblows .
There was also some other lady .
I remember her as pale blue , but for the life of me I can not remember her name .
`` I asked three questions yesterday .
And for one of them I had to consult nine books ! ''
For a time talk frothed over Britten 's head , but the natural mischief in Mrs. Millingham had been stirred , and she was presently echoing his demand in lisping , quasi-confidential undertones .
`` What ARE we Liberals doing ? ''
Then Esmeer fell in with the revolutionaries .
My long-controlled hatred of the Cramptons ' stereotyped phrases about the Country and the House got the better of me .
I showed my cloven hoof to my friends for the first time .
`` We do n't respect the Country as we used to do , '' I said .
`` We haven't the same belief we used to have in the will of the people .
It 's no good , Crampton , trying to keep that up .
We Liberals know as a matter of fact -- nowadays every one knows -- that the monster that brought us into power has , among other deficiencies , no head .
We 've got to give it one -- if possible with brains and a will .
That lies in the future .
For the present if the country is with us , it means merely that we happen to have hold of its tether . ''
`` We all , '' I said , `` shrink from the probe . ''
I was never at any stage a loyal party man .
I doubt if party will ever again be the force it was during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries .
Men are becoming increasingly constructive and selective , less patient under tradition and the bondage of initial circumstances .
As education becomes more universal and liberating , men will sort themselves more and more by their intellectual temperaments and less and less by their accidental associations .
The past will rule them less ; the future more .
It is not simply party but school and college and county and country that lose their glamour .
One does not hear nearly as much as our forefathers did of the `` old Harrovian , '' `` old Arvonian , '' `` old Etonian '' claim to this or that unfair advantage or unearnt sympathy .
Even the Scotch and the Devonians weaken a little in their clannishness .
A widening sense of fair play destroys such things .
They follow freemasonry down -- freemasonry of which one is chiefly reminded nowadays in England by propitiatory symbols outside shady public-houses ... .
Addressing the House of Commons is like no other public speaking in the world .
Its semi-colloquial methods give it an air of being easy , but its shifting audience , the comings and goings and hesitations of members behind the chair -- not mere audience units , but men who matter -- the desolating emptiness that spreads itself round the man who fails to interest , the little compact , disciplined crowd in the strangers' gallery , the light , elusive , flickering movements high up behind the grill , the wigged , attentive , weary Speaker , the table and the mace and the chapel-like Gothic background with its sombre shadows , conspire together , produce a confused , uncertain feeling in me , as though I was walking upon a pavement full of trap-doors and patches of uncovered morass .
A misplaced , well-meant `` Hear , Hear ! ''
is apt to be extraordinarily disconcerting , and under no other circumstances have I had to speak with quite the same sideways twist that the arrangement of the House imposes .
One does not recognise one 's own voice threading out into the stirring brown .
Unless I was excited or speaking to the mind of some particular person in the house , I was apt to lose my feeling of an auditor .
I had no sense of whither my sentences were going , such as one has with a public meeting well under one 's eye .
And to lose one 's sense of an auditor is for a man of my temperament to lose one 's sense of the immediate , and to become prolix and vague with qualifications .
My discontents with the Liberal party and my mental exploration of the quality of party generally is curiously mixed up with certain impressions of things and people in the National Liberal Club .
The National Liberal Club is Liberalism made visible in the flesh -- and Doultonware .
It is an extraordinary big club done in a bold , wholesale , shiny , marbled style , richly furnished with numerous paintings , steel engravings , busts , and full-length statues of the late Mr. Gladstone ; and its spacious dining-rooms , its long , hazy , crowded smoking-room with innumerable little tables and groups of men in armchairs , its magazine room and library upstairs , have just that undistinguished and unconcentrated diversity which is for me the Liberal note .
The pensive member sits and hears perplexing dialects and even fragments of foreign speech , and among the clustering masses of less insistent whites his roving eye catches profiles and complexions that send his mind afield to Calcutta or Rangoon or the West Indies or Sierra Leone or the Cape ... .
I would mark with a curious interest the stray country member of the club up in town for a night or so .
My mind would be busy with speculations about him , about his home , his family , his reading , his horizons , his innumerable fellows who did n't belong and never came up .
I would fill in the outline of him with memories of my uncle and his Staffordshire neighbours .
He was perhaps Alderman This or Councillor That down there , a great man in his ward , J. P. within seven miles of the boundary of the borough , and a God in his home .
Here he was nobody , and very shy , and either a little too arrogant or a little too meek towards our very democratic mannered but still livened waiters .
Was he perhaps the backbone of England ?
He over-ate himself lest he should appear mean , went through our Special Dinner conscientiously , drank , unless he was teetotal , of unfamiliar wines , and did his best , in spite of the rules , to tip .
Afterwards , in a state of flushed repletion , he would have old brandy , black coffee , and a banded cigar , or in the name of temperance omit the brandy and have rather more coffee , in the smoking-room .
I would sit and watch that stiff dignity of self-indulgence , and wonder , wonder ... .
An infernal clairvoyance would come to me .
I would have visions of him in relation to his wife , checking always , sometimes bullying , sometimes being ostentatiously `` kind '' ; I would see him glance furtively at his domestic servants upon his staircase , or stiffen his upper lip against the reluctant , protesting business employee .
We imaginative people are base enough , heaven knows , but it is only in rare moods of bitter penetration that we pierce down to the baser lusts , the viler shames , the everlasting lying and muddle-headed self-justification of the dull .
I wonder what reply I should have got .
When I think of the Socialists there comes a vivid memory of certain evening gatherings at our house ... .
`` Oh , Lord ! ''
`` When you think of the height and depth and importance and wisdom of the Socialist ideas , and see the men who are running them , '' I explained ... .
`` A big system of ideas like Socialism grows up out of the obvious common sense of our present conditions .
It 's as impersonal as science .
All these men -- They 've given nothing to it .
They 're just people who have pegged out claims upon a big intellectual No-Man's-Land -- and do n't feel quite sure of the law .
There 's a sort of quarrelsome uneasiness ... .
If we professed Socialism do you think they 'd welcome us ?
Not a man of them !
They 'd feel it was burglary ... . ''
`` I do n't think there is a man among them who makes me feel he is trustworthy , '' said Margaret ; `` unless it is Featherstonehaugh . ''
Perfectly clear it was , perfectly clear , and why had n't I seen it before ?
I looked at my watch , and it was half-past two .
I arrived at last at the clear realisation that my political associates , and I in my association with them , were oddly narrow , priggish , and unreal , that the Socialists with whom we were attempting co-operation were preposterously irrelevant to their own theories , that my political life did n't in some way comprehend more than itself , that rather perplexingly I was missing the thing I was seeking .
Britten 's footnotes to Altiora 's self-assertions , her fits of energetic planning , her quarrels and rallies and vanities , his illuminating attacks on Cramptonism and the heavy-spirited triviality of such Liberalism as the Children 's Charter , served to point my way to my present conclusions .
I had been trying to deal all along with human progress as something immediate in life , something to be immediately attacked by political parties and groups pointing primarily to that end .
I now began to see that just as in my own being there was the rather shallow , rather vulgar , self-seeking careerist , who wore an admirable silk hat and bustled self-consciously through the lobby , and a much greater and indefinitely growing unpublished personality behind him -- my hinterland , I have called it -- so in human affairs generally the permanent reality is also a hinterland , which is never really immediate , which draws continually upon human experience and influences human action more and more , but which is itself never the actual player upon the stage .
It is the unseen dramatist who never takes a call .
Now it was just through the fact that our group about the Baileys did n't understand this , that with a sort of frantic energy they were trying to develop that sham expert officialdom of theirs to plan , regulate , and direct the affairs of humanity , that the perplexing note of silliness and shallowness that I had always felt and felt now most acutely under Britten 's gibes , came in .
They were neglecting human life altogether in social organisation .
My convictions crystallised more and more definitely upon this .
The more of love and fine thinking the better for men , I said ; the less , the worse .
And upon this fresh basis I set myself to examine what I as a politician might do .
I perceived I was at last finding an adequate expression for all that was in me , for those forces that had rebelled at the crude presentations of Bromstead , at the secrecies and suppressions of my youth , at the dull unrealities of City Merchants , at the conventions and timidities of the Pinky Dinkys , at the philosophical recluse of Trinity and the phrases and tradition-worship of my political associates .
None of these things were half alive , and I wanted life to be intensely alive and awake .
I wanted thought like an edge of steel and desire like a flame .
The real work before mankind now , I realised once and for all , is the enlargement of human expression , the release and intensification of human thought , the vivider utilisation of experience and the invigoration of research -- and whatever one does in human affairs has or lacks value as it helps or hinders that .
We want to invigorate and reinvigorate education .
We want to create a sustained counter effort to the perpetual tendency of all educational organisations towards classicalism , secondary issues , and the evasion of life .
He opened his heart to me .
`` Are you a Confederate ? ''
`` What are the Confederates after ? ''
That is a research which yields no statistics , an enquiry like asking what is the ruling colour of a chameleon .
The shadowy answer varied with my health , varied with my mood and the conduct of the people I was watching .
How fine can people be ?
-- not incidentally , but all round ?
How far can you educate sons beyond the outlook of their fathers , and how far lift a rich , proud , self-indulgent class above the protests of its business agents and solicitors and its own habits and vanity ?
Is chivalry in a class possible ?
-- was it ever , indeed , or will it ever indeed be possible ?
Is the progress that seems attainable in certain directions worth the retrogression that may be its price ?
I expatiated on the small proportion of the available ability that is really serving humanity to-day .
`` I suppose to-day all the thought , all the art , all the increments of knowledge that matter , are supplied so far as the English-speaking community is concerned by -- how many ?
-- by three or four thousand individuals .
( 'Less , ' said Thorns . )
To be more precise , by the mental hinterlands of three or four thousand individuals .
We who know some of the band entertain no illusions as to their innate rarity .
We know that they are just the few out of many , the few who got in our world of chance and confusion , the timely stimulus , the apt suggestion at the fortunate moment , the needed training , the leisure .
The rest are lost in the crowd , fail through the defects of their qualities , become commonplace workmen and second-rate professional men , marry commonplace wives , are as much waste as the driftage of superfluous pollen in a pine forest is waste . ''
I remember very vividly how Shoesmith harped on an idea I had thrown out of using some sort of review or weekly to express and elaborate these conceptions of a new , severer , aristocratic culture .
`` It would have to be done amazingly well , '' said Britten , and my mind went back to my school days and that ancient enterprise of ours , and how Cossington had rushed it .
Well , Cossington had too many papers nowadays to interfere with us , and we perhaps had learnt some defensive devices .
`` But this thing has to be linked to some political party , '' said Crupp , with his eye on me .
`` You ca n't get away from that .
The Liberals , '' he added , `` have never done anything for research or literature . ''
`` Bailey thinks that , '' said some one .
`` Suppose all of us were able to work together .
It 's just one of those indeterminate , confused , eventful times ahead when a steady jet of ideas might produce enormous results . ''
`` Leave me out of it , '' said Dayton , `` IF you please . ''
`` I said SPOILT children , '' said Thorns .
`` Look here , Thorns ! ''
`` If this Budget row leads to a storm , and these big people get their power clipped , what 's going to happen ?
Have you thought of that ?
When they go out lock , stock , and barrel , who comes in ? ''
`` Hear , hear ! ''
said Shoesmith , faint but pursuing .
All our Imperialists were obsessed by the thought of international conflict , and their influence revived for a time those uneasinesses that had been aroused in me for the first time by my continental journey with Willersley and by Meredith 's `` One of Our Conquerors . ''
That quite justifiable dread of a punishment for all the slackness , mental dishonesty , presumption , mercenary respectability and sentimentalised commercialism of the Victorian period , at the hands of the better organised , more vigorous , and now far more highly civilised peoples of Central Europe , seemed to me to have both a good and bad series of consequences .
It seemed the only thing capable of bracing English minds to education , sustained constructive effort and research ; but on the other hand it produced the quality of a panic , hasty preparation , impatience of thought , a wasteful and sometimes quite futile immediacy .
In 1909 , for example , there was a vast clamour for eight additional Dreadnoughts --
`` We want eight And we wo n't wait , ''
And afterwards Crupp declared I had begotten a nightmare which haunted him of nights ; he was trying desperately and belatedly to blow a brain as one blows soap-bubbles on such a mezoroic saurian as I had conjured up , while the clumsy monster 's fate , all teeth and brains , crept nearer and nearer ... .
`` Twenty thousand , '' she repeated with conviction .
We had been discussing Cossington 's recent peerage , for Cossington , my old schoolfellow at City Merchants ' , and my victor in the affair of the magazine , had clambered to an amazing wealth up a piled heap of energetically pushed penny and halfpenny magazines , and a group of daily newspapers .
I had expected to find the great lady hostile to the new-comer , but she accepted him , she gloried in him .
`` We 're a peerage , '' she said , `` but none of us have ever had any nonsense about nobility . ''
`` And all that , '' said Lady Forthundred .
And things go on .
Sometimes better than others , but they go on -- somehow .
It depends very much on the sort of butler who pokes 'um about . ''
I suggested that it might be possible to get a secure twenty thousand a year by at least detrimental methods -- socially speaking .
And what was he up to ?
What did HE think we were doing with Mankind ?
That I thought worth knowing .
I remember his talking on one occasion at the Hartsteins ' , at a dinner so tremendously floriferous and equipped that we were almost forced into duologues , about the possible common constructive purpose in politics .
`` Apart , '' said I , `` from the religious question . ''
Of course , when Evesham talked of this ideal of the organised state becoming so finely true to practicability and so clearly stated as to have the compelling conviction of physical science , he spoke quite after my heart .
Had he really embodied the attempt to realise that , I could have done no more than follow him blindly .
But neither he nor I embodied that , and there lies the gist of my story .
And when it came to a study of others among the leading Tories and Imperialists the doubt increased , until with some at last it was possible to question whether they had any imaginative conception of constructive statecraft at all ; whether they did n't opaquely accept the world for what it was , and set themselves single-mindedly to make a place for themselves and cut a figure in it .
`` Why not ? ''
I said , after a pause , and leant across him for the little silver spirit-lamp , to light my cigarette ... .
One countervailing influence to my drift to Toryism in those days was Margaret 's quite religious faith in the Liberals .
I realised that slowly and with a mild astonishment .
It set me , indeed , even then questioning my own change of opinion .
We came at last incidentally , as our way was , to an exchange of views .
It was as nearly a quarrel as we had before I came over to the Conservative side .
It was at Champneys , and I think during the same visit that witnessed my exploration of Lady Forthundred .
It arose indirectly , I think , out of some comments of mine upon our fellow-guests , but it is one of those memories of which the scene and quality remain more vivid than the things said , a memory without any very definite beginning or end .
It was afternoon , in the pause between tea and the dressing bell , and we were in Margaret 's big silver-adorned , chintz-bright room , looking out on the trim Italian garden ... .
Yes , the beginning of it has escaped me altogether , but I remember it as an odd exceptional little wrangle .
`` They 're so superficial , so extravagant ! ''
`` Think of the poor , '' said Margaret , going off at a tangent .
At last we talked it out to the practical pitch , and Crupp and Shoesmith , and I and Gane , made our definite agreement together ... .
`` My ideas have changed and developed , '' I said .
I walked across to her bearskin hearthrug , and stood by the mantel .
`` For me , '' she said at last , `` our political work has been a religion -- it has been more than a religion . ''
I heard in silence .
I had no form of protest available against the implications of that .
She was white-lipped as she spoke .
In the most curious way she had captured the moral values of the situation .
I found myself protesting ineffectually against her fixed conviction .
`` It 's because I think my duty lies in this change that I make it , '' I said .
She was extraordinarily dignified and extraordinarily absurd .
She was hurt and thwarted beyond measure .
She had no place in her ideas , I thought , for me .
I could see how it appeared to her , but I could not make her see anything of the intricate process that had brought me to this divergence .
The opposition of our intellectual temperaments was like a gag in my mouth .
What was there for me to say ?
A flash of intuition told me that behind her white dignity was a passionate disappointment , a shattering of dreams that needed before everything else the relief of weeping .
`` I 've told you , '' I said awkwardly , `` as soon as I could . ''
She hid her tears from me .
Something gripped my heart at the thought .
For a time my life centred altogether upon this journalistic work .
Britten was an experienced journalist , and I had most of the necessary instincts for the business .
We meant to make the paper right and good down to the smallest detail , and we set ourselves at this with extraordinary zeal .
It was n't our intention to show our political motives too markedly at first , and through all the dust storm and tumult and stress of the political struggle of 1910 , we made a little intellectual oasis of good art criticism and good writing .
It was the firm belief of nearly all of us that the Lords were destined to be beaten badly in 1910 , and our game was the longer game of reconstruction that would begin when the shouting and tumult of that immediate conflict were over .
Meanwhile we had to get into touch with just as many good minds as possible .
As we felt our feet , I developed slowly and carefully a broadly conceived and consistent political attitude .
As I will explain later , we were feminist from the outset , though that caused Shoesmith and Gane great searching of heart ; we developed Esmeer 's House of Lords reform scheme into a general cult of the aristocratic virtues , and we did much to humanise and liberalise the narrow excellencies of that Break-up of the Poor Law agitation , which had been organised originally by Beatrice and Sidney Webb .
In addition , without any very definite explanation to any one but Esmeer and Isabel Rivers , and as if it was quite a small matter , I set myself to secure a uniform philosophical quality in our columns .
That , indeed , was the peculiar virtue and characteristic of the BLUE WEEKLY .
I was now very definitely convinced that much of the confusion and futility of contemporary thought was due to the general need of metaphysical training ... .
The great mass of people -- and not simply common people , but people active and influential in intellectual things -- are still quite untrained in the methods of thought and absolutely innocent of any criticism of method ; it is scarcely a caricature to call their thinking a crazy patchwork , discontinuous and chaotic .
They arrive at conclusions by a kind of accident , and do not suspect any other way may be found to their attainment .
A stage above this general condition stands that minority of people who have at some time or other discovered general terms and a certain use for generalisations .
They are -- to fall back on the ancient technicality -- Realists of a crude sort .
When I say Realist of course I mean Realist as opposed to Nominalist , and not Realist in the almost diametrically different sense of opposition to Idealist .
Such are the Baileys ; such , to take their great prototype , was Herbert Spencer ( who could n't read Kant ) ; such are whole regiments of prominent and entirely self-satisfied contemporaries .
They go through queer little processes of definition and generalisation and deduction with the completest belief in the validity of the intellectual instrument they are using .
They are Realists -- Cocksurists -- in matter of fact ; sentimentalists in behaviour .
The Baileys having got to this glorious stage in mental development -- it is glorious because it has no doubts -- were always talking about training `` Experts '' to apply the same simple process to all the affairs of mankind .
Well , Realism is n't the last word of human wisdom .
Modest-minded people , doubtful people , subtle people , and the like -- the kind of people William James writes of as `` tough-minded , '' go on beyond this methodical happiness , and are forever after critical of premises and terms .
They are truer -- and less confident .
They have reached scepticism and the artistic method .
They have emerged into the new Nominalism .
I was at great pains to give my philosophical , political , and social matter the best literary and critical backing we could get in London .
I hunted sedulously for good descriptive writing and good criticism ; I was indefatigable in my readiness to hear and consider , if not to accept advice ; I watched every corner of the paper , and had a dozen men alert to get me special matter of the sort that draws in the unattached reader .
The chief danger on the literary side of a weekly is that it should fall into the hands of some particular school , and this I watched for closely .
It seems impossible to get vividness of apprehension and breadth of view together in the same critic .
So it falls to the wise editor to secure the first and impose the second .
Directly I detected the shrill partisan note in our criticism , the attempt to puff a poor thing because it was `` in the right direction , '' or damn a vigorous piece of work because it was n't , I tackled the man and had it out with him .
Our pay was good enough for that to matter a good deal ... .
Our office was at the very top of a big building near the end of Adelphi Terrace ; the main window beside my desk , a big undivided window of plate glass , looked out upon Cleopatra 's Needle , the corner of the Hotel Cecil , the fine arches of Waterloo Bridge , and the long sweep of south bank with its shot towers and chimneys , past Bankside to the dimly seen piers of the great bridge below the Tower .
The dome of St. Paul 's just floated into view on the left against the hotel facade .
By night and day , in every light and atmosphere , it was a beautiful and various view , alive as a throbbing heart ; a perpetual flow of traffic ploughed and splashed the streaming silver of the river , and by night the shapes of things became velvet black and grey , and the water a shining mirror of steel , wearing coruscating gems of light .
In the foreground the Embankment trams sailed glowing by , across the water advertisements flashed and flickered , trains went and came and a rolling drift of smoke reflected unseen fires .
By day that spectacle was sometimes a marvel of shining wet and wind-cleared atmosphere , sometimes a mystery of drifting fog , sometimes a miracle of crowded details , minutely fine .
In all my earlier imaginings of statecraft I had tacitly assumed either that the relations of the sexes were all right or that anyhow they did n't concern the state .
It was a matter they , whoever `` they '' were , had to settle among themselves .
That sort of disregard was possible then .
But even before 1906 there were endless intimations that the dams holding back great reservoirs of discussion were crumbling .
We political schemers were ploughing wider than any one had ploughed before in the field of social reconstruction .
We had also , we realised , to plough deeper .
We had to plough down at last to the passionate elements of sexual relationship and examine and decide upon them .
I remember , with exceptional vividness , that great night early in the session of 1909 , when -- I think it was -- fifty or sixty women went to prison .
I had been dining at the Barham 's , and Lord Barham and I came down from the direction of St. James 's Park into a crowd and a confusion outside the Caxton Hall .
We found ourselves drifting with an immense multitude towards Parliament Square and parallel with a silent , close-packed column of girls and women , for the most part white-faced and intent .
I still remember the effect of their faces upon me .
It was quite different from the general effect of staring about and divided attention one gets in a political procession of men .
There was an expression of heroic tension .
I remember too the petty little difficulty I felt whether I should ignore these pickets altogether , or lift a hat as I hurried past with averted eyes , or look them in the face as I did so .
Towards the end the House evoked an etiquette of salutation .
For some years after my marriage , I too was for leaving them alone .
I developed a dread and dislike for romance , for emotional music , for the human figure in art -- turning my heart to landscape .
I wanted to sneer at lovers and their ecstasies , and was uncomfortable until I found the effective sneer .
In matters of private morals these were my most uncharitable years .
I did n't want to think of these things any more for ever .
I hated the people whose talk or practice showed they were not of my opinion .
I wanted to believe that their views were immoral and objectionable and contemptible , because I had decided to treat them as at that level .
I was , in fact , falling into the attitude of the normal decent man .
It is difficult now to trace how I changed from my early aversion until I faced this mass of problems .
But so far back as 1910 I had it clear in my mind that I would rather fail utterly than participate in all the surrenders of mind and body that are implied in Dayton 's snarl of `` Leave it alone ; leave it all alone ! ''
Marriage and the begetting and care of children , is the very ground substance in the life of the community .
In a world in which everything changes , in which fresh methods , fresh adjustments and fresh ideas perpetually renew the circumstances of life , it is preposterous that we should not even examine into these matters , should rest content to be ruled by the uncriticised traditions of a barbaric age .
I have wanted to make that idea of a collective mind play in this book the part United Italy plays in Machiavelli 's PRINCE .
I have called it the hinterland of reality , shown it accumulating a dominating truth and rightness which must force men 's now sporadic motives more and more into a disciplined and understanding relation to a plan .
And I have tried to indicate how I sought to serve this great clarification of our confusions ... .
Now I come back to personality and the story of my self-betrayal , and how it is I have had to leave all that far-reaching scheme of mine , a mere project and beginning for other men to take or leave as it pleases them .
It is not the telling of one simple disastrous accident .
There was a vein in our natures that led to this collapse , gradually and at this point and that it crept to the surface .
One may indeed see our destruction -- for indeed politically we could not be more extinct if we had been shot dead -- in the form of a catastrophe as disconnected and conclusive as a meteoric stone falling out of heaven upon two friends and crushing them both .
But I do not think that is true to our situation or ourselves .
We were not taken by surprise .
The thing was in us and not from without , it was akin to our way of thinking and our habitual attitudes ; it had , for all its impulsive effect , a certain necessity .
We might have escaped no doubt , as two men at a hundred yards may shoot at each other with pistols for a considerable time and escape .
But it isn't particularly reasonable to talk of the contrariety of fate if they both get hit .
Such friendships are not uncommon nowadays -- among easy-going , liberal-minded people .
For the most part , there 's no sort of harm , as people say , in them .
The two persons concerned are never supposed to think of the passionate love that hovers so close to the friendship , or if they do , then they banish the thought .
I think we kept the thought as permanently in exile as any one could do .
If it did in odd moments come into our heads we pretended elaborately it was n't there .
But we did n't see very much of one another on that occasion .
There was something in the air between us that made a faint embarrassment ; the mere fact , perhaps , that she had asked me to come up .
`` And then ? ''
If she had been only a beautiful girl in love with me , I think I could have managed the situation .
Once or twice since my marriage and before Isabel became of any significance in my life , there had been incidents with other people , flashes of temptation -- no telling is possible of the thing resisted .
I think that mere beauty and passion would not have taken me .
But between myself and Isabel things were incurably complicated by the intellectual sympathy we had , the jolly march of our minds together .
That has always mattered enormously .
I should have wanted her company nearly as badly if she had been some crippled old lady ; we would have hunted shoulder to shoulder , as two men .
Only two men would never have had the patience and readiness for one another we two had .
I had never for years met any one with whom I could be so carelessly sure of understanding or to whom I could listen so easily and fully .
She gave me , with an extraordinary completeness , that rare , precious effect of always saying something fresh , and yet saying it so that it filled into and folded about all the little recesses and corners of my mind with an infinite , soft familiarity .
It is impossible to explain that .
It is like trying to explain why her voice , her voice heard speaking to any one -- heard speaking in another room -- pleased my ears .
`` Some one will , '' she said , almost viciously .
`` And then we 'll have to stop these walks and talks of ours , dear Master ... .
I 'll be sorry to give them up . ''
But before things came to that pass , some months and many phases and a sudden journey to America intervened .
`` Just because we may be found out ! ''
`` Master , I should n't in the least mind being found out with you .
I'm afraid -- I 'd be proud . ''
My return to the office sticks out in my memory with an extreme vividness , because of the wild eagle of pride that screamed within me .
It was Tuesday morning , and though not a soul in London knew of it yet except Isabel , I had been back in England a week .
I came in upon Britten and stood in the doorway .
`` So glad you are back , dear , '' she said .
so very glad you are back . ''
I returned her kiss with a queer feeling at my heart , too undifferentiated to be even a definite sense of guilt or meanness .
I think it was chiefly amazement -- at the universe -- at myself .
I perceived suddenly that she had resolved to end our estrangement .
She put herself so that my arm came caressingly about her .
`` Restlessness , '' she said , and thought .
`` You were restless in Venice .
You said it was restlessness took you to America . ''
`` If I was in Parliament again , I should be on the Conservative side . ''
I took her hands , perplexed beyond measure .
`` My dear ! ''
she said , and slowly withdrew her hand .
She leant forward with her arm on the sofa-back , and looked very intently into my face .
I felt the most damnable scoundrel in the world as I returned her gaze .
The thought of Isabel 's darkly shining eyes seemed like a physical presence between us ... .
I sat a little away from her , and then took my teacup in hand , with an odd effect of defending myself .
`` Have you been reading that old book of mine ? ''
`` It all seems so plain to me now , '' she said , `` and so true . ''
I was profoundly disconcerted .
I put down my teacup , stood up in the middle of the hearthrug , and began talking .
`` I 'm tremendously glad , Margaret , that you 've come to see I 'm not altogether perverse , '' I began .
I launched out into a rather trite and windy exposition of my views , and she sat close to me on the sofa , looking up into my face , hanging on my words , a deliberate and invincible convert .
`` Yes , '' she said , `` yes .
Margaret and I dined together at home .
She made me open out my political projects to her .
`` I have been foolish , '' she said .
`` I want to help . ''
I am telling a story , and not propounding theories in this book ; and chiefly I am telling of the ideas and influences and emotions that have happened to me -- me as a sort of sounding board for my world .
The moralist is at liberty to go over my conduct with his measure and say , `` At this point or at that you went wrong , and you ought to have done '' -- so-and-so .
The point of interest to the statesman is that it did n't for a moment occur to us to do so-and-so when the time for doing it came .
It amazes me now to think how little either of us troubled about the established rights or wrongs of the situation .
We had n't an atom of respect for them , innate or acquired .
The guardians of public morals will say we were very bad people ; I submit in defence that they are very bad guardians -- provocative guardians ... .
And when at last there came a claim against us that had an effective validity for us , we were in the full tide of passionate intimacy .
For a brief time we had been like two people in a magic cell , magically cut off from the world and full of a light of its own , and then we began to realise that we were not in the least cut off , that the world was all about us and pressing in upon us , limiting us , threatening us , resuming possession of us .
I tried to ignore the injury to Margaret of her unreciprocated advances .
I tried to maintain to myself that this hidden love made no difference to the now irreparable breach between husband and wife .
But I never spoke of it to Isabel or let her see that aspect of our case .
The time for that had gone ... .
It is still only two years since that struggle , and I will not trouble the reader with a detailed history of events that must be quite sufficiently present in his mind for my purpose already .
Huge stacks of journalism have dealt with Handitch and its significance .
For the reader very probably , as for most people outside a comparatively small circle , it meant my emergence from obscurity .
We obtruded no editor 's name in the BLUE WEEKLY ; I had never as yet been on the London hoardings .
Before Handitch I was a journalist and writer of no great public standing ; after Handitch , I was definitely a person , in the little group of persons who stood for the Young Imperialist movement .
Handitch was , to a very large extent , my affair .
I realised then , as a man comes to do , how much one can still grow after seven and twenty .
In the second election I was a man taking hold of things ; at Kinghamstead I had been simply a young candidate , a party unit , led about the constituency , told to do this and that , and finally washed in by the great Anti-Imperialist flood , like a starfish rolling up a beach .
My feminist views had earnt the mistrust of the party , and I do not think I should have got the chance of Handitch or indeed any chance at all of Parliament for a long time , if it had not been that the seat with its long record of Liberal victories and its Liberal majority of 3642 at the last election , offered a hopeless contest .
The Liberal dissensions and the belated but by no means contemptible Socialist candidate were providential interpositions .
I think , however , the conduct of Gane , Crupp , and Tarvrille in coming down to fight for me , did count tremendously in my favour .
`` We are n't going to win , perhaps , '' said Crupp , `` but we are going to talk . ''
And until the very eve of victory , we treated Handitch not so much as a battlefield as a hoarding .
And so it was the Endowment of Motherhood as a practical form of Eugenics got into English politics .
`` Not when you explain it -- but they wo n't let you explain it .
And about marriage -- ? ''
`` It 's catching on like old age pensions , '' he said .
`` We 've dished the Liberals !
To think that such a project should come from our side ! ''
`` You 've done a great thing this time , '' she said .
`` Handitch will make you . ''
`` I want you . ''
`` You 've got me . ''
`` And I want to darn your socks , '' she said , smiling back at me .
`` We want a lot .
You and I are greedy people for the things we like , Master .
It 's very evident we 've got nearly all we can ever have of one another -- and I 'm not satisfied . ''
`` YOUR things , '' she said .
But the profound impossibility of our relation was now becoming more and more apparent to us .
We found ourselves seeking justification , clinging passionately to a situation that was coldly , pitilessly , impossible and fated .
We wanted quite intensely to live together and have a child , but also we wanted very many other things that were incompatible with these desires .
It was extraordinarily difficult to weigh our political and intellectual ambitions against those intimate wishes .
The weights kept altering according as one found oneself grasping this valued thing or that .
It was n't as if we could throw everything aside for our love , and have that as we wanted it .
Love such as we bore one another isn't altogether , or even chiefly , a thing in itself -- it is for the most part a value set upon things .
Our love was interwoven with all our other interests ; to go out of the world and live in isolation seemed to us like killing the best parts of each other ; we loved the sight of each other engaged finely and characteristically , we knew each other best as activities .
We had no delusions about material facts ; we did n't want each other alive or dead , we wanted each other fully alive .
We wanted to do big things together , and for us to take each other openly and desperately would leave us nothing in the world to do .
We wanted children indeed passionately , but children with every helpful chance in the world , and children born in scandal would be handicapped at every turn .
We wanted to share a home , and not a solitude .
Discovery broke out in every direction .
Friends with grave faces and an atmosphere of infinite tact invaded us both .
Other friends ceased to invade either of us .
It was manifest we had become -- we knew not how -- a private scandal , a subject for duologues , an amazement , a perplexity , a vivid interest .
In a few brief weeks it seemed London passed from absolute unsuspiciousness to a chattering exaggeration of its knowledge of our relations .
It was just the most inappropriate time for that disclosure .
The long smouldering antagonism to my endowment of motherhood ideas had flared up into an active campaign in the EXPURGATOR , and it would be altogether disastrous to us if I should be convicted of any personal irregularity .
It was just because of the manifest and challenging respectability of my position that I had been able to carry the thing as far as I had done .
Now suddenly my fortunes had sprung a leak , and scandal was pouring in ... .
It chanced , too , that a wave of moral intolerance was sweeping through London , one of those waves in which the bitterness of the consciously just finds an ally in the panic of the undiscovered .
A certain Father Blodgett had been preaching against social corruption with extraordinary force , and had roused the Church of England people to a kind of competition in denunciation .
The old methods of the Anti-Socialist campaign had been renewed , and had offered far too wide a scope and too tempting an opportunity for private animosity , to be restricted to the private affairs of the Socialists .
I had intimations of an extensive circulation of `` private and confidential '' letters ... .
`` Then part , '' she cried , `` part .
If you do n't want a smashing up , -- part !
You two have got to be parted .
You 've got never to see each other ever , never to speak . ''
There was a zest in her voice .
`` We 're not circulating stories , '' she denied .
And Curmain never told us anything -- Curmain is an EXCELLENT young man ; oh !
a quite excellent young man .
You misjudged him altogether .
I was equally unsuccessful with Bailey .
I caught the little wretch in the League Club , and he wriggled and lied .
He would n't say where he had got his facts , he would n't admit he had told any one .
When I gave him the names of two men who had come to me astonished and incredulous , he attempted absurdly to make me think they had told HIM .
He did his horrible little best to suggest that honest old Quackett , who had just left England for the Cape , was the real scandalmonger .
That struck me as mean , even for Bailey .
I 've still the odd vivid impression of his fluting voice , excusing the inexcusable , his big , shifty face evading me , his perspiration-beaded forehead , the shrugging shoulders , and the would-be exculpatory gestures -- Houndsditch gestures -- of his enormous ugly hands .
`` Everything , '' she said .
`` Keep you and have our work .
Are n't we Mates ? ''
And then for a long time we stared at one another in silence .
`` We have n't much time left , '' she said .
`` I do n't want you to marry Shoesmith , '' I said at last .
`` He wants me to be engaged soon .
Then , he says , he can go round fighting these rumours , defending us both -- and force a quarrel on the Baileys . ''
`` What else is there to do , my dear ?
-- what else is there to do at all ?
I 've been thinking day and night .
You ca n't go away with me .
You can't smash yourself suddenly in the sight of all men .
I 'd rather die than that should happen .
Look what you are becoming in the country !
Look at all you 've built up !
I would n't let you do it if you could .
I would n't let you -- if it were only for Margaret 's sake .
THIS ... closes the scandal , closes everything . ''
She was manifestly altogether unaware .
`` What do they say ? ''
And to make THAT of it .
But how can they ? ''
She paused and looked at me .
`` It 's so incredible .
How can any one believe it ?
I could n't . ''
I turned my face towards the desk , and took up and dropped a handful of paper fasteners .
Margaret sat very still .
When I looked at her again , her face was very white , and her distressed eyes scrutinised me .
Her lips quivered as she spoke .
`` You really mean -- THAT ? ''
I had that distressful feeling I have always had with Margaret , of not being altogether sure she heard , of being doubtful if she understood .
I perceived that once again I had struck at her and shattered a thousand unsubstantial pinnacles .
And I could n't get at her , to help her , or touch her mind !
I stood up , and at my movement she moved .
She produced a dainty little handkerchief , and made an effort to wipe her face with it , and held it to her eyes .
`` Oh , my Husband ! ''
`` We ca n't part in a room , '' said Isabel .
We talked and thought that afternoon on every aspect of our relations .
It seems to me now we talked so wide and far that scarcely an issue in the life between man and woman can arise that we did not at least touch upon .
Lying there at Isabel 's feet , I have become for myself a symbol of all this world-wide problem between duty and conscious , passionate love the world has still to solve .
Because it is n't solved ; there 's a wrong in it either way.. ..
The sky , the wide horizon , seemed to lift us out of ourselves until we were something representative and general .
She was womanhood become articulate , talking to her lover .
`` It was n't a thing planned , '' she said .
`` It 's queer to think of now , '' said Isabel .
`` Who could believe we did all we have done honestly ?
Well , in a manner honestly .
Who could believe we thought this might be hidden ?
Who could trace it all step by step from the time when we found that a certain boldness in our talk was pleasing ?
We talked of love ... .
Master , there 's not much for us to do in the way of Apologia that any one will credit .
And yet if it were possible to tell the very heart of our story ... .
I recalled once more the largeness , the release from small personal things that I had felt in my youth ; statecraft became real and wonderful again with the memory , the gigantic handling of gigantic problems .
I began to talk out my thoughts , sitting up beside her , as I could never talk of them to any one but Isabel ; began to recover again the purpose that lay under all my political ambitions and adjustments and anticipations .
I saw the State , splendid and wide as I had seen it in that first travel of mine , but now it was no mere distant prospect of spires and pinnacles , but populous with fine-trained , bold-thinking , bold-doing people .
It was as if I had forgotten for a long time and now remembered with amazement .
`` It 's good , '' I said , `` to talk like this to you , to get back to youth and great ambitions with you .
There have been times lately when politics has seemed the pettiest game played with mean tools for mean ends -- and none the less so that the happiness of three hundred million people might be touched by our follies .
I talk to no one else like this ... .
And now I think of parting , I think but of how much more I might have talked to you .
`` I 've a superstition that after -- after we 've parted -- if ever I go into my room and talk , you 'll hear .
You 'll be -- somewhere . ''
Unless it 's by accident . ''
`` Well , by accident it happens .
Not too many accidents , Isabel .
Never any more adventures for us , dear , now .
They play the game , you know .
They 've begun late , but now they 've got to .
You see it 's not so very hard for them since you and I , my dear , are here always , always faithfully here on this warm cliff of love accomplished , watching and helping them under high heaven .
It is n't so VERY hard .
Rather good in some ways .
Some people HAVE to be broken a little .
Can you see Altiora down there , by any chance ? ''
`` I can only see you here beside me , dear -- for ever .
For all my life , dear , till I die .
Was that -- the sin ?
`` After we 've parted I shall look to talk it over with you . ''
CHAPTER THE THIRD ~~ THE BREAKING POINT
I came to a crisis after that wild dinner of Tarvrille 's .
Something in that stripped my soul bare .
Wilkins was asking questions , and I , too , was curious .
The story of the siege of the Legations in China in the year 1900 and all that followed upon that , is just one of those disturbing interludes in history that refuse to join on to that general scheme of protestation by which civilisation is maintained .
It is a break in the general flow of experience as disconcerting to statecraft as the robbery of my knife and the scuffle that followed it had been to me when I was a boy at Penge .
It is like a tear in a curtain revealing quite unexpected backgrounds .
I had never given the business a thought for years ; now this talk brought back a string of pictures to my mind ; how the reliefs arrived and the plundering began , how section after section of the International Army was drawn into murder and pillage , how the infection spread upward until the wives of Ministers were busy looting , and the very sentinels stripped and crawled like snakes into the Palace they were set to guard .
It did not stop at robbery , men were murdered , women , being plundered , were outraged , children were butchered , strong men had found themselves with arms in a lawless , defenceless city , and this had followed .
Now it was all recalled .
`` It 's all right , '' said Tarvrille to the table generally .
It's not a general conflagration , and the fire brigade wo n't be five minutes .
Do n't see that it 's our affair .
The stuff 's insured .
They say old Lady Paskershortly was dreadful .
The Dowager Empress had shown her some little things of hers .
Pet things -- hidden away .
Susan went straight for them -- used to take an umbrella for the silks .
It was evident he did n't want his dinner spoilt , and we played up loyally .
Gane picked up the tale with confirmations .
`` I suppose those men came back , '' said Wilkins .
`` How do they fit it in with the rest of their lives ? ''
`` I suppose there 's Pekin-stained police officers , Pekin-stained J. P. 's -- trying petty pilferers in the severest manner .
said some one , intent .
`` Hate a fool , '' said my assailant .
`` Then this about fine thinking .
Like going into a bear pit armed with a tagle -- talgent -- talgent galv'nometer .
Like going to fight a mad dog with Shasepear and the Bible .
Fine thinking -- what we want is the thickes' thinking we can get .
Thinking that stands up alone .
Taf Reform means work for all , thassort of thing . ''
`` Oh , HE forsakes every one , '' I said , flying out as a tired mind will , with an obvious repartee ... .
I passed at a bound from such monstrous theology to a towering rage against the Baileys .
In an instant and with no sense of absurdity I wanted -- in the intervals of love and fine thinking -- to fling about that strenuously virtuous couple ; I wanted to kick Keyhole of the PEEPSHOW into the gutter and make a common massacre of all the prosperous rascaldom that makes a trade and rule of virtue .
I can still feel that transition .
In a moment I had reached that phase of weakly decisive anger which is for people of my temperament the concomitant of exhaustion .
It was then between one and two .
I felt that I could go home now without any risk of meeting Margaret .
It had been the thought of returning to Margaret that had sent me wandering that night .
It is one of the ugliest facts I recall about that time of crisis , the intense aversion I felt for Margaret .
No sense of her goodness , her injury and nobility , and the enormous generosity of her forgiveness , sufficed to mitigate that .
I hope now that in this book I am able to give something of her silvery splendour , but all through this crisis I felt nothing of that .
There was a triumphant kindliness about her that I found intolerable .
She meant to be so kind to me , to offer unstinted consolation , to meet my needs , to supply just all she imagined Isabel had given me .
I remember my lame sentences .
`` We 'll have a boat .
That 's best here . ''
`` I ca n't stand it , '' she blubbered .
She stopped weeping , she made a great effort to control herself , and looked at me steadfastly for a moment .
`` I was going to kill myself , '' she whispered .
`` I was going to kill myself quietly -- somehow .
I meant to wait a bit and have an accident .
I thought -- you did n't understand .
You were a man , and could n't understand ... . ''
I was silent while he read .
I said , amazed .
There came a pause between us .
`` Yes , '' he answered , after a pause , `` I 've watched . ''
`` Shoesmith -- whom you 're pledged to in a manner .
You 've just picked him out and made him conspicuous .
Every one will know .
of course -- it's nothing to you .
`` We have a use for you -- no one else quite fills it .
I 'm not sure it will go on . ''
`` Some things one 's GOT to do , '' he threw out .
And you 'll always be something fine and good for me anyhow .
I know things about you , -- qualities -- no mere act can destroy them.. .. Well , I can tell you , you 're doing wrong .
You 're going on now like a man who is hypnotised and ca n't turn round .
You 're piling wrong on wrong .
It was wrong for you two people ever to be lovers . ''
`` It gripped us hard , '' I said .
Britten looked at his finger-nails closely .
His red face puckered to a wry frown .
`` Have n't we all at times wanted the world put back ? ''
he grunted , and looked hard and close at one particular nail .
`` I do n't believe you are right , '' I said .
`` I believe we can save something -- ''
He raised his eyebrows .
I perceived now the element of absurdity in me , but at the time I was as serious as a man who is burning .
He swung round upon his swivel at me .
`` Remington , '' he said , `` have you forgotten the immense things our movement means ? ''
`` It is strange to think after all these years that I should be asking myself , do I love you ?
have I loved you ?
In a sense I think I HATE you .
I feel you have taken my life , dragged it in your wake for a time , thrown it aside .
Unfairly resentful , for why should I exact that you should watch and understand my life , when clearly I have understood so little of yours .
But I am savage -- savage at the wrecking of all you were to do .
`` Oh , why -- why did you give things up ?
`` No human being is his own to do what he likes with .
You were not only pledged to my tiresome , ineffectual companionship , but to great purposes .
They ARE great purposes ... .
`` But , dear , if I can help you -- even now -- in any way -- help both of you , I mean ... .
It tears me when I think of you poor and discredited .
You will let me help you if I can -- it will be the last wrong not to let me do that ... .
There was a bustle of final adieux on the platform , a cry of `` Stand away , please , stand away ! ''
and the train was gliding slowly and smoothly out of the station .
I heard as though he had spoken it in the carriage Britten 's `` It WAS a good game . ''
No end of a game .
And for the first time I imagined the faces and voices of Crupp and Esmeer and Gane when they learnt of this secret flight , this flight of which they were quite unwarned .
And Shoesmith might be there in the house , -- Shoesmith who was to have been married in four days -- the thing might hit him full in front of any kind of people .
Cruel eyes might watch him .
Why the devil had n't I written letters to warn them all ?
I could have posted them five minutes before the train started .
I had never thought to that moment of the immense mess they would be in ; how the whole edifice would clatter about their ears .
I had a sudden desire to stop the train and go back for a day , for two days , to set that negligence right .
My brain for a moment brightened , became animated and prolific of ideas .
I thought of a brilliant line we might have taken on that confounded Reformatory Bill ... .
Then suddenly , stabbing me to the heart , came a vision of Margaret's tears and the sound of her voice saying , `` Husband mine !
To see you cry !
Of all these titles THE ARISTOCRATIC LIFE seemed at first most like a clue to White .
Benham 's erratic movements , his sudden impulses , his angers , his unaccountable patiences , his journeys to strange places , and his lapses into what had seemed to be pure adventurousness , could all be put into system with that .
Before White had turned over three pages of the great fascicle of manuscript that was called Book Two , he had found the word `` Bushido '' written with a particularly flourishing capital letter and twice repeated .
`` That was inevitable , '' said White with the comforting regret one feels for a friend 's banalities .
`` And it dates ... [ unreadable ] this was early ... . ''
The story began with the schoolfellow he had known at Minchinghampton School .
`` Well , who began it ? ''
`` Fear , the First Limitation '' -- his title indicated the spirit of Benham's opening book very clearly .
His struggle with fear was the very beginning of his soul 's history .
It continued to the end .
He had hardly decided to lead the noble life before he came bump against the fact that he was a physical coward .
He felt fear acutely .
`` Fear , '' he wrote , `` is the foremost and most persistent of the shepherding powers that keep us in the safe fold , that drive us back to the beaten track and comfort and -- futility .
The beginning of all aristocracy is the subjugation of fear . ''
`` 'And my little son must n't be a coward . '
When Benham was already seventeen and , as he supposed , hardened against his fear of beasts , his friend Prothero gave him an account of the killing of an old labouring man by a stallion which had escaped out of its stable .
The beast had careered across a field , leapt a hedge and come upon its victim suddenly .
He had run a few paces and stopped , trying to defend his head with the horse rearing over him .
It beat him down with two swift blows of its fore hoofs , one , two , lifted him up in its long yellow teeth and worried him as a terrier does a rat -- the poor old wretch was still able to make a bleating sound at that -- dropped him , trampled and kicked him as he tried to crawl away , and went on trampling and battering him until he was no more than a bloody inhuman bundle of clothes and mire .
For more than half an hour this continued , and then its animal rage was exhausted and it desisted , and went and grazed at a little distance from this misshapen , hoof-marked , torn , and muddy remnant of a man .
No one it seems but a horror-stricken child knew what was happening ... .
`` Then the left wing of the monoplane came up like a door that slams , some wires whistled past my head , and one whipped off my helmet , and then , with the seat slipping away from me , down we went .
I snatched unavailingly for the helmet , and then gripped the sides .
It was like dropping in a boat suddenly into the trough of a wave -- and going on dropping .
We were both strapped , and I got my feet against the side and clung to the locked second wheel .
`` But the point I want to insist upon is that I did not feel afraid .
I was simply enormously , terribly INTERESTED ... .
Young people and unseasoned people , Benham argued , are apt to imagine that if fear is increased and carried to an extreme pitch it becomes unbearable , one will faint or die ; given a weak heart , a weak artery or any such structural defect and that may well happen , but it is just as possible that as the stimulation increases one passes through a brief ecstasy of terror to a new sane world , exalted but as sane as normal existence .
There is the calmness of despair .
Benham had made some notes to enforce this view , of the observed calm behaviour of men already hopelessly lost , men on sinking ships , men going to execution , men already maimed and awaiting the final stroke , but for the most part these were merely references to books and periodicals .
In exactly the same way , he argued , we exaggerate the range of pain as if it were limitless .
We think if we are unthinking that it passes into agony and so beyond endurance to destruction .
It probably does nothing of the kind .
Benham compared pain to the death range of the electric current .
At a certain voltage it thrills , at a greater it torments and convulses , at a still greater it kills .
But at enormous voltages , as Tesla was the first to demonstrate , it does no injury .
And following on this came memoranda on the recorded behaviour of martyrs , on the self-torture of Hindoo ascetics , of the defiance of Red Indian prisoners .
Long before they found him he had passed to an extremity of terror .
The world had become hideous and threatening , the sun was a pitiless glare , each rocky ridge he clambered became more dreadful than the last , each new valley into which he looked more hateful and desolate , the cramped thorn bushes threatened him gauntly , the rocks had a sinister lustre , and in every blue shadow about him the night and death lurked and waited .
There was no hurry for them , presently they would spread out again and join and submerge him , presently in the confederated darkness he could be stalked and seized and slain .
Yes , this he admitted was real fear .
He had cracked his voice , yelling as a child yells .
And then he had become afraid of his own voice ... .
With something bordering upon intellectual consternation , White , who was a decent self-respecting sceptic , read these last clamberings of Benham 's spirit .
They were written in pencil ; they were unfinished when he died .
`` You may be heedless of death and suffering because you think you can not suffer and die , or you may be heedless of death and pain because you have identified your life with the honour of mankind and the insatiable adventurousness of man 's imagination , so that the possible death is negligible and the possible achievement altogether outweighs it .
Even now some hungry watchful monster might lurk in yonder shadows , watching with infinite still patience .
Kepple had told him how they would sit still for hours -- staring unblinkingly as cats stare at a fire -- and then crouch to advance .
Beneath the shrill overtone of the nightjars , what noiseless grey shapes , what deep breathings and cracklings and creepings might there not be ?
A thorn caught at him and he disentangled himself .
He went on down a winding sound-deadening path of sand towards the drinking-place .
He came to a wide white place that was almost level , and beyond it under clustering pale-stemmed trees shone the mirror surface of some ancient tank , and , sharp and black , a dog-like beast sat on its tail in the midst of this space , started convulsively and went slinking into the undergrowth .
Benham paused for a moment and then walked out softly into the light , and , behold !
as if it were to meet him , came a monster , a vast dark shape drawing itself lengthily out of the blackness , and stopped with a start as if it had been instantly changed to stone .
It had stopped with one paw advanced .
Its striped mask was light and dark grey in the moonlight , grey but faintly tinged with ruddiness ; its mouth was a little open , its fangs and a pendant of viscous saliva shone vivid .
Its great round-pupilled eyes regarded him stedfastly .
At last the nightmare of Benham 's childhood had come true , and he was face to face with a tiger , uncaged , uncontrolled .
Benham stood quite motionless , and body and mind had halted together .
That confrontation had an interminableness that had nothing to do with the actual passage of time .
Then some trickle of his previous thoughts stirred in the frozen quiet of his mind .
`` I am Man , '' he said , and lifted a hand as he spoke .
`` The Thought of the world . ''
`` What is this fool 's trap of security ?
`` I am just one -- just the precursor .
He wandered now uttering his thoughts as they came to him , and he saw no more living creatures because they fled and hid before the sound of his voice .
He wandered until the moon , larger now and yellow tinged , was low between the black bars of the tree stems .
And then it sank very suddenly behind a hilly spur and the light failed swiftly .
A great stillness came over the world , a velvet silence that wrapped about him , as the velvet shadows wrapped about him .
The corncrakes had ceased , all the sounds and stir of animal life had died away , the breeze had fallen .
A drowsing comfort took possession of him .
He grew more placid and more placid still .
He was enormously content to find that fear had fled before him and was gone .
He drifted into that state of mind when one thinks without ideas , when one 's mind is like a starless sky , serene and empty .
He heard a cock crow , and another answer -- jungle fowl these must be , because there could be no village within earshot -- and then far away and bringing back memories of terraced houses and ripe walled gardens , was the scream of peacocks .
And some invisible bird was making a hollow beating sound among the trees near at hand .
TUNK , and out of the dry grass came a twittering .
`` His heart failed him .
He did his very best to make it a wrench .
Her family were the Mantons of Blent , quite good west-country people .
She had broken away from them before she was twenty to marry Benham , whom she had idealized at a tennis party .
He had talked of his work and she had seen it in a flash , the noblest work in the world , him at his daily divine toil and herself a Madonna surrounded by a troupe of Blessed Boys -- all of good family , some of quite the best .
For a time she had kept it up even more than he had , and then Nolan had distracted her with a realization of the heroism that goes to the ends of the earth .
She became sick with desire for the forests of Brazil , and the Pacific , and -- a peak in Darien .
Immediately the school was frowsty beyond endurance , and for the first time she let herself perceive how dreadfully a gentleman and a scholar can smell of pipes and tobacco .
Only one course lay open to a woman of spirit ... .
`` What have you done ?
All sorts of brave things ?
Do you swim now ?
I can swim half a mile .
Some day we will swim races together .
She lay among splashes of sunshine on the red cushions in the punt , a little curled-up figure of white , with her sweet pale animated face warmed by the reflection of her red sunshade , and her eyes like little friendly heavens .
And he , lean , and unconsciously graceful , sat at her feet and admired her beyond measure , and rejoiced that now at last they were going to be ever so much together , and doubted if it would be possible ever to love any other woman so much as he did her .
`` Poff , '' she said suddenly , `` has it ever occurred to you what you are going to do afterwards .
Do you know you are going to be quite well off ? ''
Benham looked up with a faint embarrassment .
`` My father said something .
He was rather vague .
It was n't his affair -- that kind of thing . ''
`` You MUST do something , Poff .
But it need n't be for a living .
The world is yours without that .
And so you see you 've got to make plans .
You've got to know the sort of people who 'll have things in their hands .
You've got to keep out of -- holes and corners .
You 've got to think of Parliament and abroad .
There 's the army , there 's diplomacy .
There 's the Empire .
You can be a Cecil Rhodes if you like .
You can be a Winston ... . ''
`` But who IS he ?
Who is his father ?
Where does he come from ? ''
Benham sought in his mind for a space .
`` I do n't know , '' he said at last .
Billy had always been rather reticent about his people .
She demanded an account of Billy 's furniture , Billy's clothes , Billy 's form of exercise .
It dawned upon Benham that for some inexplicable reason she was hostile to Billy .
It was like the unmasking of an ambuscade .
He had talked a lot about Prothero 's ideas and the discussions of social reform and social service that went on in his rooms , for Billy read at unknown times , and was open at all hours to any argumentative caller .
To Lady Marayne all ideas were obnoxious , a form of fogging ; all ideas , she held , were queer ideas .
`` And does he call himself a Socialist ? ''
`` I THOUGHT he would . ''
`` They have ideas , '' he evaded .
He tried to express it better .
`` They give one something to take hold of . ''
`` There 's no sense in them .
What is the good of talking about upsetting everything ?
How can one do anything then ?
It 's nonsense , little Poff .
And you may spoil so much ... .
I HATE the way you talk of it ... .
As if it wasn't all -- absolutely -- RUBBISH ... . ''
`` I was n't going to be bullied by a beast , '' said Benham .
`` Yes , but my case is that there are limits . ''
It was Prothero 's eyes and pencil that first directed Benham to the poor indolences and evasions and insincerities of the masters .
It was Prothero 's wicked pictures that made him see the shrivelled absurdity of the vulgar theology .
But it was Benham who stood between Prothero and that rather coarsely conceived epicureanism that seemed his logical destiny .
When quite early in their Cambridge days Prothero's revolt against foppery reached a nadir of personal neglect , and two philanthropists from the rooms below him , goaded beyond the normal tolerance of Trinity , and assisted by two sportsmen from Trinity Hall , burnt his misshapen straw hat ( after partly filling it with gunpowder and iron filings ) and sought to duck him in the fountain in the court , it was Benham , in a state between distress and madness , and armed with a horn-handled cane of exceptional size , who intervened , turned the business into a blend of wrangle and scuffle , introduced the degrading topic of duelling into a simple wholesome rag of four against one , carried him off under the cloud of horror created by this impropriety and so saved him , still only slightly wetted , not only from this indignity but from the experiment in rationalism that had provoked it .
And something in his manner would suggest a satisfaction , or a dissatisfaction with confidential mysteries .
`` You know Scotland well , Mr .
`` I 've never had a chance of riding .
And I think I 'm afraid of horses . ''
`` That 's only an excuse , '' said Lady Marayne .
`` Everybody 's afraid of horses and nobody 's really afraid of horses . ''
`` But is n't it dreadfully hot in town in the summer ? ''
`` But it 's good at tennis , '' she said .
`` You DO play tennis , Mr .
`` Poff , my dear , '' she said , `` I 've had a diving-board put at the deep end of the pond . ''
The remark hung unanswered for a moment .
The transition had been too quick for Benham 's state of mind .
`` What would you do , Prothero , if you found yourself saddled with some thousands a year ? ''
`` Godfathers do n't grow in Brixton , '' said Prothero concisely .
`` Well , what am I to do , Prothero ? ''
`` I 've dreamt of a paper , '' he said , `` a paper that should tell the brute truth about things . ''
`` I 'm not a speaker , '' said Benham .
`` Better , pride than dishonour , '' said Benham , `` better the pretentious life than the sordid life .
What else is there ? ''
It is unnecessary even to recapitulate these universal controversies of our time .
The lunch-table and the dinner-table and the general talk of the house drifted more and more definitely at its own level in the same direction as the private talk of Prothero and Benham , towards the antagonism of the privileged few and the many , of the trained and traditioned against the natural and undisciplined , of aristocracy against democracy .
At the week-end Sir Godfrey returned to bring fresh elements .
He said that democracy was unscientific .
`` To deny aristocracy is to deny the existence of the fittest .
It is on the existence of the fittest that progress depends . ''
`` So far as I can understand Mr. Prothero , '' said Lady Marayne , `` he thinks that all the inferiors are the superiors and all the superiors inferior .
It 's quite simple ... . ''
`` Any fool can do that who cares to go to the trouble . ''
`` This equestrianism , '' he began , `` is a matter of time and money -- time even more than money .
I want to read .
I want to deal with ideas ... .
`` Prothero , '' he said in hall next day , `` we are going to drive to-morrow . ''
`` The barrow ought not to have been there ... .
said Benham , and the horse stopped .
`` Are you coming up , Prothero ? ''
Benham made a half-turn of the head .
`` It 's a motor-bicycle . ''
For three days the two friends avoided each other , and then Prothero went to Benham 's room .
Benham was smoking cigarettes -- Lady Marayne , in the first warmth of his filial devotion , had prohibited his pipe -- and reading Webb 's INDUSTRIAL DEMOCRACY .
he said coldly , scarcely looking up , and continued to read that absorbing work .
`` It did n't matter in the least , '' said Benham distantly .
Benham stuck one leg over the arm of his chair .
`` Billy , '' he said , `` come and be -- equestrian and stop this nonsense . ''
`` If I miss another drive may I be -- lost for ever , '' said Billy , with the utmost sincerity .
`` Never more will I get down , Benham , wherever you may take me .
Short of muffing my fellowship I 'm with you always ... .
Will it be an American trotter ? ''
The biologist was temporarily incapacitated , and the talk went on over his prostrate attempts to rally and protest .
He was understood to convey that the speaker was a Jew , and did not in the least mean what he was saying ... .
`` Nevertheless this immense appearance of choice which we get in the undergraduate community here , is not altogether illusion ; it is more reality than illusion even if it has not the stable and complete reality it appears to have .
And it is more a reality for us than it was for our fathers , and much more a reality now than it was a few centuries ago .
The world is more confused and multitudinous than ever it was , the practicable world far wider , and ourselves far less under the pressure of inflexible moulding forces and inevitable necessities than any preceding generations .
I want to put very clearly how I see the new world , the present world , the world of novel choice to which our youth and inexperience faces , and I want to define to you a certain selection of choices which I am going to call aristocratic , and to which it is our manifest duty and destiny as the elect and favoured sons of our race to direct ourselves .
`` Or -- we are lost ... . ''
`` Now you see better what I mean about choice .
Now you see what I am driving at .
We have to choose each one for himself and also each one for the race , whether we will accept the muddle of the common life , whether we ourselves will be muddled , weakly nothings , children of luck , steering our artful courses for mean success and tawdry honours , or whether we will be aristocrats , for that is what it amounts to , each one in the measure of his personal quality an aristocrat , refusing to be restrained by fear , refusing to be restrained by pain , resolved to know and understand up to the hilt of his understanding , resolved to sacrifice all the common stuff of his life to the perfection of his peculiar gift , a purged man , a trained , selected , artificial man , not simply free , but lordly free , filled and sustained by pride .
Whether you or I make that choice and whether you or I succeed in realizing ourselves , though a great matter to ourselves , is , I admit , a small matter to the world .
But the great matter is this , that THE CHOICE IS BEING MADE , that it will continue to be made , and that all around us , so that it can never be arrested and darkened again , is the dawn of human possibility ... . ''
If White had been writing this chapter he would have in all probability called it THE TOBIAS STAGE , forgetful that there was no Tobit behind Benham and an entirely different Sara in front of him .
`` Of course it will be aristocratic .
How can uninformed men think all round the globe ?
Democracy dies five miles from the parish pump .
It will be an aristocratic republic of all the capable men in the world ... . ''
An aristocratic world-state ; this political dream had already taken hold of Benham 's imagination when he came to town .
But it was a dream , something that had never existed , something that indeed may never materialize , and such dreams , though they are vivid enough in a study at night , fade and vanish at the rustle of a daily newspaper or the sound of a passing band .
To come back again ... .
So it was with Benham .
Sometimes he was set clearly towards this world-state that Prothero had talked into possibility .
Sometimes he was simply abreast of the patriotic and socially constructive British Imperialism of Breeze and Westerton .
And there were moods when the two things were confused in his mind , and the glamour of world dominion rested wonderfully on the slack and straggling British Empire of Edward the Seventh -- and Mr. Rudyard Kipling and Mr. Chamberlain .
He did go on for a time honestly entertaining both these projects in his mind , each at its different level , the greater impalpable one and the lesser concrete one within it .
In some unimaginable way he could suppose that the one by some miracle of ennoblement -- and neglecting the Frenchman , the Russian , the German , the American , the Indian , the Chinaman , and , indeed , the greater part of mankind from the problem -- might become the other ... .
But to the enthusiasm of the young , dreams have something of the substance of reality and realities , something of the magic of dreams .
The London to which Benham came from Cambridge and the disquisitions of Prothero was not the London of a mature and disillusioned vision .
It was London seen magnified and distorted through the young man 's crystalline intentions .
It had for him a quality of multitudinous , unquenchable activity .
Himself filled with an immense appetite for life , he was unable to conceive of London as fatigued .
He could not suspect these statesmen he now began to meet and watch , of jaded wills and petty spites , he imagined that all the important and influential persons in this large world of affairs were as frank in their private lives and as unembarrassed in their financial relationships as his untainted self .
And he had still to reckon with stupidity .
He believed in the statecraft of leader-writers and the sincerity of political programmes .
And so regarded , what an avenue to Empire was Whitehall !
How momentous was the sunrise in St. James 's Park , and how significant the clustering knot of listeners and speakers beneath the tall column that lifts our Nelson to the windy sky !
For a time Benham was in love with the idea of London .
He got maps of London and books about London .
He made plans to explore its various regions .
He tried to grasp it all , from the conscious picturesqueness of its garden suburbs to the factories of Croydon , from the clerk-villadoms of Ealing to the inky streams of Bow .
In those days there were passenger steamboats that would take one from the meadows of Hampton Court past the whole spectacle of London out to the shipping at Greenwich and the towed liners , the incessant tugs , the heaving portals of the sea ... .
His time was far too occupied for him to carry out a tithe of these expeditions he had planned , but he had many walks that bristled with impressions .
Northward and southward , eastward and westward a dreaming young man could wander into a wilderness of population , polite or sombre , poor , rich , or middle-class , but all ceaselessly active , all urgently pressing , as it seemed , to their part in the drama of the coming years .
He loved the late afternoon , when every artery is injected and gorged with the multitudinous home-going of the daily workers , he loved the time of lighting up , and the clustering excitements of the late hours .
And he went out southward and eastward into gaunt regions of reeking toil .
As yet he knew nothing of the realities of industrialism .
He saw only the beauty of the great chimneys that rose against the sullen smoke-barred sunsets , and he felt only the romance of the lurid shuddering flares that burst out from squat stacks of brickwork and lit the emptiness of strange and slovenly streets ... .
And this London was only the foreground of the great scene upon which he , as a prosperous , well-befriended young Englishman , was free to play whatever part he could .
This narrow turbid tidal river by which he walked ran out under the bridges eastward beneath the grey-blue clouds towards Germany , towards Russia , and towards Asia , which still seemed in those days so largely the Englishman 's Asia .
And when you turned about at Blackfriars Bridge this sense of the round world was so upon you that you faced not merely Westminster , but the icy Atlantic and America , which one could yet fancy was a land of Englishmen -- Englishmen a little estranged .
At any rate they assimilated , they kept the tongue .
The shipping in the lower reaches below the Tower there carried the flags of every country under the sky ... .
As he went along the riverside he met a group of dusky students , Chinese or Japanese .
Cambridge had abounded in Indians ; and beneath that tall clock tower at Westminster it seemed as though the world might centre .
The background of the Englishman 's world reached indeed to either pole , it went about the earth , his background it was -- for all that he was capable of doing .
All this had awaited him ... .
And with an effect of detachment , just as though it did n't belong to the rest of him at all , there was beginning a sort of backstairs and underside to Benham 's life .
There is no need to discuss how inevitable that may or may not be in the case of a young man of spirit and large means , nor to embark upon the discussion of the temptations and opportunities of large cities .
Several ladies , of various positions and qualities , had reflected upon his manifest need of education .
There was in particular Mrs. Skelmersdale , a very pretty little widow with hazel eyes , black hair , a mobile mouth , and a pathetic history , who talked of old music to him and took him to a Dolmetsch concert in Clifford 's Inn , and expanded that common interest to a general participation in his indefinite outlook .
She advised him about his probable politics -- everybody did that -- but when he broke through his usual reserve and suggested views of his own , she was extraordinarily sympathetic .
She was so sympathetic and in such a caressing way that she created a temporary belief in her understanding , and it was quite imperceptibly that he was drawn into the discussion of modern ethical problems .
She herself was a rather stimulating instance of modern ethical problems .
She told him something of her own story , and then their common topics narrowed down very abruptly .
He found he could help her in several ways .
There is , unhappily , a disposition on the part of many people , who ought to know better , to regard a role played by Joseph during his earlier days in Egypt as a ridiculous one .
This point of view became very inopportunely dominant in Benham 's mind when he was lunching TETE A TETE with Mrs. Skelmersdale at her flat ... .
There was a curious effect about her as though when she went round the corner she would become somebody else .
And a curious recurrent feeling that round the corner there was somebody else .
The worry and disorganization of Benham 's life and thoughts increased as the spring advanced .
His need in some way to pull things together became overpowering .
He began to think of Billy Prothero , more and more did it seem desirable to have a big talk with Billy and place everything that had got disturbed .
Benham thought of going to Cambridge for a week of exhaustive evenings .
Small engagements delayed that expedition ... .
Then came a day in April when all the world seemed wrong to Benham .
He was irritable ; his will was unstable ; whatever presented itself to be done presented itself as undesirable ; he could settle to nothing .
He had been keeping away from Mrs. Skelmersdale and in the morning there came a little note from her designed to correct this abstention .
She understood the art of the attractive note .
But he would not decide to go to her .
He left the note unanswered .
`` Damned liar ! ''
he said , and then , `` Dirty liar ! ''
He decided to lunch at the club , and in the afternoon he was moved to telephone an appointment with his siren .
And having done that he was bound to keep it .
`` What are we doing with life ?
What are we all doing with life ?
And then suddenly he reached out his arms in the darkness and prayed aloud to the silences .
`` Oh , God !
Give me back my visions !
Give me back my visions ! ''
What was to be done ?
In the first place he must get away and think about it all , think himself clear of all these -- these immediacies , these associations and relations and holds and habits .
He must get back to his vision , get back to the God in his vision .
And to do that he must go alone .
His plans grew so definite that presently he was in his dressing-gown and turning out the maps in the lower drawer of his study bureau .
He would go down into Surrey with a knapsack , wander along the North Downs until the Guildford gap was reached , strike across the Weald country to the South Downs and then beat eastward .
The very thought of it brought a coolness to his mind .
He knew that over those southern hills one could be as lonely as in the wilderness and as free to talk to God .
And there he would settle something .
He would make a plan for his life and end this torment .
After a large and serious movement through his mind he came back to Science , Philosophy or Politics as the sole three justifications for the usurpation of leisure .
So far as devotion to science went , he knew he had no specific aptitude for any departmentalized subject , and equally he felt no natural call to philosophy .
He was left with politics ... .
When one comes down from Oxford or Cambridge one falls into the mistake of thinking that learning is over and action must begin .
But until one perceives clearly just where one stands action is impossible .
The party game had not altogether swallowed `` Mr .
`` I ca n't smug about in a state of falsified righteousness like these Crampton chaps .
He turned off from the track and wandered among the bushes .
One might lie down anywhere here .
But not yet ; it was as yet barely twilight .
He consulted his watch .
He might perhaps sit and think for a time .
Here for example was a mossy bank , a seat , and presently a bed .
So far there were only three stars visible but more would come .
He dropped into a reclining attitude .
The landlord was a pleasant-faced man ; he attended to Benham himself and displayed a fine sense of comfort .
He could produce wine , a half-bottle of Australian hock , Big Tree brand No .
8 , a virile wine , he thought of sardines to precede the meal , he provided a substantial Welsh rarebit by way of a savoury , he did not mind in the least that it was nearly ten o'clock .
He ended by suggesting coffee .
`` And a liqueur ? ''
A night of clear melancholy ensued ... .
After long and feverish wanderings of the mind , and some talking to himself and walking about the room , he did at last get a little away from Mrs. Skelmersdale .
Recoiling from this , he was at once resumed by Mrs. Skelmersdale .
Who had in fact an effect of really never having been out of the room .
But now he became penitent about her .
His penitence expanded until it was on a nightmare scale .
At last it blotted out the heavens .
He felt like one of those unfortunate victims of religious mania who are convinced they have committed the Sin against the Holy Ghost .
( Why had he gone there to lunch ?
That was the key to it .
WHY had he gone there to lunch ? )
He began to have remorse for everything , for everything he had ever done , for everything he had ever not done , for everything in the world .
In a moment of lucidity he even had remorse for drinking that stout honest cup of black coffee ... .
When daylight came it found Benham still wide awake .
Things crept mournfully out of the darkness into a reproachful clearness .
The sound of birds that had been so delightful on the yesterday was now no longer agreeable .
The thrushes , he thought , repeated themselves a great deal .
The second day opened rather dully for Benham .
There was not an idea left in his head about anything in the world .
It was -- SOLID .
He walked through Bramley and Godalming and Witley and so came out upon the purple waste of Hindhead .
He strayed away from the road and found a sunny place of turf amidst the heather and lay down and slept for an hour or so .
He got some food at the Huts Inn on the Hindhead crest and went on across sunlit heathery wildernesses variegated by patches of spruce and fir and silver birch .
And then suddenly his mental inanition was at an end and his thoughts were wide and brave again .
He was astonished that for a moment he could have forgotten that he was vowed to the splendid life .
`` In the summer we all do , '' said the younger cousin .
`` Amanda makes us .
We go out on to the little lawn at the back . ''
`` I think so . ''
`` If I were you , '' said Amanda , and reflected .
Then she half turned herself to him .
`` I should go first to India , '' she said , `` and I should shoot , one , two , three , yes , three tigers .
And then I would see Farukhabad Sikri -- I was reading in a book about it yesterday -- where the jungle grows in the palaces ; and then I would go right up the Himalayas , and then , then I would have a walking tour in Japan , and then I would sail in a sailing ship down to Borneo and Java and set myself up as a Ranee -- ... And then I would think what I would do next . ''
`` Do n't you think there 's something to be found out at home ? ''
said the elder cousin , blushing very brightly and speaking with the effort of one who speaks for conscience ' sake .
Under cross-examination Mr. Rathbone-Sanders became entangled and prophetic .
It was evident he had never thought out his `` democratic , '' he had rested in some vague tangle of idealism from which Benham now set himself with the zeal of a specialist to rout him .
Such an argument sprang up as one meets with rarely beyond the happy undergraduate's range .
Everybody lived in the discussion , even Amanda 's mother listened visibly .
Betty said she herself was certainly democratic and Mrs. Wilder had always thought herself to be so , and outside the circle round the fire Amanda hovered impatiently , not quite sure of her side as yet , but eager to come down with emphasis at the first flash of intimation .
And being a very clear-cutting personality with an instinct for the material rendering of things , she also came and sat beside him on the little square-cornered sofa .
In saying this she did but echo Benham 's very words , and all she said and did that evening was in quick response to Benham 's earnest expression of his views .
She found Benham a delightful novelty .
She liked to argue because there was no other talk so lively , and she had perhaps a lurking intellectual grudge against Mr. Rathbone-Sanders that made her welcome an ally .
Everything from her that night that even verges upon the notable has been told , and yet it sufficed , together with something in the clear , long line of her limbs , in her voice , in her general physical quality , to convince Benham that she was the freest , finest , bravest spirit that he had ever encountered .
Marriage did n't at this stage strike Benham as an agreeable aspect of Amanda 's possibilities ; it was an inconvenience ; his mind was running in the direction of pedestrian tours in armour of no particular weight , amidst scenery of a romantic wildness ... .
He only saw a light slender figure , but when she came back into the sitting-room Mr. Rathbone-Sanders noted the faint flush in her cheek and an unwonted abstraction in her eye .
But here we may note that Amanda answered him .
Her reply came some four days later .
It was written in a square schoolgirl hand , it covered three sheets of notepaper , and it was a very intelligent essay upon the REPUBLIC of Plato .
`` Of course , '' she wrote , `` the Guardians are inhuman , but it was a glorious sort of inhumanity .
They had a spirit -- like sharp knives cutting through life . ''
The accumulation of letters , packages and telephone memoranda upon his desk included a number of notes and slips to remind him that both Mrs. Skelmersdale and his mother were ladies of some determination .
Even as he stood turning over the pile of documents the mechanical vehemence of the telephone filled him with a restored sense of the adverse will in things .
`` Yes , mam , '' he heard Merkle 's voice , `` yes , mam .
I will tell him , mam .
Will you keep possession , mam . ''
And then in the doorway of the study , `` Mrs. Skelmersdale , sir .
Upon the telephone , sir . ''
Benham lied about an engagement .
`` Then to-morrow in the morning. ''
`` In the afternoon .
You do n't WANT to see me . ''
Benham did want to see her .
The lady 's voice fell to flatness .
`` But why not come to see me HERE ? ''
Merkle had been just outside , on call .
`` Of course alone . ''
`` Who is that woman , '' she interrupted suddenly , `` Mrs. Fly-by-Night , or some such name , who rings you up on the telephone ? ''
`` Mrs. Skelmersdale , '' he said after a little pause .
`` She 's -- she 's very good -- in her way .
She 's had a difficult life ... . ''
Benham braced himself to face fresh difficulties .
It was amazing how different the world could look from his mother 's little parlour and from the crest of the North Downs .
`` I see , '' cried Lady Marayne , `` I see .
I 've bored you .
I might have known I should have bored you . ''
One sort of woman perhaps ... .
It was odd that for the first time now , in the sunshine of Kensington Gardens , he saw the little gossamer lines that tell that thirty years and more have passed over a face , a little wrinkling of the eyelids , a little hardening of the mouth .
How slight it is , how invisible it has been , how suddenly it appears !
And the sunshine of the warm April afternoon , heightened it may be by her determined unmercenary pose , betrayed too the faintest hint of shabbiness in her dress .
He had never noticed these shadows upon her or her setting before and their effect was to fill him with a strange regretful tenderness ... .
He could n't keep his arm from her little shoulders .
And as their lips touched he suddenly found himself weeping also ... .
His spirit went limping from that interview .
She chose to stay behind in her chair and think , she said , and each time he turned back she was sitting in the same attitude looking at him as he receded , and she had one hand on the chair back and her arm drawn up to it .
The third time he waved his hat clumsily , and she started and then answered with her hand .
Then the trees hid her ... .
He had trampled on Mrs. Skelmersdale , he had hurt and disappointed his mother .
Was he a brute ?
Was he a cold-blooded prig ?
What was this aristocracy ?
Was his belief anything more than a theory ?
Was he only dreaming of a debt to the men in the quarry , to the miners , to the men in the stokeholes , to the drudges on the fields ?
And while he dreamt he wounded and distressed real living creatures in the sleep-walk of his dreaming ... .
On that point Lady Marayne was to score beyond her utmost expectations .
`` Come round , '' she said over the telephone , two mornings later .
`` I've something to tell you . ''
`` That man Morris . ''
Benham stood quite motionless on the hearthrug and stared very hard at the little volume of Henley 's poetry that lay upon the table .
`` You ca n't go and see them then , '' he said .
`` After all -- since I am going abroad so soon -- ...
It does n't so very much matter . ''
To Benham it did not seem to be of the slightest importance that Amanda 's father was a convicted swindler who had committed suicide .
Never was a resolved and conscious aristocrat so free from the hereditary delusion .
Good parents , he was convinced , are only an advantage in so far as they have made you good stuff , and bad parents are no discredit to a son or daughter of good quality .
Conceivably he had a bias against too close an examination of origins , and he held that the honour of the children should atone for the sins of the fathers and the questionable achievements of any intervening testator .
Not half a dozen rich and established families in all England could stand even the most conventional inquiry into the foundations of their pride , and only a universal amnesty could prevent ridiculous distinctions .
But he brought no accusation of inconsistency against his mother .
She looked at things with a lighter logic and a kind of genius for the acceptance of superficial values .
She was condoned and forgiven , a rescued lamb , re-established , notoriously bright and nice , and the Morrises were damned .
That was their status , exclusion , damnation , as fixed as colour in Georgia or caste in Bengal .
But if his mother 's mind worked in that way there was no reason why his should .
So far as he was concerned , he told himself , it did not matter whether Amanda was the daughter of a swindler or the daughter of a god .
He had no doubt that she herself had the spirit and quality of divinity .
He had seen it .
It seemed to Benham that here indeed was the very sister of his spirit .
His words sprang into his mind as one thinks of a repartee .
`` But why should n't you come too ? ''
`` Marry me , '' he said very quickly , glancing towards the dark group at the end of the garden .
`` And we will go together . ''
But it looked so frightfully like it !
Could n't they realize that he had fled out of London before ever he had seen Amanda ?
They might be able to do it perhaps , but they never would .
It just happened that in the very moment when the edifice of his noble resolutions had been ready , she had stepped into it -- out of nothingness and nowhere .
She was n't an accident ; that was just the point upon which they were bound to misjudge her ; she was an embodiment .
If only he could show her to them as she had first shown herself to him , swift , light , a little flushed from running but not in the least out of breath , quick as a leopard upon the dogs ... .
But even if the improbable opportunity arose , he perceived it might still be impossible to produce the Amanda he loved , the Amanda of the fluttering short skirt and the clear enthusiastic voice .
Because , already he knew she was not the only Amanda .
There was another , there might be others , there was this perplexing person who had flashed into being at the very moment of their mutual confession , who had produced the entirely disconcerting demand that nobody must be told .
Then Betty had intervened .
But that sub-Amanda and her carneying note had to be dealt with on the first occasion , because when aristocrats love they do n't care a rap who is told and who is not told .
They just step out into the light side by side ... .
`` A human being , '' White read , `` the simplest human being , is a clustering mass of aspects .
No man will judge another justly who judges everything about him .
And of love in particular is this true .
We love not persons but revelations .
The woman one loves is like a goddess hidden in a shrine ; for her sake we live on hope and suffer the kindred priestesses that make up herself .
The art of love is patience till the gleam returns ... . ''
It was a curate and he was weeping bitterly ... .
He found Amanda standing alone in the room from which this young man had fled .
She had a handful of daffodils in her hand , and others were scattered over the table .
She had been arranging the big bowl of flowers in the centre .
He left the door open behind him and stopped short with the table between them .
She looked up at him -- intelligently and calmly .
Her pose had a divine dignity .
`` Amanda and I are going to marry each other , '' said Benham , standing in front of her .
Freedom and the sight of the world had if possible brightened and invigorated her .
Her costume and bearing were subtly touched by the romance of the Adriatic .
There was a flavour of the pirate in the cloak about her shoulders and the light knitted cap of scarlet she had stuck upon her head .
She surveyed his preoccupation for a moment , glanced forward , and then covered his eyes with her hands .
In almost the same movement she had bent down and nipped the tip of his ear between her teeth .
`` They were traders -- and nothing more .
Just as we are .
And when they were rich they got splendid clothes and feasted and rested .
Much as we do . ''
Benham picked up the thread of his musing .
`` Well , MUST N'T we ? ''
She put her elbows on her knees , dropped her chin between her hands and regarded him impudently .
She had a characteristic trick of looking up with her face downcast that never failed to soften his regard .
For a space Benham made no reply .
This controversy had been gathering for some time and he wanted to state his view as vividly as possible .
The Benham style of connubial conversation had long since decided for emphasis rather than delicacy .
`` I have loved this wandering -- I could wander always .
I tell you I WANT to go to London . ''
`` Have n't I , so far , invented things , made life amusing , Cheetah ?
Can't you trust the leopard 's wisdom ? ''
`` You ARE that , Cheetah , that lank , long , EAGER beast -- . ''
They drove away from Harting , as it were , over the weeping remains of this infatuated divine .
His sorrow made them thoughtful for a time , and then Amanda nestled closer to her lover and they forgot about him , and their honeymoon became so active and entertaining that only very rarely and transitorily did they ever think of him again .
`` Then why did you give it money ? ''
`` These beggars annoy you , '' said Amanda after a pause .
`` They do me .
Let us go back into the mountains . ''
But he fretted in the mountains .
They made a ten days ' tour from Macugnaga over the Monte Moro to Sass , and thence to Zermatt and back by the Theodule to Macugnaga .
The sudden apparition of douaniers upon the Monte Moro annoyed Benham , and he was also irritated by the solemn English mountain climbers at Saas Fee .
They were as bad as golfers , he said , and reflected momentarily upon his father .
Amanda fell in love with Monte Rosa , she wanted to kiss its snowy forehead , she danced like a young goat down the path to Mattmark , and rolled on the turf when she came to gentians and purple primulas .
Benham was tremendously in love with her most of the time , but one day when they were sitting over the Findelen glacier his perceptions blundered for the first time upon the fundamental antagonism of their quality .
She was sketching out jolly things that they were to do together , expeditions , entertainments , amusements , and adventures , with a voluble swiftness , and suddenly in a flash his eyes were opened , and he saw that she would never for a moment feel the quality that made life worth while for him .
He saw it in a flash , and in that flash he made his urgent resolve not to see it .
From that moment forth his bearing was poisoned by his secret determination not to think of this , not to admit it to his mind .
And forbidden to come into his presence in its proper form , this conflict of intellectual temperaments took on strange disguises , and the gathering tension of his mind sought to relieve itself along grotesque irrelevant channels .
They had decided to walk down in a leisurely fashion , but with the fatigues of the precipitous clamber down from Switzerland still upon them they found the white road between rock above and gorge below wearisome , and the valley hot in the late morning sunshine , and already before they reached the inn they had marked for lunch Amanda had suggested driving the rest of the way .
The inn had a number of brigand-like customers consuming such sustenance as garlic and salami and wine ; it received them with an indifference that bordered on disrespect , until the landlord , who seemed to be something of a beauty himself , discovered the merits of Amanda .
Then he became markedly attentive .
He was a large , fat , curly-headed person with beautiful eyes , a cherished moustache , and an air of great gentility , and when he had welcomed his guests and driven off the slatternly waiting-maid , and given them his best table , and consented , at Amanda 's request , to open a window , he went away and put on a tie and collar .
It was an attention so conspicuous that even the group of men in the far corner noticed and commented on it , and then they commented on Amanda and Benham , assuming an ignorance of Italian in the visitors that was only partly justifiable .
`` Bellissima , '' `` bravissima , '' `` signorina , '' `` Inglesa , '' one need not be born in Italy to understand such words as these .
Also they addressed sly comments and encouragements to the landlord as he went to and fro .
The question of the vehicle was broached .
The landlord was doubtful , then an idea , it was manifestly a questionable idea , occurred to him .
He went to consult an obscure brown-faced individual in the corner , disappeared , and the world without became eloquent .
Presently he returned and announced that a carozza was practicable .
It had been difficult , but he had contrived it .
And he remained hovering over the conclusion of their meal , asking questions about Amanda 's mountaineering and expressing incredulous admiration .
The landlord was sitting down to a little game of dominoes with his friends when Benham reappeared in the sunlight of the doorway .
There was no misunderstanding Benham 's expression .
There were dissuasive noises from the company , but no attempt at rescue .
Benham released his hold .
The landlord decided to disgorge .
It was at any rate a comfort that the beautiful lady was not seeing anything of this .
And he could explain afterwards to his friends that the Englishman was clearly a lunatic , deserving pity rather than punishment .
He made some sound of protest , but attempted no delay in refunding the money Benham had prepaid .
Outside sounded the wheels of the returning carriage .
Amanda appeared in the doorway and discovered Benham dominant .
While that was being done he discoursed upon his adjacent fellow-creatures .
`` A man who pays beforehand for anything in this filthy sort of life is a fool .
You see the standards of the beast .
They think of nothing but their dirty little tricks to get profit , their garlic , their sour wine , their games of dominoes , their moments of lust .
They crawl in this place like cockroaches in a warm corner of the fireplace until they die .
Look at the scabby frontage of the house .
Look at the men 's faces ... .
Get back into the carriage , Amanda . ''
`` Amanda , '' said Benham leaning back .
`` If we do happen to go over on THAT side , jump out .
It 's all clear and wide for you .
This side wo n't matter so -- ''
screamed Amanda and recalled him to his duties .
He was off the road and he had narrowly missed an outstanding chestnut true .
And there was Kroia , which Benham and Amanda saw first through the branches of the great trees that bordered the broad green track they were following .
The town and its castle were poised at a tremendous height , sunlit and brilliant against a sombre mass of storm cloud , over vast cliffs and ravines .
Kroia continued to be beautiful through a steep laborious approach up to the very place itself , a clustering group of houses and bazaars crowned with a tower and a minaret , and from a painted corridor upon this crest they had a wonderful view of the great seaward levels , and even far away the blue sea itself stretching between Scutari and Durazzo .
The eye fell in succession down the stages of a vast and various descent , on the bazaars and tall minarets of the town , on jagged rocks and precipices , on slopes of oak forest and slopes of olive woods , on blue hills dropping away beyond blue hills to the coast .
And behind them when they turned they saw great mountains , sullenly magnificent , cleft into vast irregular masses , dense with woods below and grim and desolate above ... .
`` In Scutari , '' said Benham , `` we will get an extra horse and a tent . ''
`` It 's a woman , '' she said .
The shrieks seemed to turn into a side street and receded .
The tension of listening relaxed .
Men 's voices sounded below in question and answer .
Dogs close at hand barked shortly and then stopped enquiringly .
`` Yes , '' said Benham and reflected , `` they do sing .
I suppose singing is the last thing left to men .
When there is nothing else you can still sit about and sing .
Miners who have been buried in mines will sing , people going down in ships . ''
`` It only comes down on his family .
The shoemaker 's son thought the matter over and squared accounts by putting the muzzle of a gun into the small of the back of our bully 's uncle .
It was easier that way ... .
You see you 're dealing with men of thirteen years old or thereabouts , the boy who does n't grow up . ''
`` There 's no law .
Only custom and the Turkish tax collector .
`` You see this is what men are where there is no power , no discipline , no ruler , no responsibility .
This is a masterless world .
This is pure democracy .
This is the natural state of men .
This is the world of the bully and the brigand and assassin , the world of the mud-pelter and brawler , the world of the bent woman , the world of the flea and the fly , the open drain and the baying dog .
This is what the British sentimentalist thinks a noble state for men . ''
`` How can we get back ? ''
They were riding through a sunlit walnut wood beyond Ochrida when they came upon the thing .
Through the trees now they could see houses .
He quickened his pace and jerked Amanda 's horse forward ... .
cried Amanda , with her voice going up .
`` They 've been killed .
Some one has killed them . ''
`` What is that hanging from a tree ? ''
`` Oh , oh ! ''
Then suddenly he began to declaim .
Have they no lord , no master , to save them from such things ?
This is the life of men when no man rules ... .
When no man rules ... .
Not even himself ... .
It is because we are idle , because we keep our wits slack and our wills weak that these poor devils live in hell .
These things happen here and everywhere when the hand that rules grows weak .
Away in China now they are happening .
And I who should serve the law , I who should keep order , wander and make love ... .
may I never forget !
May I never forget !
Flies in the sunlight !
That man 's face .
And those six men !
she said suddenly between remonstrance and a cry of terror .
The darkness suddenly became quite still .
He did not move .
`` AMMALATO , '' said Giorgio confidentially , coming abreast of her .
`` MEDICO IN MONASTIR , '' said Amanda .
Then came the inevitable dogs , big white brutes , three in full cry charging hard at Benham and a younger less enterprising beast running along the high bank above yapping and making feints to descend .
`` Dogs must be shot , '' said Benham , exalted .
`` Dogs must be shot . ''
The doctor in Monastir was an Armenian with an ambition that outran his capacity to speak English .
He had evidently studied the language chiefly from books .
He thought THESE was pronounced `` theser '' and THOSE was pronounced `` thoser , '' and that every English sentence should be taken at a rush .
He diagnosed Benham 's complaint in various languages and failed to make his meaning clear to Amanda .
One combination of words he clung to obstinately , having clearly the utmost faith in its expressiveness .
To Amanda it sounded like , `` May , Ah !
Slays , '' and it seemed to her that he sought to intimate a probable fatal termination of Benham 's fever .
But it was clear that the doctor was not satisfied that she understood .
He came again with a queer little worn book , a parallel vocabulary of half-a-dozen European languages .
He turned over the pages and pointed to a word .
he repeated , reproachfully , almost bitterly .
`` Oh , MEASLES ! ''
He considered her reasons .
`` You see you are not interested . ''
`` How could we ever keep away from each uvver ? ''
But children were not the only new topic in Amanda 's talk .
She set herself with an ingenious subtlety to remind her husband that there were other men in the world .
The convenient fags , sometimes a little embarrassed , found their inobtrusive services being brought into the light before Benham 's eyes .
Most of them were much older men than himself , elderly philanderers of whom it seemed to him no sane man need be jealous , men often of forty or more , but one was a contemporary , Sir Philip Easton , a man with a touch of Spanish blood and a suggestion of Spanish fire , who quite manifestly was very much in love with Amanda and of whom she spoke with a slight perceptible difference of manner that made Benham faintly uneasy .
He was ashamed of the feeling .
Easton it seemed was a man of a peculiarly fine honour , so that Amanda could trust herself with him to an extent that would have been inadvisable with men of a commoner substance , and he had a gift of understanding and sympathy that was almost feminine ; he could cheer one up when one was lonely and despondent .
For Amanda was so methodical in the arrangement of her time that even in the full rush of a London season she could find an hour now and then for being lonely and despondent .
And he was a liberal and understanding purchaser of the ascendant painters ; he understood that side of Amanda 's interests , a side upon which Benham was notably deficient ... .
She tried to play upon his jealousy , but her quick instinct speedily told her that this only hardened his heart .
She perceived that she must make a softer appeal .
Now of a set intention she began to revive and imitate the spontaneous passion of the honeymoon ; she perceived for the first time clearly how wise and righteous a thing it is for a woman to bear a child .
`` He can not go if I am going to have a child , '' she told herself .
But that would mean illness , and for illness in herself or others Amanda had the intense disgust natural to her youth .
Yet even illness would be better than this intolerable publication of her husband 's ability to leave her side ... .
She argued with all the concentrated subtlety of her fine keen mind .
She argued with persistence and repetition .
And then suddenly so that she was astonished at herself , there came a moment when she ceased to argue .
She came forward to him and looked up closely at his face .
`` You want to bear me a child ! ''
he whispered , profoundly moved .
`` I think , you know , she ought to seem just SLIGHTLY aware that the man to her left is talking to her ... . ''
All through Benham 's writing there was manifest a persuasion that in some way Prothero was necessary to his mind .
It was as if he looked to Prothero to keep him real .
He suspected even while he obeyed that upward flourish which was his own essential characteristic .
He had a peculiar feeling that somehow that upward bias would betray him ; that from exaltation he might presently float off , into the higher , the better , and so to complete unreality .
He fled from priggishness and the terror of such sublimity alike to Prothero .
Moreover , in relation to so many things Prothero in a peculiar distinctive manner SAW .
He had less self-control than Benham , less integrity of purpose , less concentration , and things that were before his eyes were by the very virtue of these defects invariably visible to him .
Things were able to insist upon themselves with him .
Benham , on the other hand , when facts contradicted his purpose too stoutly , had a way of becoming blind to them .
He repudiated inconvenient facts .
He mastered and made his world ; Prothero accepted and recorded his .
Benham was a will towards the universe where Prothero was a perception and Amanda a confusing responsive activity .
And it was because of his realization of this profound difference between them that he was possessed by the idea of taking Prothero with him about the world , as a detachable kind of vision -- rather like that eye the Graiae used to hand one another ... .
It seemed to Benham that somewhere , very far away , in another world , such a statement might have been credible .
Even in his own life , -- it was now indeed a remote , forgotten stage -- there had been something distantly akin ... .
`` Mutual , perhaps , Billy . ''
`` We might go by boat .
You could row . ''
`` Then why do n't we up and find out ? ''
`` But , Billy !
How can one settle these things ?
It 's a matter of idiosyncrasy .
What is true for one man is n't true for another .
There's infinite difference of temperaments ! ''
`` I was angry about sex by seventeen , '' he went on .
`` Every year I live I grow angrier . ''
`` Think , '' he said , `` of the amount of thinking and feeling about sex that is going on in Cambridge this morning .
The hundreds out of these thousands full of it .
A vast tank of cerebration .
And we put none of it together ; we work nothing out from that but poor little couplings and casual stories , patchings up of situations , misbehaviours , blunders , disease , trouble , escapes ; and the next generation will start , and the next generation after that will start with nothing but your wisdom of the ages , which is n't wisdom at all , which is just awe and funk , taboos and mystery and the secretive cunning of the savage ... .
`` There I 'm with you , '' cried Benham , struggling out of the thick torrent of Prothero 's prepossessions .
`` What we want to do is our work . ''
What he had now in mind was an expedition to Russia .
When at last he could sufficiently release Prothero 's attention , he unfolded the project that had been developing steadily in him since his honeymoon experience .
He was absorbed in his effort to understand this universal ominous drift towards a conflict .
He was trying to piece together a process , if it was one and the same process , which involved riots in Lodz , fighting at Libau , wild disorder at Odessa , remote colossal battlings in Manchuria , the obscure movements of a disastrous fleet lost somewhere now in the Indian seas , steaming clumsily to its fate , he was trying to rationalize it all in his mind , to comprehend its direction .
He was struggling strenuously with the obscurities of the language in which these things were being discussed about him , a most difficult language demanding new sets of visual images because of its strange alphabet .
Is it any wonder that for a time he failed to observe that Prothero was involved in some entirely disconnected affair .
`` But Odessa -- Odessa is the centre of interest just now . ''
Prothero stuck up his knees and rested his night-shirted arms upon them .
`` I do n't want to leave Moscow , '' he said , `` and I 'm not going to do so . ''
His eye and voice achieved a fierceness that Benham found nearly incredible in him .
And suddenly this extraordinary young man put his hands to his face as though he feared to lose it and would hold it on , and after an apoplectic moment burst noisily into tears .
They ran between his fingers .
`` Get out of my room , '' he shouted , suffocatingly .
`` What business have you to come prying on me ? ''
He closed the door behind him and went in a state of profound thought to his own room ... .
In an unaccountable way Prothero 's bristling little mind seemed to have shrunken to something sleek and small .
It only got to him slowly through his political preoccupations that there were obscure obstacles to this manifest course .
Prothero hesitated ; the lady expressed doubts .
On closer acquaintance her resemblance to Amanda diminished .
It was chiefly a similarity of complexion .
She had a more delicate face than Amanda , and its youthful brightness was deadened ; she had none of Amanda 's glow , and she spoke her mother 's language with a pretty halting limp that was very different from Amanda 's clear decisions .
`` He is very kind and very generous -- too generous .
He keeps sending for more money -- hundreds of roubles , I try to prevent him . ''
`` Oh , damnably not !
But what can I do ?
I had at first some idea of coming to Moscow for good -- teaching . ''
`` But I do n't love her like that , '' said Prothero , shrill with anger .
`` I tell you I do n't love her like that . ''
`` MAKE her your very own woman , said the exponent of heroic love .
`` I shirk deeds , Benham , but you shirk facts .
How could any man make her his very own woman now ?
You -- you do n't seem to understand -- ANYTHING .
She 's nobody 's woman -- for ever .
That -- that might-have-been has gone for ever ... .
It 's nerves -- a passion of the nerves .
There 's a cruelty in life and -- She 's KIND to me .
She 's so kind to me ... . ''
Then came a scrawl of passionate confession , so passionate that it seemed as if Prothero had been transfigured .
`` I ca n't stand this business , '' he wrote .
`` It has things in it , possibilities of emotional disturbance -- you can have no idea !
In the train -- luckily I was alone in the compartment -- I sat and thought , and suddenly , I could not help it , I was weeping -- noisy weeping , an uproar !
A beastly German came and stood in the corridor to stare .
I had to get out of the train .
It is disgraceful , it is monstrous we should be made like this ... .
The little man merged again into his rare company of discreet Benedicts and restrained celibates at the high tables .
They ate on in their mature wisdom long after the undergraduates had fled .
Presently they would withdraw processionally to the combination room ... .
He did a little miss his cue in these exaltations , because he had returned in a rather different vein of exaltation .
After that visit it was that the notes upon love and sex began in earnest .
The scattered memoranda upon the perfectness of heroic love for the modern aristocrat ended abruptly .
Instead there came the first draft for a study of jealousy .
The note was written in pencil on Chexington notepaper and manifestly that had been supported on the ribbed cover of a book .
There was a little computation in the corner , converting forty-five degrees Reaumur into degrees Fahrenheit , which made White guess it had been written in the Red Sea .
But , indeed , it had been written in a rather amateurishly stoked corridor-train on Benham's journey to the gathering revolt in Moscow ... .
`` I think I have been disposed to underrate the force of sexual jealousy ... .
I thought it was something essentially contemptible , something that one dismissed and put behind oneself in the mere effort to be aristocratic , but I begin to realize that it is not quite so easily settled with ... .
`` There is no clear reason why one should insist upon another human being being one 's ownest own -- utterly one 's own ... .
This time he argued no case .
These issues he had settled for ever .
Even an indignant dissertation from Lady Marayne , a dissertation that began with appeals and ended in taunts , did not move him .
Behind these things now was India .
The huge problems of India had laid an unshakeable hold upon his imagination .
He had seen Russia , and he wanted to balance that picture by a vision of the east ... .
`` I see now that I despised jealousy because I assumed that it was impossible for Amanda to love any one but me ; it was intolerable to imagine anything else , I insisted upon believing that she was as fastidious as myself and as faithful as myself , made indeed after my image , and I went on disregarding the most obvious intimations that she was not , until that still moment in the Indian Ocean , when silently , gently as a drowned body might rise out of the depths of a pool , that knowledge of love dead and honour gone for ever floated up into my consciousness .
`` It is clear that the women aristocrats who must come to the remaking of the world will do so in spite of limitations at least as great as those from which the aristocratic spirit of man escapes .
These women must become aristocratic through their own innate impulse , they must be self-called to their lives , exactly as men must be ; there is no making an aristocrat without a predisposition for rule and nobility .
And they have to discover and struggle against just exactly the limitations that we have to struggle against .
They have to conquer not only fear but indulgence , indulgence of a softer , more insidious quality , and jealousy -- proprietorship ... .
`` We should be lovers , of course ; that goes without saying ... .
`` There were things between us two as lovers , -- love , things more beautiful than anything else in the world , things that set the mind hunting among ineffectual images in a search for impossible expression , images of sunlight shining through blood-red petals , images of moonlight in a scented garden , of marble gleaming in the shade , of far-off wonderful music heard at dusk in a great stillness , of fairies dancing softly , of floating happiness and stirring delights , of joys as keen and sudden as the knife of an assassin , assassin 's knives made out of tears , tears that are happiness , wordless things ; and surprises , expectations , gratitudes , sudden moments of contemplation , the sight of a soft eyelid closed in sleep , shadowy tones in the sound of a voice heard unexpectedly ; sweet , dear magical things that I can find no words for ... .
He walked his room in the darkness longing to smash and tear .
He went out from the house and shook his ineffectual fists at the stirring quiet of the stars .
He reached London in the afternoon and put up at a hotel near Charing Cross .
In the evening about ten he appeared at the house in Lancaster Gate .
The butler was deferentially amazed .
Mrs. Benham was , he said , at a theatre with Sir Philip Easton , and he thought some other people also .
He did not know when she would be back .
She might go on to supper .
It was not the custom for the servants to wait up for her .
`` Why have you come back ? ''
Sir Philip Easton found his voice to ask .
`` I came back , '' Benham went on , `` to see to all this .
I do n't -- now I see you -- feel very fierce about it .
But it has distressed me .
You look changed , Amanda , and fagged .
And your hair is untidy .
It's as if something had happened to you and made you a stranger ... .
You two people are lovers .
Very natural and simple , but I want to get out of it .
Yes , I want to get out of it .
That was n't quite my idea , but now I see it is .
It 's queer , but on the whole I feel sorry for you .
All of us , poor humans -- .
There 's reason to be sorry for all of us .
We 're full of lusts and uneasiness and resentments that we have n't the will to control .
What do you two people want me to do to you ?
Would you like a divorce , Amanda ?
It 's the clean , straight thing , is n't it ?
Or would the scandal hurt you ? ''
`` Your business , it seems to me , is to live to make her happy .
That you may find more of a strain .
Less tragic and more tiresome .
I , on the other hand , want neither to die nor live for her . ''
`` It 's extraordinary what amazing vapours a lonely man may get into his head .
If you do n't want a divorce then I suppose things might go on as they are now . ''
`` It would be only a temporary inconvenience , '' said Benham .
`` Every one would sympathize with you ... .
The whole thing is so natural ... .
People would be glad to forget very soon .
They did with my mother . ''
She seemed to come to a decision .
`` I do , '' she said .
She stood up too and turned so that she and Benham both faced the younger man .
The strangest uneasiness mingled with his resolve to be at any cost splendid .
He felt -- and it was a most unexpected and disconcerting feeling -- that he was no longer confederated with Amanda ; that prior , more fundamental and greater associations prevailed over his little new grip upon her mind and senses .
He stared at husband and wife aghast in this realization .
Then his resolute romanticism came to his help .
`` I would trust you -- '' he began .
`` If you tell me to go -- ''
Amanda seemed to measure her hold upon him .
Then the door had closed upon him , and Amanda , pale and darkly dishevelled , faced her husband , silently and intensely .
She dropped upon the step below him .
She laid her hands with a deliberate softness upon him , she gave a toss so that her disordered hair was a little more disordered , and brought her soft chin down to touch his knees .
Her eyes implored him .
`` And I have n't the remotest intention of making love to you , '' he said , and pushed her soft face and hands away from him as if he would stand up .
He made no effort to shake off her grip .
He looked at the dark cloud of her hair that had ruled him so magically , and the memory of old delights made him grip a great handful almost inadvertently as he spoke .
`` Dear Leopard , '' he said , `` we humans are the most streaky of conceivable things .
I thought I hated you .
I hate you like poison .
And also I do not hate you at all . ''
`` With me in the old days she had always been a sincere person ; she had deceived me about facts , but she had never deceived me about herself .
Her personal , stark frankness had been her essential strength .
And it was gone .
I came back to find Amanda an accomplished actress , a thing of poses and calculated effects .
She was a surface , a sham , a Lorelei .
Beneath that surface I could not discover anything individual at all .
Fear and a grasping quality , such as God gave us all when he gave us hands ; but the individual I knew , the humorous wilful Spotless Leopard was gone .
Whither , I can not imagine .
Clean out of space and time like a soul lost for ever .
`` When I went to see her in the morning , she was made up for a scene , she acted an intricate part , never for a moment was she there in reality ... .
She had dressed for that morning 's encounter in a very becoming and intimate wrap of soft mauve and white silk , and she had washed and dried her dark hair so that it was a vapour about her face .
She set herself with a single mind to persuade herself and Benham that they were inseparable lovers , and she would not be deflected by his grim determination to discuss the conditions of their separation .
When he asked her whether she wanted a divorce , she offered to throw over Sir Philip and banish him for ever as lightly as a great lady might sacrifice an objectionable poodle to her connubial peace .
The head chambermaid was left to consider the accidents .
`` I had a kind of nightmare , '' he said .
`` I am fearfully sorry to have disarranged your room .
You must charge me for the inconvenience as well as for the damage . ''
`` But if one does not give one 's whole love and life into a woman 's hands I do not think one can expect to be loved .
`` I never wanted you to go away from her .
If you 'd stayed and watched her as a man should , as I begged you and implored you to do .
Did n't I tell you , Poff ?
Did n't I warn you ? ''
Her blue eyes were demonstratively round .
`` Yes , but -- ''
`` I warned you , '' she interrupted .
`` I warned you .
I 've done all I could for you .
It is n't that I have n't seen through her .
When she came to me at first with that made-up story of a baby !
And all about loving me like her own mother .
But I did what I could .
I thought we might still make the best of a bad job .
I might have known she could n't leave Pip alone ... .
But for weeks I did n't dream .
I would n't dream .
Right under my nose .
The impudence of it ! ''
`` You are n't going back without tying her up , Poff ?
You ought to stop every farthing of her money -- every farthing .
It 's your duty . ''
`` I ca n't do things like that . ''
It is , I suppose , a part of the general humour of life that these words should have been written by a man who walked the plank to fresh ideas with the dizziest difficulty unless he had Prothero to drag him forward , and who acted time after time with an altogether disastrous hastiness .
Benham 's notes on race and racial cultures gave White tantalizing glimpses of a number of picturesque experiences .
The adventure in Kieff had first roused Benham to the reality of racial quality .
He was caught in the wheels of a pogrom .
`` Before that time I had been disposed to minimize and deny race .
I still think it need not prevent men from the completest social co-operation , but I see now better than I did how difficult it is for any man to purge from his mind the idea that he is not primarily a Jew , a Teuton , or a Kelt , but a man .
You can persuade any one in five minutes that he or she belongs to some special and blessed and privileged sort of human being ; it takes a lifetime to destroy that persuasion .
There are these confounded differences of colour , of eye and brow , of nose or hair , small differences in themselves except that they give a foothold and foundation for tremendous fortifications of prejudice and tradition , in which hostilities and hatreds may gather .
When I think of a Jew 's nose , a Chinaman 's eyes or a negro 's colour I am reminded of that fatal little pit which nature has left in the vermiform appendix , a thing no use in itself and of no significance , but a gathering-place for mischief .
The extremest case of race-feeling is the Jewish case , and even here , I am convinced , it is the Bible and the Talmud and the exertions of those inevitable professional champions who live upon racial feeling , far more than their common distinction of blood , which holds this people together banded against mankind . ''
For a time he watched .
Black figures moved between him and the glare , and he tried to find out the exact nature of the conflict by enquiries in clumsy Russian .
He was told that the Jews had insulted a religious procession , that a Jew had spat at an ikon , that the shop of a cheating Jew trader had been set on fire , and that the blaze had spread to the adjacent group of houses .
He gathered that the Jews were running out of the burning block on the other side `` like rats . ''
The crowd was mostly composed of town roughs with a sprinkling of peasants .
They were mischievous but undecided .
Among them were a number of soldiers , and he was surprised to see a policemen , brightly lit from head to foot , watching the looting of a shop that was still untouched by the flames .
The ghetto could not understand him , nobody could understand him , but it was clear a rare and precious visitor had come to their rescue , and he was implored by a number of elderly , dirty , but very intelligent-looking old men to stay with them and preserve them until their safety was assured .
Benham found himself , refreshed and tended , sitting beside a wood fire in an inner chamber richly flavoured by humanity and listening to a discourse in evil but understandable German .
It was a discourse upon the wrongs and the greatness of the Jewish people -- and it was delivered by a compact middle-aged man with a big black beard and long-lashed but animated eyes .
Beside him a very old man dozed and nodded approval .
A number of other men crowded the apartment , including several who had helped to hold off the rioters from the court .
Some could follow the talk and ever again endorsed the speaker in Yiddish or Russian ; others listened with tantalized expressions , their brows knit , their lips moving .
It was a discourse Benham had provoked .
For now he was at the very heart of the Jewish question , and he could get some light upon the mystery of this great hatred at first hand .
He did not want to hear tales of outrages , of such things he knew , but he wanted to understand what was the irritation that caused these things .
`` They are merciful creditors , '' he said .
`` And it is their genius to possess and control .
What better stewards could you find for the wealth of nations than the Jews ?
And for the honours ?
That always had been the role of the Jews -- stewardship .
Since the days of Joseph in Egypt ... . ''
Then in a lower voice he went on to speak of the deficiencies of the Gentile population .
He wished to be just and generous but the truth was the truth .
The Christian Russians loved drink and laziness ; they had no sense of property ; were it not for unjust laws even now the Jews would possess all the land of South Russia ... .
`` And torn your coat ?
And hit you rather heavily upon the neck ? ''
His Indian adventures and his great public controversy on caste began with a tremendous row with an Indian civil servant who had turned an Indian gentleman out of his first-class compartment , and culminated in a disgraceful fracas with a squatting brown holiness at Benares , who had thrown aside his little brass bowlful of dinner because Benham 's shadow had fallen upon it .
Benham 's detestation of human divisions and hostilities was so deep in his character as to seem almost instinctive .
But he had too a very clear reason for his hostility to all these amazing breaks in human continuity in his sense of the gathering dangers they now involve .
They had always , he was convinced , meant conflict , hatred , misery and the destruction of human dignity , but the new conditions of life that have been brought about by modern science were making them far more dangerous than they had ever been before .
He believed that the evil and horror of war was becoming more and more tremendous with every decade , and that the free play of national prejudice and that stupid filching ambitiousness that seems to be inseparable from monarchy , were bound to precipitate catastrophe , unless a real international aristocracy could be brought into being to prevent it .
`` Science is either slave or master .
These people -- I mean the German people and militarist people generally -- have no real mastery over the scientific and economic forces on which they seem to ride .
The monster of steel and iron carries Kaiser and Germany and all Europe captive .
It has persuaded them to mount upon its back and now they must follow the logic of its path .
... Only kingship will ever master that beast of steel which has got loose into the world .
Nothing but the sense of unconquerable kingship in us all will ever dare withstand it ... .
Men must be kingly aristocrats -- it is n't MAY be now , it is MUST be -- or , these confederated metals , these things of chemistry and metallurgy , these explosives and mechanisms , will trample the blood and life out of our race into mere red-streaked froth and filth ... . ''
He proceeded to speculate upon the probability whether a great war would ever devastate western Europe again , and it was very evident to White that he wanted very much to persuade himself against that idea .
It was too disagreeable for him to think it probable .
The paper was dated 1910 .
It was in October , 1914 , that White , who was still working upon the laborious uncertain account of Benham 's life and thought he has recently published , read what Benham had written .
Benham concluded that the common-sense of the world would hold up this danger until reason could get `` to the head of things . ''
He had bought all the evening papers , and had read and re-read them and turned up maps and worried over strategic problems for which he had no data at all -- as every one did at that time -- before he was able to go on with Benham 's manuscripts .
`` How can we ever begin over again ? ''
said White , and sat for a long time staring gloomily into the fire , forgetting forgetting , forgetting too that men who are tired and weary die , and that new men are born to succeed them ... .
What track was he following ?
It was now that White first heard of the Research Magnificent .
He wanted to know what Benham was doing , and Benham after some partial and unsatisfactory explanation of his interest in insurgent Hindoos , embarked upon larger expositions .
`` It is , of course , a part of something else , '' he amplified .
He was writing a book , `` an enormous sort of book . ''
He laughed with a touch of shyness .
It was about `` everything , '' about how to live and how not to live .
And `` aristocracy , and all sorts of things . ''
White was always curious about other people 's books .
Benham became earnest and more explicit under encouragement , and to talk about his book was soon to talk about himself .
In various ways , intentionally and inadvertently , he told White much .
These chance encounters , these intimacies of the train and hotel , will lead men at times to a stark frankness of statement they would never permit themselves with habitual friends .
But White , who had not seen so much human disorder as Benham , felt that it was more than that .
Always he kept the tail of his eye upon that eventful background while Benham talked to him .
But some things that Benham did not talk about at all , left by their mere marked absence an impression on White 's mind .
And occasionally after Benham had been talking for a long time there would be an occasional aphasia , such as is often apparent in the speech of men who restrain themselves from betraying a preoccupation .
He would say nothing about Amanda or about women in general , he was reluctant to speak of Prothero , and another peculiarity was that he referred perhaps half a dozen times or more to the idea that he was a `` prig . ''
He seemed to be defending himself against some inner accusation , some unconquerable doubt of the entire adventure of his life .
These half hints and hints by omission exercised the quick intuitions of White 's mind very keenly , and he drew far closer to an understanding of Benham 's reserves than Benham ever suspected ... .
In certain moods she could wring his heart by such imagined speeches , the very quality of her voice was in them , a softness that his ear had loved , and not only could she distress him , but when Benham was in this heartache mood , when once she had set him going , then his little mother also would rise against him , touchingly indignant , with her blue eyes bright with tears ; and his frowsty father would back towards him and sit down complaining that he was neglected , and even little Mrs. Skelmersdale would reappear , bravely tearful on her chair looking after him as he slunk away from her through Kensington Gardens ; indeed every personal link he had ever had to life could in certain moods pull him back through the door of self-reproach Amanda opened and set him aching and accusing himself of harshness and self-concentration .
The very kittens of his childhood revived forgotten moments of long-repented hardness .
For a year before Prothero was killed there were these heartaches .
That tragedy gave them their crowning justification .
All these people said in this form or that , `` You owed a debt to us , you evaded it , you betrayed us , you owed us life out of yourself , love and services , and you have gone off from us all with this life that was ours , to live by yourself in dreams about the rule of the world , and with empty phantoms of power and destiny .
All this was intellectualization .
You sacrificed us to the thin things of the mind .
There is no rule of the world at all , or none that a man like you may lay hold upon .
The rule of the world is a fortuitous result of incalculably multitudinous forces .
But all of us you could have made happier .
You could have spared us distresses .
Prothero died because of you .
Presently it will be the turn of your father , your mother -- Amanda perhaps ... . ''
`` If one has to speak the truth with the voice of a prig , still one must speak the truth .
I have worked out some very considerable things in my research , and the time has come when I must set them out clearly and plainly .
That is my job anyhow .
My journey to London to release Amanda will be just the end of my adolescence and the beginning of my real life .
It will release me from my last entanglement with the fellow creatures I have always failed to make happy ... .
It 's a detail in the work ... .
And I shall go on .
In the eastward train he talked intermittently of her .
`` I should have defied Cambridge , '' he said .
Prothero discoursed much upon the essential goodness of Russians .
He said they were a people of genius , that they showed it in their faults and failures just as much as in their virtues and achievements .
He extolled the `` germinating disorder '' of Moscow far above the `` implacable discipline '' of Berlin .
Only a people of inferior imagination , a base materialist people , could so maintain its attention upon precision and cleanliness .
Benham was roused to defence against this paradox .
`` But all exaltation neglects , '' said Prothero .
`` No religion has ever boasted that its saints were spick and span . ''
This controversy raged between them in the streets of Irkutsk .
It was still burning while they picked their way through the indescribable filth of Pekin .
`` A mere phase of frankness .
Only frankness is left to them now .
The Manchus crippled them , spoilt their roads and broke their waterways .
European intervention paralyses every attempt they make to establish order on their own lines .
In the Ming days China did not reek ... .
And , anyhow , Benham , it 's better than the silly waste of London ... . ''
What was this new-fangled aristocratic man , he asked , but the ideal of Confucius , the superior person , `` the son of the King '' ?
There you had the very essence of Benham , the idea of self-examination , self-preparation under a vague Theocracy .
( `` Vaguer , '' said Benham , `` for the Confucian Heaven could punish and reward . ''
) Even the elaborate sham modesty of the two dreams was the same .
Benham interrupted and protested with heat .
And this Confucian idea of the son of the King , Prothero insisted , had been the cause of China 's paralysis .
`` My idea of nobility is not traditional but expectant , '' said Benham .
`` After all , Confucianism has held together a great pacific state far longer than any other polity has ever lasted .
I 'll accept your Confucianism .
I 've not the slightest objection to finding China nearer salvation than any other land .
Do but turn it round so that it looks to the future and not to the past , and it will be the best social and political culture in the world .
That , indeed , is what is happening .
Mix Chinese culture with American enterprise and you will have made a new lead for mankind . ''
His host intervened and explained after a few questions that the occasion was serious .
Prothero , it seemed , had been gambling .
White pieced together his conception of the circles of disturbance that spread out from Benham 's pursuit of Prothero 's flying messenger .
It was a complicated struggle into which the local foreign traders on the river-front and a detachment of modern drilled troops from the up-river barracks were presently drawn .
It was a struggle that was never clearly explained , and at the end of it they found Prothero 's body flung out upon a waste place near a little temple on the river bank , stabbed while he was asleep ... .
Benham sat at a table in the smoking-room of the Sherborough Hotel at Johannesburg and told of these things .
White watched him from an armchair .
And as he listened he noted again the intensification of Benham 's face , the darkness under his brows , the pallor of his skin , the touch of red in his eyes .
For there was still that red gleam in Benham's eyes ; it shone when he looked out of a darkness into a light .
And he sat forward with his arms folded under him , or moved his long lean hand about over the things on the table .
`` At the time it seemed just pandering to his vices ... .
`` But I wish I had sent those dollars to Prothero ... .
White , but I lie awake at night thinking of that messenger as he turned away ... .
Trying to stop him ... .
The earlier phases of violence in the Rand outbreak in 1913 were manifest rather in the outskirts of Johannesburg than at the centre .
`` Pulling out '' was going on first at this mine and then that , there were riots in Benoni , attacks on strike breakers and the smashing up of a number of houses .
It was not until July the 4th that , with the suppression of a public meeting in the market-place , Johannesburg itself became the storm centre .
Then there were shouts that the police were charging .
A number of mounted men trotted into the square .
The crowd began a series of short rushes that opened lanes for the passage of the mounted police as they rode to and fro .
These men trotted through the crowd , scattering knots of people .
They carried pick-handles , but they did not seem to be hitting with them .
It became clear that they aimed at the capture of the trolley .
There was only a feeble struggle for the trolley ; it was captured and hauled through the scattered spectators in the square to the protection of a small impassive body of regular cavalry at the opposite corner .
Then quite a number of people seemed to be getting excited and fighting .
They appeared to be vaguely fighting the foot-police , and the police seemed to be vaguely pushing through them and dispersing them .
The roof of a little one-story shop became prominent as a centre of vigorous stone-throwing .
`` What was that boy saying ?
They are burning the STAR office ... .
Well , let them ... . ''
The roadway beyond the club had suddenly become clear .
Across it a dozen soldiers had appeared and dismounted methodically and lined out , with their carbines in readiness .
The mounted men at the club corner had vanished , and the people there had swayed about towards this new threat .
Quite abruptly the miscellaneous noises of the crowd ceased .
Understanding seized upon every one .
These soldiers were going to fire ... .
The tall man who had led the mob had run out into the middle of the road .
His commando was a little disposed to assume a marginal position , and it had to be reassured .
He was near enough for Benham to see his face .
For a time it looked anxious and thoughtful .
Then he seemed to jump to his decision .
He unbuttoned and opened his coat wide as if defying the soldiers .
`` Shoot , '' he bawled , `` Shoot , if you dare ! ''
A little uniform movement of the soldiers answered him .
The small figure of the officer away there was inaudible .
The coat of the man below flapped like the wings of a crowing cock before a breast of dirty shirt , the hoarse voice cracked with excitement , `` Shoot , if you dare .
Shoot , if you dare !
After one moment of blank funk White drew out his pocket handkerchief , held it arm high by way of a white flag , and ran out from the piazza of the hotel .
Benham , after a moment of perplexed thought answered in a strange voice , a whisper into which a whistling note had been mixed .
The flight was , considering all things , an amazing success .
The apparatus was brought in a cart from Dymchurch to Burford Bridge , ascended there to a height of nearly three hundred feet , swooped thence very nearly back to Dymchurch , came about in its sweep , rose again , circled , and finally sank uninjured in a field behind the Burford Bridge Inn .
At its descent a curious thing happened .
Filmer got off his tricycle , scrambled over the intervening dyke , advanced perhaps twenty yards towards his triumph , threw out his arms in a strange gesticulation , and fell down in a dead faint .
Every one could then recall the ghastliness of his features and all the evidences of extreme excitement they had observed throughout the trial , things they might otherwise have forgotten .
Afterwards in the inn he had an unaccountable gust of hysterical weeping .
`` I saw Filmer in his glory , '' he writes , with just the touch of envy natural to his position as a poet passe .
`` The man is brushed and shaved , dressed in the fashion of a Royal-Institution-Afternoon Lecturer , the very newest shape in frock-coats and long patent shoes , and altogether in a state of extraordinary streakiness between an owlish great man and a scared abashed self-conscious bounder cruelly exposed .
He has n't a touch of colour in the skin of his face , his head juts forward , and those queer little dark amber eyes of his watch furtively round him for his fame .
His clothes fit perfectly and yet sit upon him as though he had bought them ready-made .
He speaks in a mumble still , but he says , you perceive indistinctly , enormous self-assertive things , he backs into the rear of groups by instinct if Banghurst drops the line for a minute , and when he walks across Banghurst 's lawn one perceives him a little out of breath and going jerky , and that his weak white hands are clenched .
His is a state of tension -- horrible tension .
And he is the Greatest Discoverer of This or Any Age -- the Greatest Discoverer of This or Any Age !
What strikes one so forcibly about him is that he did n't somehow quite expect it ever , at any rate , not at all like this .
Banghurst is about everywhere , the energetic M.C .
of his great little catch , and I swear he will have every one down on his lawn there before he has finished with the engine ; he had bagged the prime minister yesterday , and he , bless his heart !
did n't look particularly outsize , on the very first occasion .
Our obscure unwashed Filmer , the Glory of British science !
Duchesses crowd upon him , beautiful , bold peeresses say in their beautiful , clear loud voices -- have you noticed how penetrating the great lady is becoming nowadays ?
-- 'Oh , Mr. Filmer , how DID you do it ? '
Every one else almost was staring to see where the machine had vanished , or rushing into the house .
`` It 's certainly most unfortunate if he 's going to be ill now , '' said Mrs. Banghurst a little severely .
`` YOU 'LL be all right , '' said Banghurst , as they went towards the pavilion .
`` All you want is a nip of brandy .
It ought to be you , you know .
You 'll be -- you 'd get it rough , you know , if you let another man -- ''
`` The man was certainly a poor , cowardly body , but so far as his science went he was NO impostor , '' said MacAndrew , `` and I 'm prepared to give that proposition a very practical demonstration , Mr. Wilkinson , so soon as we 've got the place a little more to ourselves .
For I 've no faith in all this publicity for experimental trials . ''
And to that end , while all the world was reading of the certain failure of the new flying machine , MacAndrew was soaring and curvetting with great amplitude and dignity over the Epsom and Wimbledon divisions ; and Banghurst , restored once more to hope and energy , and regardless of public security and the Board of Trade , was pursuing his gyrations and trying to attract his attention , on a motor car and in his pyjamas -- he had caught sight of the ascent when pulling up the blind of his bedroom window -- equipped , among other things , with a film camera that was subsequently discovered to be jammed .
And Filmer was lying on the billiard table in the green pavilion with a sheet about his body .
`` Anything , '' said Gip , `` will disappear under one of those cones .
I have read about it in a book .
Gip made no answer , but his grip tightened on my finger , and so we came into the shop .
It was a little , narrow shop , not very well lit , and the door-bell pinged again with a plaintive note as we closed it behind us .
For a moment or so we were alone and could glance about us .
There was a tiger in papier-mache on the glass case that covered the low counter -- a grave , kind-eyed tiger that waggled his head in a methodical manner ; there were several crystal spheres , a china hand holding magic cards , a stock of magic fish-bowls in various sizes , and an immodest magic hat that shamelessly displayed its springs .
On the floor were magic mirrors ; one to draw you out long and thin , one to swell your head and vanish your legs , and one to make you short and fat like a draught ; and while we were laughing at these the shopman , as I suppose , came in .
`` What can we have the pleasure ? ''
he said , spreading his long , magic fingers on the glass case ; and so with a start we were aware of him .
Gip stretched out his disengaged hand to take this object and found merely a blank palm .
And leaning over the counter -- he really had an extraordinarily long body -- this amazing person produced the article in the customary conjurer 's manner .
`` Paper , '' he said , and took a sheet out of the empty hat with the springs ; `` string , '' and behold his mouth was a string-box , from which he drew an unending thread , which when he had tied his parcel he bit off -- and , it seemed to me , swallowed the ball of string .
And then he lit a candle at the nose of one of the ventriloquist 's dummies , stuck one of his fingers ( which had become sealing-wax red ) into the flame , and so sealed the parcel .
`` Then there was the Disappearing Egg , '' he remarked , and produced one from within my coat-breast and packed it , and also The Crying Baby , Very Human .
I handed each parcel to Gip as it was ready , and he clasped them to his chest .
`` I say , '' I said , on a rather louder note , `` I want the bill ; and my hat , please . ''
`` So should I , '' I said to myself , `` if the counter would n't suddenly extend itself to shut one off from the door . ''
But I did n't call Gip's attention to that .
he said , with a hand out to the rabbit as it came lolloping past us ; `` Pussy , do Gip a magic ! ''
and his eyes followed it as it squeezed through a door I had certainly not remarked a moment before .
Then this door opened wider , and the man with one ear larger than the other appeared again .
He was smiling still , but his eye met mine with something between amusement and defiance .
`` You 'd like to see our show-room , sir , '' he said , with an innocent suavity .
Gip tugged my finger forward .
I glanced at the counter and met the shopman 's eye again .
I was beginning to think the magic just a little too genuine .
`` We have n't VERY much time , '' I said .
But somehow we were inside the show-room before I could finish that .
There were many things that Gip fancied there .
He turned to this astonishing tradesman with mingled confidence and respect .
`` Is that a Magic Sword ? ''
For the second I was rather at a loss .
I stared round to see the door of the magic shop , and , behold , it was not there !
There was no door , no shop , nothing , only the common pilaster between the shop where they sell pictures and the window with the chicks !
`` Mine do , '' said Gip .
`` I just have to say a word I know before I open the lid . ''
`` Even then they ca n't go fast .
They 've got no beast but the mule , and all to-day the girl 's foot has been bleeding -- - ''
His eye caught a whole row of high plumed canes bending in unison , and then the tails of silk that hung before his neck flapped and fell .
The breeze was growing stronger .
Somehow it took the stiff stillness out of things -- and that was well .
The dog came on .
Then when the little man 's blade was already out , it swerved aside and went panting by them and past .
The eyes of the little man followed its flight .
`` There was no foam , '' he said .
For a space the man with the silver-studded bridle stared up the valley .
`` Oh , come on ! ''
he cried at last .
`` What does it matter ? ''
and jerked his horse into movement again .
The little man left the insoluble mystery of a dog that fled from nothing but the wind , and lapsed into profound musings on human character .
`` Come on ! ''
he whispered to himself .
`` Why should it be given to one man to say 'Come on ! '
with that stupendous violence of effect .
Always , all his life , the man with the silver bridle has been saying that .
If _I_ said it -- ! ''
thought the little man .
But people marvelled when the master was disobeyed even in the wildest things .
This half-caste girl seemed to him , seemed to every one , mad -- blasphemous almost .
The little man , by way of comparison , reflected on the gaunt rider with the scarred lip , as stalwart as his master , as brave and , indeed , perhaps braver , and yet for him there was obedience , nothing but to give obedience duly and stoutly ...
Certain sensations of the hands and knees called the little man back to more immediate things .
He became aware of something .
He rode up beside his gaunt fellow .
`` Do you notice the horses ? ''
he said in an undertone .
`` They do n't like this wind , '' said the little man , and dropped behind as the man with the silver bridle turned upon him .
The master could see the great spiders upon him , and others upon the ground .
To the day of his death he never knew just how the event of that moment happened .
Did he , indeed , turn his horse , or did it really of its own accord stampede after its fellow ?
Suffice it that in another second he was galloping full tilt down the valley with his sword whirling furiously overhead .
And all about him on the quickening breeze , the spiders ' airships , their air bundles and air sheets , seemed to him to hurry in a conscious pursuit .
`` Cowards both , '' said the little man .
Far away out of the wooded slopes across the valley , but in the clearness of the sunset distinct and unmistakable , he saw a little spire of smoke .
`` Perhaps , after all , it is not them , '' he said at last .
Their time had passed .
From the ground without either a wind to carry them or a winding sheet ready , these things , for all their poison , could do him little evil .
He flicked with his belt at those he fancied came too near .
Once , where a number ran together over a bare place , he was minded to dismount and trample them with his boots , but this impulse he overcame .
Ever and again he turned in his saddle , and looked back at the smoke .
If I wanted to tell on him I should have told long ago .
I do n't tell and I do n't tell , and he ought to feel at his ease .
As if anything so gross and fat as he could feel at ease !
Who would believe me if I did tell ?
`` I expect , '' he said , `` you take no more exercise than I do , and probably you eat no less . ''
( Like all excessively obese people he fancied he ate nothing . )
`` Yet , '' -- and he smiled an oblique smile -- '' we differ . ''
`` Every time we 've met for a week , '' I said , `` and we 've met pretty often -- you 've given me a broad hint or so about that little secret of mine . ''
`` Well , '' he said , `` now the cat 's out of the bag , I 'll admit , yes , it is so .
I had it -- ''
`` Look here , '' said I to Pyecraft next day , and snatched the slip away from his eager grasp .
`` So far as I -- can make it out , this is a recipe for Loss of Weight .
( `` Ah ! ''
I 'm not absolutely sure , but I think it 's that .
And if you take my advice you 'll leave it alone .
Because , you know -- I blacken my blood in your interest , Pyecraft -- my ancestors on that side were , so far as I can gather , a jolly queer lot .
`` I must speak , '' he said .
`` It is n't fair .
There 's something wrong .
It's done me no good .
You 're not doing your great-grandmother justice . ''
`` That , '' I said , `` goes without saying in all my poor dear great-grandmother 's recipes .
When condition or quality is not specified you must get the worst .
She was drastic or nothing ... .
And there 's one or two possible alternatives to some of these other things .
You got FRESH rattlesnake venom . ''
`` H 'm , '' said I , and to tell the truth I was so pleased at the rehabilitation of my great grandmother 's reputation this evidently promised that I made a most excellent lunch .
`` He expects me , '' said I , and they sent me up .
`` In there ? ''
`` That you , Pyecraft ? ''
I shouted , and went and banged the door .
I lit a cigar .
`` Tell me , '' I said , `` what happened ? ''
`` I took it , '' he said .
`` And as I felt lighter and better after an hour , I decided to take the draught . ''
`` My dear Pyecraft ! ''
`` I held my nose , '' he explained .
`` And then I kept on getting lighter and lighter -- and helpless , you know . ''
I shook my head .
`` I do n't think you can count on that , '' I said .
And then there was another burst of passion , and he kicked out at adjacent chairs and banged the floor .
He behaved just as I should have expected a great , fat , self-indulgent man to behave under trying circumstances -- that is to say , very badly .
He spoke of me and my great-grandmother with an utter want of discretion .
`` I never asked you to take the stuff , '' I said .
As we got on with the thing I found myself almost keenly interested .
It was I who called in the housekeeper and broke matters to her , and it was I chiefly who fixed up the inverted bed .
In fact , I spent two whole days at his flat .
I am a handy , interfering sort of man with a screw-driver , and I made all sorts of ingenious adaptations for him -- ran a wire to bring his bells within reach , turned all his electric lights up instead of down , and so on .
The whole affair was extremely curious and interesting to me , and it was delightful to think of Pyecraft like some great , fat blow-fly , crawling about on his ceiling and clambering round the lintels of his doors from one room to another , and never , never , never coming to the club any more ... .
And now to elude Pyecraft , occupying , as he does , an admirable strategic position between me and the door .
He looked up at me for a moment with wrinkled brows , with an aggrieved , exasperated face .
`` O SHUT it ! ''
he said , and , after a moment of hostility , eye to eye , he went on adding up my bill .
`` Four , six and a half , '' he said , after a pause .
`` Thank you , Sir . ''
So , unpropitiously , my acquaintance with Mr. Skelmersdale began .
I scented my opportunity .
`` What 's this joke , '' said I , `` about Fairyland ? ''
What these elves were like I have failed to gather , so vague and imperfect is his vocabulary , and so unobservant of all minor detail does he seem to have been .
They were clothed in something very light and beautiful , that was neither wool , nor silk , nor leaves , nor the petals of flowers .
They stood all about him as he sat and waked , and down the glade towards him , down a glow-worm avenue and fronted by a star , came at once that Fairy Lady who is the chief personage of his memory and tale .
Of her I gathered more .
She was clothed in filmy green , and about her little waist was a broad silver girdle .
Her hair waved back from her forehead on either side ; there were curls not too wayward and yet astray , and on her brow was a little tiara , set with a single star .
Her sleeves were some sort of open sleeves that gave little glimpses of her arms ; her throat , I think , was a little displayed , because he speaks of the beauty of her neck and chin .
There was a necklace of coral about her white throat , and in her breast a coral-coloured flower .
She had the soft lines of a little child in her chin and cheeks and throat .
And her eyes , I gather , were of a kindled brown , very soft and straight and sweet under her level brows .
You see by these particulars how greatly this lady must have loomed in Mr. Skelmersdale 's picture .
Certain things he tried to express and could not express ; `` the way she moved , '' he said several times ; and I fancy a sort of demure joyousness radiated from this Lady .
There are kisses and kisses , I am told , and this must have been quite the other sort from Millie 's resonant signals of regard .
There was something magic in that kiss ; assuredly it marked a turning point .
At any rate , this is one of the passages that he thought sufficiently important to describe most at length .
I have tried to get it right , I have tried to disentangle it from the hints and gestures through which it came to me , but I have no doubt that it was all different from my telling and far finer and sweeter , in the soft filtered light and the subtly stirring silences of the fairy glades .
The Fairy Lady asked him more about Millie , and was she very lovely , and so on -- a great many times .
As to Millie 's loveliness , I conceive him answering that she was `` all right . ''
And then , or on some such occasion , the Fairy Lady told him she had fallen in love with him as he slept in the moonlight , and so he had been brought into Fairyland , and she had thought , not knowing of Millie , that perhaps he might chance to love her .
`` But now you know you ca n't , '' she said , `` so you must stop with me just a little while , and then you must go back to Millie . ''
She told him that , and you know Skelmersdale was already in love with her , but the pure inertia of his mind kept him in the way he was going .
I imagine him sitting in a sort of stupefaction amidst all these glowing beautiful things , answering about his Millie and the little shop he projected and the need of a horse and cart ... .
And that absurd state of affairs must have gone on for days and days .
I see this little lady , hovering about him and trying to amuse him , too dainty to understand his complexity and too tender to let him go .
And he , you know , hypnotised as it were by his earthly position , went his way with her hither and thither , blind to everything in Fairyland but this wonderful intimacy that had come to him .
It is hard , it is impossible , to give in print the effect of her radiant sweetness shining through the jungle of poor Skelmersdale 's rough and broken sentences .
To me , at least , she shone clear amidst the muddle of his story like a glow-worm in a tangle of weeds .
`` Yes , '' I said .
`` I did n't want to see Millie . ''
There was something in his eyes and manner that was too difficult for him to express in words .
`` One gets talking , '' he said at last at the door , and smiled wanly , and so vanished from my eyes .
And that is the tale of Mr. Skelmersdale in Fairyland just as he told it to me .
The scene amidst which Clayton told his last story comes back very vividly to my mind .
There he sat , for the greater part of the time , in the corner of the authentic settle by the spacious open fire , and Sanderson sat beside him smoking the Broseley clay that bore his name .
There was Evans , and that marvel among actors , Wish , who is also a modest man .
We had all come down to the Mermaid Club that Saturday morning , except Clayton , who had slept there overnight -- which indeed gave him the opening of his story .
We had golfed until golfing was invisible ; we had dined , and we were in that mood of tranquil kindliness when men will suffer a story .
When Clayton began to tell one , we naturally supposed he was lying .
It may be that indeed he was lying -- of that the reader will speedily be able to judge as well as I .
He began , it is true , with an air of matter-of-fact anecdote , but that we thought was only the incurable artifice of the man .
`` I say ! ''
he remarked , after a long consideration of the upward rain of sparks from the log that Sanderson had thumped , `` you know I was alone here last night ? ''
`` Who sleep in the other wing , '' said Clayton .
Well -- '' He pulled at his cigar for some little time as though he still hesitated about his confidence .
Then he said , quite quietly , `` I caught a ghost ! ''
We laughed , and Clayton looked aggrieved .
`` I know , '' he said , with the flicker of a smile , `` but the fact is it really WAS a ghost , and I 'm as sure of it as I am that I am talking to you now .
I 'm not joking .
I mean what I say . ''
Sanderson drew deeply at his pipe , with one reddish eye on Clayton , and then emitted a thin jet of smoke more eloquent than many words .
I said , joining the party of the sceptics .
`` The poor devil was in trouble , '' said Clayton , bowed over his cigar-end and with the very faintest note of reproof .
`` I came upon him , you know , in the long passage .
His back was towards me and I saw him first .
Right off I knew him for a ghost .
He was transparent and whitish ; clean through his chest I could see the glimmer of the little window at the end .
And not only his physique but his attitude struck me as being weak .
He looked , you know , as though he did n't know in the slightest whatever he meant to do .
One hand was on the panelling and the other fluttered to his mouth .
Like -- SO ! ''
You know that sort of young man 's neck that has two great flutings down the back , here and here -- so !
And a little , meanish head with scrubby hair -- And rather bad ears .
Shoulders bad , narrower than the hips ; turn-down collar , ready-made short jacket , trousers baggy and a little frayed at the heels .
That 's how he took me .
I came very quietly up the staircase .
I did not carry a light , you know -- the candles are on the landing table and there is that lamp -- and I was in my list slippers , and I saw him as I came up .
I stopped dead at that -- taking him in .
I was n't a bit afraid .
I think that in most of these affairs one is never nearly so afraid or excited as one imagines one would be .
I was surprised and interested .
I thought , 'Good Lord !
Here 's a ghost at last !
And I have n't believed for a moment in ghosts during the last five-and-twenty years . '
`` I suppose I was n't on the landing a moment before he found out I was there .
He turned on me sharply , and I saw the face of an immature young man , a weak nose , a scrubby little moustache , a feeble chin .
So for an instant we stood -- he looking over his shoulder at me and regarded one another .
Then he seemed to remember his high calling .
He turned round , drew himself up , projected his face , raised his arms , spread his hands in approved ghost fashion -- came towards me .
As he did so his little jaw dropped , and he emitted a faint , drawn-out 'Boo . '
No , it was n't -- not a bit dreadful .
I 'd had a bottle of champagne , and being all alone , perhaps two or three -- perhaps even four or five -- whiskies , so I was as solid as rocks and no more frightened than if I 'd been assailed by a frog .
You do n't belong to THIS place .
What are you doing here ? '
`` 'Yes , sir .
I 've tried to do it several times , and it does n't come off .
There 's some little thing has slipped me , and I ca n't get back . '
`` And at last he did it ? ''
`` At last he did it .
I had to keep him up to it hard , but he did it at last -- rather suddenly .
He despaired , we had a scene , and then he got up abruptly and asked me to go through the whole performance , slowly , so that he might see .
'I believe , ' he said , 'if I could SEE I should spot what was wrong at once . '
'_I_ know , ' he said .
'What do you know ? '
'_I_ know , ' he repeated .
Then he said , peevishly , 'I CA N'T do it if you look at me -- I really CA N'T ; it 's been that , partly , all along .
I 'm such a nervous fellow that you put me out . '
Well , we had a bit of an argument .
Naturally I wanted to see ; but he was as obstinate as a mule , and suddenly I had come over as tired as a dog -- he tired me out .
'All right , ' I said , '_I_ wo n't look at you , ' and turned towards the mirror , on the wardrobe , by the bed .
`` And then you went to bed ? ''
`` That 's what I 'm going to do , '' said Clayton .
`` They wo n't work , '' said Evans .
`` If they do -- '' I suggested .
`` But he has n't got 'em right , '' said Sanderson , plugging too much tobacco in his pipe .
`` Clayton , '' said I , `` you 're too good a liar for us .
Most of it was all right .
But that disappearance ... happened to be convincing .
Tell us , it 's a tale of cock and bull . ''
`` Ah , NOW , '' said Clayton , `` I can do the whole thing -- right . ''
Clayton , with a humorous light in his eyes , smiled back at him .
`` Wish , '' he said , `` is right and all you others are wrong .
I shall get to the end of these passes , and as the last swish whistles through the air , Presto !
-- this hearthrug will be vacant , the room will be blank amazement , and a respectably dressed gentleman of fifteen stone will plump into the world of shades .
So will you be .
I decline to argue further .
Let the thing be tried . ''
I intimated my sense of his condescension .
The name was familiar , and I tried to recall when and where I had read it .
`` Something about gold dust , '' I said vaguely , `` but the precise -- ''
But at the word salvage the sunburnt man exploded into language so extraordinarily horrible that I stopped aghast .
He came down to more ordinary swearing , and pulled himself up abruptly .
`` Excuse me , '' he said , `` but -- salvage ! ''
`` The mast came up like a ghost out of the black , and then a lot of fishes , and then a lot of flapping red seaweed , and then whack I came with a kind of dull bang on the deck of the Ocean Pioneer , and the fishes that had been feeding on the dead rose about me like a swarm of flies from road stuff in summer time .
I turned on the compressed air again -- for the suit was a bit thick and mackintoshery after all , in spite of the rum -- and stood recovering myself .
It struck coolish down there , and that helped take off the stuffiness a bit .
He broke off in his story .
`` I 've lifted it , '' he said , `` as near as that !
Forty thousand pounds worth of pure gold !
I shouted inside my helmet as a kind of cheer and hurt my ears .
I was getting confounded stuffy and tired by this time -- I must have been down twenty-five minutes or more -- and I thought this was good enough .
I went up the companion again , and as my eyes came up flush with the deck , a thundering great crab gave a kind of hysterical jump and went scuttling off sideways .
Quite a start it gave me .
I stood up clear on deck and shut the valve behind the helmet to let the air accumulate to carry me up again -- I noticed a kind of whacking from above , as though they were hitting the water with an oar , but I did n't look up .
I fancied they were signalling me to come up .
`` Then up jumped one and began pointing , making extraordinary gestures to me as he did so , and all the others began sharing their attention between me and something out at sea .
'What 's the matter now ? '
I turned slowly on account of my dignity , and there I saw , coming round a point , the poor old Pride of Banya towed by a couple of canoes .
The sight fairly made me sick .
But they evidently expected some recognition , so I waved my arms in a striking sort of non-committal manner .
And then I turned and stalked on towards the trees again .
At that time I was praying like mad , I remember , over and over again : 'Lord help me through with it !
Lord help me through with it ! '
It 's only fools who know nothing of dangers can afford to laugh at praying .
`` Did the little missionary come back ? ''
`` Not a doubt of it .
And you 'd eat double or treble -- and all that .
But just think what the thing would mean .
Imagine yourself with a little phial like this '' -- he held up a little bottle of green glass and marked his points with it -- '' and in this precious phial is the power to think twice as fast , move twice as quickly , do twice as much work in a given time as you could otherwise do . ''
`` Or a doctor , driven to death , wants to sit down and think out a case .
Or a barrister -- or a man cramming for an examination . ''
`` And in a duel , again , '' said Gibberne , `` where it all depends on your quickness in pulling the trigger . ''
`` I suppose , '' I meditated , `` in a duel -- it would be fair ? ''
He paused and smiled at me deeply , and tapped slowly on the edge of his desk with the green phial .
`` I think I know the stuff ... .
Already I've got something coming . ''
The nervous smile upon his face betrayed the gravity of his revelation .
He rarely talked of his actual experimental work unless things were very near the end .
`` And it may be , it may be -- I should n't be surprised -- it may even do the thing at a greater rate than twice . ''
But I do n't think he quite knew what a big thing it was to be , for all that .
Come up and see . ''
`` I 'm not walking fast , am I ? ''
cried Gibberne , and slackened his pace to a quick march .
`` And it goes twice ? ''
I said , nearing his doorway in a grateful perspiration .
`` Lor ' , '' I said .
`` And you mean -- ''
`` The New Accelerator , '' he answered , and we touched glasses and drank , and instantly I closed my eyes .
`` Analysed sounds , '' I think he said , but I am not sure .
He glanced at the window .
`` Have you ever seen a curtain before a window fixed in that way before ? ''
cried Gibberne , suddenly ; `` look there ! ''
`` Or smile , '' said Gibberne , with his eye on the lady 's answering teeth .
He clapped his hand on his thigh and stood hesitating on the verge .
`` Gibberne , '' I cried , coming up , `` put it down .
This heat is too much !
It 's our running so !
Two or three miles a second !
Friction of the air ! ''
About that past he displays an anxious modesty .
`` I do not KNOW what I should do if it became known , '' he says ; and repeats , impressively , `` I do not know WHAT I should do . ''
As a matter of fact , I doubt if he would do anything except get very red about the ears .
But that will appear later ; nor will I tell here of our first encounter , since , as a general rule -- though I am prone to break it -- the end of a story should come after , rather than before , the beginning .
And the beginning of the story goes a long way back ; indeed , it is now nearly twenty years since Fate , by a series of complicated and startling manoeuvres , brought Mr. Ledbetter , so to speak , into my hands .
The ascent of the balcony , it was evident , would have to be done in a rush , for it was all in clear moonlight , and visible from the gate into the avenue .
A trellis thinly set with young , ambitious climbing roses made the ascent ridiculously easy .
There , in that black shadow by the stone vase of flowers , one might crouch and take a closer view of this gaping breach in the domestic defences , the open window .
For a while Mr. Ledbetter was as still as the night , and then that insidious whisky tipped the balance .
He went up the trellis with quick , convulsive movements , swung his legs over the parapet of the balcony , and dropped panting in the shadow even as he had designed .
He was trembling violently , short of breath , and his heart pumped noisily , but his mood was exultation .
He could have shouted to find he was so little afraid .
Do n't you move that hand . ''
`` Do n't explain .
It 's sure to be a lie , and there 's no time for explanations .
What was I going to ask you ?
Have you any mates ? ''
`` I do n't see how I could prove an alibi , '' remarked Mr. Ledbetter , trying to show by his conversation that he was an educated man .
There was a pause .
Mr. Ledbetter perceived that on a chair beside his captor was a large black bag on a heap of crumpled papers , and that there were torn and burnt papers on the table .
And in front of these , and arranged methodically along the edge were rows and rows of little yellow rouleaux -- a hundred times more gold than Mr. Ledbetter had seen in all his life before .
The light of two candles , in silver candlesticks , fell upon these .
`` It is rather fatiguing holding up my hands like this , '' said Mr. Ledbetter , with a deprecatory smile .
`` You gas as much as if you were a real parson , I 'm blessed if you do n't .
Of all the burglars you are the -- Well !
-- I WO N'T permit you .
There is n't time .
If you start off jawing again , I 'll shoot right in your stomach .
But I know now-I know now !
What we 're going to do first , my man , is an examination for concealed arms -- an examination for concealed arms .
When I tell you to do a thing , don't start off at a gabble -- do it brisk . ''
`` From your accent I judge you are a man of some education , '' he said , lighting a cigar .
`` No -- DO N'T begin that explanation of yours .
I know it will be long-winded from your face , and I am much too old a liar to be interested in other men 's lying .
You are , I say , a person of education .
You do well to dress as a curate .
Even among educated people you might pass as a curate . ''
The man 's tone tickled me .
He seemed an odd character .
`` I am , '' he said , `` one of the most unfortunate beings alive . ''
So the remarkable story of Mr. Ledbetter 's Vacation ends .
That breach with his aunt was not of long duration .
The old lady had forgiven him before she died .
Then , full of a vague sense of calamity , he sought the porter at the entrance lodge .
`` Where is Mr .
`` Do you know that all the furniture is broken in Mr. Bessel 's room ? ''
The porter said nothing , but , obeying his gestures , came at once to Mr. Bessel 's apartment to see the state of affairs .
`` This settles it , '' he said , surveying the lunatic confusion .
`` I did n't know of this .
Mr. Bessel 's gone off .
He 's mad ! ''
But how they had come into that world he could not tell , nor where the bodies they had lost might be , whether they still raved about the earth , or whether they were closed forever in death against return .
That they were the spirits of the dead neither he nor I believe .
But Doctor Wilson Paget thinks they are the rational souls of men who are lost in madness on the earth .
`` That 's why -- '' I ventured .
`` That ai n't all .
I made no vulgar clamour for a story , but I became attentive to Mr. Brisher 's bodily needs , and presently I led him back to the deserted lady .
He repeated `` engaged . ''
`` Go on , '' I said .
`` I did n't understand . ''
`` Thousands , '' said Mr. Brisher , in a sort of sad calm .
`` I calc'lated it out . ''
`` I went out in a 'uff at last .
But not before I was pretty sure I 'ad to lift that treasure by myself .
The only thing that kep ' me up was thinking 'ow I 'd take it out of 'im when I 'ad the cash . ''
`` 'Yes , ' I says -- I could n't 'elp it -- 'I put a lot in that rockery , ' I says , like that .
'I put a lot in that rockery ' -- meaning -- ''
`` That 's all , '' said Mr. Brisher .
`` But about Jane ?
Did you write ? ''
Mr. Brisher pursed his mouth and moved his head slowly from side to side .
`` Not 'IM , '' he said .
And it did n't do 'IM much good to say it was treasure trove . ''
The stoppage for the night was brightened by the appearance of the young man , and his manners were all that could be desired and his French quite serviceable .
His coupons availed for the same hotel as theirs , and by chance as it seemed he sat next Miss Winchelsea at the table d'hote .
In spite of her enthusiasm for Rome , she had thought out some such possibility very thoroughly , and when he ventured to make a remark upon the tediousness of travelling -- he let the soup and fish go by before he did this -- she did not simply assent to his proposition , but responded with another .
They were soon comparing their journeys , and Helen and Fanny were cruelly overlooked in the conversation .
It was to be the same journey , they found ; one day for the galleries at Florence -- '' from what I hear , '' said the young man , `` it is barely enough , '' -- and the rest at Rome .
He talked of Rome very pleasantly ; he was evidently quite well read , and he quoted Horace about Soracte .
Miss Winchelsea had `` done '' that book of Horace for her matriculation , and was delighted to cap his quotation .
It gave a sort of tone to things , this incident -- a touch of refinement to mere chatting .
Fanny expressed a few emotions , and Helen interpolated a few sensible remarks , but the bulk of the talk on the girls ' side naturally fell to Miss Winchelsea .
`` I was n't trying to overtake them , '' said Fanny , slackening her excessive pace ; `` I was n't indeed . ''
And for a minute she was short of breath .
Helen and Fanny were returning , there were civilities , and the young men were receding .
By a great effort she controlled herself to face the enquiring eyes of her friends .
All that afternoon she lived the life of a heroine under the indescribable outrage of that name , chatting , observing , with `` Snooks '' gnawing at her heart .
From the moment that it first rang upon her ears , the dream of her happiness was prostrate in the dust .
All the refinement she had figured was ruined and defaced by that cognomen 's unavoidable vulgarity .
Miss Winchelsea repressed a desire to demand more explicit information , and wrote the sweetest long letter again .
`` Tell me all about yourself , dear .
That journey has quite refreshed our ancient friendship , and I do so want to keep in touch with you . ''
About Mr. Snooks she simply wrote on the fifth page that she was glad Fanny had seen him , and that if he SHOULD ask after her , she was to be remembered to him VERY KINDLY ( underlined ) .
And Fanny replied most obtusely in the key of that `` ancient friendship , '' reminding Miss Winchelsea of a dozen foolish things of those old schoolgirl days at the training college , and saying not a word about Mr. Snooks !
They had been in Rome at Easter , and Fanny was married in the August vacation .
She wrote a garrulous letter to Miss Winchelsea , describing her home-coming , and the astonishing arrangements of their `` teeny weeny '' little house .
Se'noks was now beginning to assume a refinement in Miss Winchelsea 's memory out of all proportion to the facts of the case , and she tried in vain to imagine his cultured greatness in a `` teeny weeny '' little house .
`` Am busy enamelling a cosey corner , '' said Fanny , sprawling to the end of her third sheet , `` so excuse more . ''
Miss Winchelsea answered in her best style , gently poking fun at Fanny's arrangements and hoping intensely that Mr. Sen'oks might see the letter .
Only this hope enabled her to write at all , answering not only that letter but one in November and one at Christmas .
It was a sadly disappointing week , and Miss Winchelsea was glad when it came to an end .
Under various excuses she avoided visiting them again .
After a time the visitor 's room was occupied by their two little boys , and Fanny 's invitations ceased .
The intimacy of her letters had long since faded away .
`` They do n't know , '' he added .
That sort of proposition I never dispute .
`` Smashed and killed , and now , so much of me as that dream was , is dead .
I dreamt I was another man , you know , living in a different part of the world and in a different time .
I dreamt that night after night .
Night after night I woke into that other life .
Fresh scenes and fresh happenings -- until I came upon the last -- ''
`` No , '' he said .
That was the end of the dream ... . ''
It was clear I was in for this dream .
And after all , I had an hour before me , the light was fading fast , and Fortnum-Roscoe has a dreary way with him .
`` Living in a different time , '' I said : `` do you mean in some different age ? ''
`` The year three thousand , for example ? ''
`` Yes , the girl .
You must not interrupt or you will put me out . ''
`` You wo n't think I 'm mad ? ''
`` I have lived three-and-fifty years in this world .
I have had mother , sisters , friends , wife , and daughters -- all their faces , the play of their faces , I know .
But the face of this girl -- it is much more real to me .
I can bring it back into memory so that I see it again -- I could draw it or paint it .
And after all -- ''
`` Well , that is the first thing I remember , the first dream I had , that little shaded room and the beautiful air and sky and that dear lady of mine , with her shining arms and her graceful robe , and how we sat and talked in half whispers to one another .
We talked in whispers not because there was any one to hear , but because there was still such a freshness of mind between us that our thoughts were a little frightened , I think , to find themselves at last in words .
And so they went softly .
`` He glanced at her , as though almost he would appeal to her .
Then he asked me suddenly if I had heard of a great and avenging declaration that Evesham had made .
Now , Evesham had always before been the man next to myself in the leadership of that great party in the north .
He was a forcible , hard and tactless man , and only I had been able to control and soften him .
It was on his account even more than my own , I think , that the others had been so dismayed at my retreat .
So this question about what he had done reawakened my old interest in the life I had put aside just for a moment .
`` 'No , ' I cried .
'I wo n't hear you .
I took count of all those things , I weighed them -- and I have come away . '
`` 'War , ' he said , as if he were speaking to himself , and then turned slowly from me and walked away .
I stood , caught in the whirl of thoughts his appeal had set going .
`` She did not finish her sentence , she let it rest there .
I turned to her sweet face , and the balance of my mood swayed and reeled .
`` Very soon the shadow had gone again , and we were hastening to our bathing-place in the Grotta del Bovo Marino , where it was our custom to bathe every day .
We swam and splashed one another , and in that buoyant water I seemed to become something lighter and stronger than a man .
And at last we came out dripping and rejoicing and raced among the rocks .
And then I put on a dry bathing-dress , and we sat to bask in the sun , and presently I nodded , resting my head against her knee , and she put her hand upon my hair and stroked it softly and I dozed .
as it were with the snapping of the string of a violin , I was awakening , and I was in my own bed in Liverpool , in the life of to-day .
`` So that afterwards you remembered little details you had forgotten . ''
`` Only I did not want to go ; my will was all the other way about .
I had so newly thrown off the incubus of responsibility : I was still so fresh a renegade from duty that the daylight clearness of what I OUGHT to do had no power at all to touch my will .
My will was to live , to gather pleasures and make my dear lady happy .
But though this sense of vast neglected duties had no power to draw me , it could make me silent and preoccupied , it robbed the days I had spent of half their brightness and roused me into dark meditations in the silence of the night .
And as I stood and watched Evesham 's aeroplanes sweep to and fro -- those birds of infinite ill omen -- she stood beside me watching me , perceiving the trouble indeed , but not perceiving it clearly her eyes questioning my face , her expression shaded with perplexity .
Her face was grey because the sunset was fading out of the sky .
It was no fault of hers that she held me .
She had asked me to go from her , and again in the night time and with tears she had asked me to go .
`` 'Yes , ' she murmured , softly .
`` And so my moment passed .
The man with the white face paused .
I glanced at him , and his face was intent on the floor of the carriage .
A little railway station , a string of loaded trucks , a signal-box , and the back of a cottage , shot by the carriage window , and a bridge passed with a clap of noise , echoing the tumult of the train .
`` And all the rest was Flight -- all the rest was Flight . ''
His face was white and drawn and his hands were clenched .
He took no heed of my curiosity .
`` Where did you go ? ''
I questioned him no more .
Presently I thought he was beginning again .
He broke out in an argumentative monotone :
I had an inspiration .
`` After all , '' I said , `` it could have been only a dream . ''
`` A dream ! ''
he cried , flaming upon me , `` a dream -- when even now -- ''
`` 'It is love and reason , ' I said , 'fleeing from all this madness , of war . '
`` But all these things do not matter now , these nights of flight and pain ... .
We were in an open place near those great temples at Paestum , at last , on a blank stony place dotted with spiky bushes , empty and desolate and so flat that a grove of eucalyptus far away showed to the feet of its stems .
How I can see it !
My lady was sitting down under a bush , resting a little , for she was very weak and weary , and I was standing up watching to see if I could tell the distance of the firing that came and went .
They were still , you know , fighting far from each other , with those terrible new weapons that had never before been used : guns that would carry beyond sight , and aeroplanes that would do -- What THEY would do no man could foretell .
`` As though she wanted to reach me --
`` And I do n't remember waking up .
I do n't remember dressing that day .
I know I found myself in my office , with my letters all slit open in front of me , and how I was struck by the absurdity of being there , seeing that in reality I was sitting , stunned , in that Paestum temple with a dead woman in my arms .
I read my letters like a machine .
I have forgotten what they were about . ''
He stopped , and there was a long silence .
He seemed to force himself to finish .
His voice was very low .
`` I stood up and walked through the temple , and then there came into sight -- first one man with a yellow face , dressed in a uniform of dirty white , trimmed with blue , and then several , climbing to the crest of the old wall of the vanished city , and crouching there .
They were little bright figures in the sunlight , and there they hung , weapon in hand , peering cautiously before them .
`` And further away I saw others and then more at another point in the wall .
It was a long lax line of men in open order .
`` 'You fool , ' I cried .
'Do n't you know ?
She is dead ! '
`` There was no pain , no sting or smart .
Amazement and then darkness sweeping over everything .
The hot , brutal face before me , the face of the man who had killed me , seemed to recede .
It swept out of existence -- ''
`` Nightmares , '' he cried ; `` nightmares indeed !
Great birds that fought and tore . ''
Steam was the first-comer in the new powers , it was the beginning of the Age of Energy that was to close the long history of the Warring States .
'But there is going to be flying -- quite soon . '
The little boy was too well bred to say what he thought of that .
'Anyhow , ' he said , 'I wish you would n't write about it . '
'And then , ' he said .
He stopped abruptly with a catching of the breath that many an actor or orator might have envied .
Young Holsten 's face was white .
He walked with that uneasy affectation of ease that marks an overstrained nervous system and an under-exercised body .
He hesitated at the White Stone Pond whether to go to the left of it or the right , and again at the fork of the roads .
He kept shifting his stick in his hand , and every now and then he would get in the way of people on the footpath or be jostled by them because of the uncertainty of his movements .
He felt , he confesses , 'inadequate to ordinary existence . '
He seemed to himself to be something inhuman and mischievous .
All the people about him looked fairly prosperous , fairly happy , fairly well adapted to the lives they had to lead -- a week of work and a Sunday of best clothes and mild promenading -- and he had launched something that would disorganise the entire fabric that held their contentments and ambitions and satisfactions together .
'Felt like an imbecile who has presented a box full of loaded revolvers to a Creche , ' he notes .
He went into those little gardens beneath the over-hanging , brightly-lit masses of the Savoy Hotel and the Hotel Cecil .
He sat down on a seat and became aware of the talk of the two people next to him .
It was the talk of a young couple evidently on the eve of marriage .
The man was congratulating himself on having regular employment at last ; 'they like me , ' he said , 'and I like the job .
If I work up -- in'r dozen years or so I ought to be gettin ' somethin ' pretty comfortable .
That 's the plain sense of it , Hetty .
There ai n't no reason whatsoever why we shouldn't get along very decently -- very decently indeed . '
The desire for little successes amidst conditions securely fixed !
So it struck upon Holsten 's mind .
He added in his diary , 'I had a sense of all this globe as that ... . '
His intelligence struggled against this mood and struggled for a time in vain .
He reassured himself against the invasion of this disconcerting idea that he was something strange and inhuman , a loose wanderer from the flock returning with evil gifts from his sustained unnatural excursions amidst the darknesses and phosphorescences beneath the fair surfaces of life .
Man had not been always thus ; the instincts and desires of the little home , the little plot , was not all his nature ; also he was an adventurer , an experimenter , an unresting curiosity , an insatiable desire .
For a few thousand generations indeed he had tilled the earth and followed the seasons , saying his prayers , grinding his corn and trampling the October winepress , yet not for so long but that he was still full of restless stirrings .
Holsten had always been accustomed to publish his results so soon as they appeared to him to be sufficiently advanced to furnish a basis for further work , and to that confiding disposition and one happy flash of adaptive invention the alert Dass owed his claim ... .
Yet that same spirit of free-thinking and outspoken publication that in the field of natural science had been the beginning of the conquest of nature , was at work throughout all the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries preparing the spirit of the new world within the degenerating body of the old .
The idea of a greater subordination of individual interests and established institutions to the collective future , is traceable more and more clearly in the literature of those times , and movement after movement fretted itself away in criticism of and opposition to first this aspect and then that of the legal , social , and political order .
Already in the early nineteenth century Shelley , with no scrap of alternative , is denouncing the established rulers of the world as Anarchs , and the entire system of ideas and suggestions that was known as Socialism , and more particularly its international side , feeble as it was in creative proposals or any method of transition , still witnesses to the growth of a conception of a modernised system of inter-relationships that should supplant the existing tangle of proprietary legal ideas .
Barnet welcomed the appearance of the atomic engine with the zest of masculine youth in all fresh machinery , and it is evident that for some time he failed to connect the rush of wonderful new possibilities with the financial troubles of his family .
'I knew my father was worried , ' he admits .
That cast the smallest of shadows upon his delighted departure for Italy and Greece and Egypt with three congenial companions in one of the new atomic models .
They flew over the Channel Isles and Touraine , he mentions , and circled about Mont Blanc -- 'These new helicopters , we found , ' he notes , 'had abolished all the danger and strain of sudden drops to which the old-time aeroplanes were liable ' -- and then he went on by way of Pisa , Paestum , Ghirgenti , and Athens , to visit the pyramids by moonlight , flying thither from Cairo , and to follow the Nile up to Khartum .
Even by later standards , it must have been a very gleeful holiday for a young man , and it made the tragedy of his next experiences all the darker .
A week after his return his father , who was a widower , announced himself ruined , and committed suicide by means of an unscheduled opiate .
He asked a passing stroller , and was told that the men had struck that day against the use of an atomic riveter that would have doubled the individual efficiency and halved the number of steel workers .
It flashed suddenly into his mind just what the multitudinous shambling enigma below meant .
It was an appeal against the unexpected , an appeal to those others who , more fortunate , seemed wiser and more powerful , for something -- for INTELLIGENCE .
This mute mass , weary footed , rank following rank , protested its persuasion that some of these others must have foreseen these dislocations -- that anyhow they ought to have foreseen -- and arranged .
It is characteristic of the widening thought of the time that this not very heroical young man who , in any previous age , might well have been altogether occupied with the problem of his own individual necessities , should be able to stand there and generalise about the needs of the race .
This was an altogether unexampled thing .
There had been no begging in London streets for a quarter of a century .
But that night the police were evidently unwilling or unable to cope with the destitute who were invading those well-kept quarters of the town .
They had become stonily blind to anything but manifest disorder .
This time it was talk of the Central European powers suddenly attacking the Slav Confederacy , with France and England going to the help of the Slavs .
But the next night he found a tolerable meal awaiting the vagrants in the casual ward , and learnt from the workhouse master that all serviceable trained men were to be sent back on the morrow to their mobilisation centres .
The country was on the eve of war .
He was to go back through London to Surrey .
His first feeling , he records , was one of extreme relief that his days of 'hopeless battering at the underside of civilisation ' were at an end .
Here was something definite to do , something definitely provided for .
But his relief was greatly modified when he found that the mobilisation arrangements had been made so hastily and carelessly that for nearly thirty-six hours at the improvised depot at Epsom he got nothing either to eat or to drink but a cup of cold water .
The depot was absolutely unprovisioned , and no one was free to leave it .
It was to become a matter for subtle inquiry how far the millions of men and women outside the world of these specialists sympathised and agreed with their portentous activities .
One school of psychologists inclined to minimise this participation , but the balance of evidence goes to show that there were massive responses to these suggestions of the belligerent schemer .
Primitive man had been a fiercely combative animal ; innumerable generations had passed their lives in tribal warfare , and the weight of tradition , the example of history , the ideals of loyalty and devotion fell in easily enough with the incitements of the international mischief-maker .
The political ideas of the common man were picked up haphazard , there was practically nothing in such education as he was given that was ever intended to fit him for citizenship as such ( that conception only appeared , indeed , with the development of Modern State ideas ) , and it was therefore a comparatively easy matter to fill his vacant mind with the sounds and fury of exasperated suspicion and national aggression .
For example , Barnet describes the London crowd as noisily patriotic when presently his battalion came up from the depot to London , to entrain for the French frontier .
He tells of children and women and lads and old men cheering and shouting , of the streets and rows hung with the flags of the Allied Powers , of a real enthusiasm even among the destitute and unemployed .
The Labour Bureaux were now partially transformed into enrolment offices , and were centres of hotly patriotic excitement .
At every convenient place upon the line on either side of the Channel Tunnel there were enthusiastic spectators , and the feeling in the regiment , if a little stiffened and darkened by grim anticipations , was none the less warlike .
Most godlike of the three was Dubois .
It was for him to decide ; the others at most might suggest .
Her woman 's soul went out to this grave , handsome , still , old man , in a passion of instinctive worship .
And every one about him was the stronger and surer for that quiet face , that air of knowledge and unruffled confidence .
The clustering lights threw a score of shadows of him upon the maps , great bunches of him , versions of a commanding presence , lighter or darker , dominated the field , and pointed in every direction .
Those shadows symbolised his control .
When a messenger came from the wireless room to shift this or that piece in the game , to replace under amended reports one Central European regiment by a score , to draw back or thrust out or distribute this or that force of the Allies , the Marshal would turn his head and seem not to see , or look and nod slightly , as a master nods who approves a pupil 's self-correction .
'Yes , that 's better . '
And then it was as if thunder broke overhead .
She had all the sensations of waking up out of a dream .
She craned her head .
There was something there .
But everything was so still !
It was terribly lonely in this chaotic strangeness , and perhaps this man -- if it was a man , for it was difficult to see -- might for all his stillness be merely insensible .
He might have been stunned ... .
It was not a whole man there ; it was a piece of a man , the head and shoulders of a man that trailed down into a ragged darkness and a pool of shining black ... .
He had in his hands the black complement to all those other gifts science was urging upon unregenerate mankind , the gift of destruction , and he was an adventurous rather than a sympathetic type ... .
Away to the north-eastward , in a cloudless pool of gathering light and with all its nocturnal illuminations still blazing , was Berlin .
The left finger of the steersman verified roads and open spaces below upon the mica-covered square of map that was fastened by his wheel .
There in a series of lake-like expansions was the Havel away to the right ; over by those forests must be Spandau ; there the river split about the Potsdam island ; and right ahead was Charlottenburg cleft by a great thoroughfare that fell like an indicating beam of light straight to the imperial headquarters .
There , plain enough , was the Thiergarten ; beyond rose the imperial palace , and to the right those tall buildings , those clustering , beflagged , bemasted roofs , must be the offices in which the Central European staff was housed .
It was all coldly clear and colourless in the dawn .
The bomb flashed blinding scarlet in mid-air , and fell , a descending column of blaze eddying spirally in the midst of a whirlwind .
Both the aeroplanes were tossed like shuttlecocks , hurled high and sideways and the steersman , with gleaming eyes and set teeth , fought in great banking curves for a balance .
The gaunt man clung tight with hand and knees ; his nostrils dilated , his teeth biting his lips .
He was firmly strapped ... .
Always before in the development of warfare the shells and rockets fired had been but momentarily explosive , they had gone off in an instant once for all , and if there was nothing living or valuable within reach of the concussion and the flying fragments then they were spent and over .
But Carolinum , which belonged to the beta group of Hyslop 's so-called 'suspended degenerator ' elements , once its degenerative process had been induced , continued a furious radiation of energy and nothing could arrest it .
Of all Hyslop 's artificial elements , Carolinum was the most heavily stored with energy and the most dangerous to make and handle .
To this day it remains the most potent degenerator known .
What the earlier twentieth-century chemists called its half period was seventeen days ; that is to say , it poured out half of the huge store of energy in its great molecules in the space of seventeen days , the next seventeen days' emission was a half of that first period 's outpouring , and so on .
As with all radio-active substances this Carolinum , though every seventeen days its power is halved , though constantly it diminishes towards the imperceptible , is never entirely exhausted , and to this day the battle-fields and bomb fields of that frantic time in human history are sprinkled with radiant matter , and so centres of inconvenient rays .
A recent historical writer has described the world of that time as one that 'believed in established words and was invincibly blind to the obvious in things . '
Certainly it seems now that nothing could have been more obvious to the people of the earlier twentieth century than the rapidity with which war was becoming impossible .
And as certainly they did not see it .
They did not see it until the atomic bombs burst in their fumbling hands .
Yet the broad facts must have glared upon any intelligent mind .
All through the nineteenth and twentieth centuries the amount of energy that men were able to command was continually increasing .
Applied to warfare that meant that the power to inflict a blow , the power to destroy , was continually increasing .
There was no increase whatever in the ability to escape .
Every sort of passive defence , armour , fortifications , and so forth , was being outmastered by this tremendous increase on the destructive side .
Destruction was becoming so facile that any little body of malcontents could use it ; it was revolutionising the problems of police and internal rule .
Before the last war began it was a matter of common knowledge that a man could carry about in a handbag an amount of latent energy sufficient to wreck half a city .
These facts were before the minds of everybody ; the children in the streets knew them .
And yet the world still , as the Americans used to phrase it , 'fooled around ' with the paraphernalia and pretensions of war .
But let us return to Frederick Barnet 's Wander Jahre and its account of the experiences of a common man during the war time .
While these terrific disclosures of scientific possibility were happening in Paris and Berlin , Barnet and his company were industriously entrenching themselves in Belgian Luxembourg .
That battle went on for three days all over a great stretch of country between Louvain on the north and Longwy to the south .
It was essentially a rifle and infantry struggle .
The aeroplanes do not seem to have taken any decisive share in the actual fighting for some days , though no doubt they effected the strategy from the first by preventing surprise movements .
They were aeroplanes with atomic engines , but they were not provided with atomic bombs , which were manifestly unsuitable for field use , nor indeed had they any very effective kind of bomb .
And though they manoeuvred against each other , and there was rifle shooting at them and between them , there was little actual aerial fighting .
Either the airmen were indisposed to fight or the commanders on both sides preferred to reserve these machines for scouting ... .
'It was a queer thrill when these fellows came into sight , ' he confesses ; 'and not a bit like manoeuvres .
They halted for a time on the edge of the wood and then came forward in an open line .
They kept walking nearer to us and not looking at us , but away to the right of us .
Even when they began to be hit , and their officers ' whistles woke them up , they did n't seem to see us .
One or two halted to fire , and then they all went back towards the wood again .
They went slowly at first , looking round at us , then the shelter of the wood seemed to draw them , and they trotted .
I fired rather mechanically and missed , then I fired again , and then I became earnest to hit something , made sure of my sighting , and aimed very carefully at a blue back that was dodging about in the corn .
At first I could n't satisfy myself and did n't shoot , his movements were so spasmodic and uncertain ; then I think he came to a ditch or some such obstacle and halted for a moment .
`` GOT you , '' I whispered , and pulled the trigger .
'At first , ' he says , 'I was extraordinarily excited by my baptism of fire .
Then as the heat of the day came on I experienced an enormous tedium and discomfort .
The flies became extremely troublesome , and my little grave of a rifle pit was invaded by ants .
I could not get up or move about , for some one in the trees had got a mark on me .
I kept thinking of the dead Prussian down among the corn , and of the bitter outcries of my own man .
It WAS damned foolery .
But who was to blame ?
How had we got to this ?
But as yet Barnet had seen no more than the mildest beginnings of modern warfare .
So far he had taken part only in a little shooting .
The bayonet attack by which the advanced line was broken was made at a place called Croix Rouge , more than twenty miles away , and that night under cover of the darkness the rifle pits were abandoned and he got his company away without further loss .
The people of this country-side were not belligerents .
The interests and sympathies alike of Holland had been so divided that to the end she remained undecided and passive in the struggle of the world powers .
And everywhere along the roads taken by the marching armies clustered groups and crowds of impartially observant spectators , women and children in peculiar white caps and old-fashioned sabots , and elderly , clean-shaven men quietly thoughtful over their long pipes .
They had no fear of their invaders ; the days when 'soldiering ' meant bands of licentious looters had long since passed away ... .
It may be that watcher drifting in the pellucid gulf beneath the stars watched all through the night ; it may be that he dozed .
But if he gave way to so natural a proclivity , assuredly on the fourth night of the great flank march he was aroused , for that was the night of the battle in the air that decided the fate of Holland .
The aeroplanes were fighting at last , and suddenly about him , above and below , with cries and uproar rushing out of the four quarters of heaven , striking , plunging , oversetting , soaring to the zenith and dropping to the ground , they came to assail or defend the myriads below .
'There was something extraordinarily strange in this swift , noiseless convergence of nearly invisible combatants above the sleeping hosts .
Every one about me was still unconscious ; there was no sign as yet of any agitation among the shipping on the main canal , whose whole course , dotted with unsuspicious lights and fringed with fires , must have been clearly perceptible from above .
Then a long way off towards Alkmaar I heard bugles , and after that shots , and then a wild clamour of bells .
I determined to let my men sleep on for as long as they could ... .
Morning found Barnet still afloat .
The bows of his barge had been badly strained , and his men were pumping or baling in relays .
He had got about a dozen half-drowned people aboard whose boat had capsized near him , and he had three other boats in tow .
He was afloat , and somewhere between Amsterdam and Alkmaar , but he could not tell where .
It was a day that was still half night .
Gray waters stretched in every direction under a dark gray sky , and out of the waves rose the upper parts of houses , in many cases ruined , the tops of trees , windmills , in fact the upper third of all the familiar Dutch scenery ; and on it there drifted a dimly seen flotilla of barges , small boats , many overturned , furniture , rafts , timbering , and miscellaneous objects .
'One 's sense was of a destruction so far-reaching and of a world so altered that it seemed foolish to go in any direction and expect to find things as they had been before the war began .
I sat on the quarter-deck with Mylius my engineer and Kemp and two others of the non-commissioned officers , and we consulted upon our line of action .
We were foodless and aimless .
We agreed that our fighting value was extremely small , and that our first duty was to get ourselves in touch with food and instructions again .
Whatever plan of campaign had directed our movements was manifestly smashed to bits .
Mylius was of opinion that we could take a line westward and get back to England across the North Sea .
He calculated that with such a motor barge as ours it would be possible to reach the Yorkshire coast within four-and-twenty hours .
But this idea I overruled because of the shortness of our provisions , and more particularly because of our urgent need of water .
'Every boat we drew near now hailed us for water , and their demands did much to exasperate our thirst .
I decided that if we went away to the south we should reach hilly country , or at least country that was not submerged , and then we should be able to land , find some stream , drink , and get supplies and news .
Many of the barges adrift in the haze about us were filled with British soldiers and had floated up from the Nord See Canal , but none of them were any better informed than ourselves of the course of events .
`` Orders '' had , in fact , vanished out of the sky .
' '' Orders '' made a temporary reappearance late that evening in the form of a megaphone hail from a British torpedo boat , announcing a truce , and giving the welcome information that food and water were being hurried down the Rhine and were to be found on the barge flotilla lying over the old Rhine above Leiden . '
For a time in western Europe at least it was indeed as if civilisation had come to a final collapse .
These crowning buds upon the tradition that Napoleon planted and Bismarck watered , opened and flared 'like waterlilies of flame ' over nations destroyed , over churches smashed or submerged , towns ruined , fields lost to mankind for ever , and a million weltering bodies .
Was this lesson enough for mankind , or would the flames of war still burn amidst the ruins ?
As they walked up -- it was the king made the pace rather than Firmin -- they talked of the conference before them , and Firmin , with a certain want of assurance that would have surprised him in himself in the days of his Professorship , sought to define the policy of his companion .
'In its broader form , sir , ' said Firmin ; 'I admit a certain plausibility in this project of Leblanc 's , but I feel that although it may be advisable to set up some sort of general control for International affairs -- a sort of Hague Court with extended powers -- that is no reason whatever for losing sight of the principles of national and imperial autonomy . '
Firmin intimated a curiosity that veiled a dread .
'The Americans ran the Japanese aeroplane down into the sea and there the bomb got busted . '
'HE will haggle , sir . '
'Leblanc wo n't let him . '
'We will go just a little higher , ' he said .
'I want to find this unoccupied village they spoke of , and then we will drink that beer .
It ca n't be far .
We will drink the beer and throw away the bottles .
And then , Firmin , I shall ask you to look at things in a more generous light ... .
Because , you know , you must ... . '
He turned about and for some time the only sound they made was the noise of their boots upon the loose stones of the way and the irregular breathing of Firmin .
'It 's no good talking , Firmin , ' said the king .
'My mind 's as clear as daylight . '
For a time neither spoke , and the king ate and turned over in his mind the phrases of the speech he intended to make to the conference .
By virtue of the antiquity of his crown he was to preside , and he intended to make his presidency memorable .
Reassured of his eloquence , he considered the despondent and sulky Firmin for a space .
'At the levers , Firmin , ' said the king .
'It 's perfectly simple , ' he added to Firmin 's tremendous silence .
'But , ' cried Firmin , 'you must have sanctions !
Will there be no form of election , for example ? '
'Exactly my position , ' said the king , and felt pleased at what he had been saying .
said the king , 'the sovereign is a being more subtle than that .
Neither my family nor your emancipated people .
It is something that floats about us , and above us , and through us .
It is that common impersonal will and sense of necessity of which Science is the best understood and most typical aspect .
It is the mind of the race .
It is that which has brought us here , which has bowed us all to its demands ... . '
The American had to confess he could hardly agree with the king's estimate of their average .
His eyes flitted once more towards Leblanc .
For once the extreme naivete of Leblanc seems to have been mitigated by duplicity .
He went on with the general pacification of the world as if the Balkan submission was made in absolute good faith , and he announced the disbandment of the force of aeroplanes that hitherto guarded the council at Brissago upon the approaching fifteenth of July .
But instead he doubled the number upon duty on that eventful day , and made various arrangements for their disposition .
He consulted certain experts , and when he took King Egbert into his confidence there was something in his neat and explicit foresight that brought back to that ex-monarch's mind his half-forgotten fantasy of Leblanc as a fisherman under a green umbrella .
These objects were so tremendously important in the eyes of their captors that they disregarded the two dead men who lay bloody and broken amidst the wreckage as they might have disregarded dead frogs by a country pathway .
The king and his minister had talked at first in whispers ; they had fallen silent , for they found little now to express except a vague anxiety .
Away there on the mountain side were the white metal roofs of the long farm buildings beneath which the bomb factory and the bombs were hidden .
( The chemist who had made all these for the king had died suddenly after the declaration of Brissago . )
Nobody knew of that store of mischief now but the king and his adviser and three heavily faithful attendants ; the aviators who waited now in the midday blaze with their bomb-carrying machines and their passenger bomb-throwers in the exercising grounds of the motor-cyclist barracks below were still in ignorance of the position of the ammunition they were presently to take up .
It was time they started if the scheme was to work as Pestovitch had planned it .
It was a magnificent plan .
It aimed at no less than the Empire of the World .
The government of idealists and professors away there at Brissago was to be blown to fragments , and then east , west , north , and south those aeroplanes would go swarming over a world that had disarmed itself , to proclaim Ferdinand Charles , the new Caesar , the Master , Lord of the Earth .
It was a magnificent plan .
But the tension of this waiting for news of the success of the first blow was -- considerable .
Left to himself , the king could worry his moustache without stint ; he leant his elbows forward on the balcony and gave both of his long white hands to the work , so that he looked like a pale dog gnawing a bone .
Suppose they caught his men , what should he do ?
Suppose they caught his men ?
interrupted the king , and pointed upward with a long , lean finger .
Pestovitch followed that indication and then glanced for one questioning moment at the white face before him .
The ex-king from Brissago came like a draught through the curtains and attendants that gave a wide margin to King Ferdinand 's state , and the familiar confidence of his manner belied a certain hardness in his eye .
Firmin trotted behind him , and no one else was with him .
And as Ferdinand Charles rose to greet him , there came into the heart of the Balkan king again that same chilly feeling that he had felt upon the balcony -- and it passed at the careless gestures of his guest .
For surely any one might outwit this foolish talker who , for a mere idea and at the command of a little French rationalist in spectacles , had thrown away the most ancient crown in all the world .
Could it be that they had been delayed ?
Could it be that they had had to drop for repairs and were still uncaptured ?
Could it be that even now while this fool babbled , they were over there among the mountains heaving their deadly charge over the side of the aeroplane ?
And then again for an instant something -- like the faintest shadow of derision -- gleamed out of the envoy 's eyes and recalled that chilly feeling to King Ferdinand 's spine .
'When would you want to have this search ? '
'And then , you see , ' said the ex-king in that easy way of his , 'we'll have a lot of men here , borrow help from your police , and run through all your things .
And then everything will be over .
Meanwhile , if I may be your guest ... . '
When presently Pestovitch was alone with the king again , he found him in a state of jangling emotions .
His spirit was tossing like a wind-whipped sea .
One moment he was exalted and full of contempt for 'that ass ' and his search ; the next he was down in a pit of dread .
'They will find them , Pestovitch , and then he 'll hang us . '
The king glanced up and met a calm , round eye of light , that seemed to wink at him and vanish , leaving him blinded ... .
The automobile made its way through the narrow streets of the old town , which were still lit and uneasy -- for the fleet of airships overhead had kept the cafes open and people abroad -- over the great new bridge , and so by straggling outskirts to the country .
And all through his capital the king who hoped to outdo Caesar , sat back and was very still , and no one spoke .
And as they got out into the dark country they became aware of the searchlights wandering over the country-side like the uneasy ghosts of giants .
The king sat forward and looked at these flitting whitenesses , and every now and then peered up to see the flying ships overhead .
Presently one of these patches of moonlight came to rest about them and seemed to be following their automobile .
The king drew back .
'Tell him to go back , ' said the king , and tried to open the window .
For a few moments there was a grim struggle in the automobile ; a gripping of wrists and a blow .
'I ca n't go through with it , ' repeated the king , 'I ca n't go through with it . '
'Not if we were to give up now .
Not if we were to surrender the bombs .
It is you who brought me into this ... . '
'But if so , these infernal aeroplanes would go . '
But had it passed at once or lingered for just a second ?
'Not completely , ' cried Pestovitch .
'Leave a chink for us to go out by ... . '
The king broke into a cold perspiration .
Then Pestovitch answered : 'Only a poor farmer loading hay , ' he said , and picked up a huge hay fork and went forward softly .
Then suddenly he turned on an electric torch , and as he did so Pestovitch sprang forward .
'Get out of my barn ! '
he cried , and drove the fork full at the intruder 's chest .
He had a vague idea that so he might stab the man to silence .
But the man shouted loudly as the prongs pierced him and drove him backward , and instantly there was a sound of feet running across the yard .
'Bombs , ' cried the man upon the ground , struggling with the prongs in his hand , and as Pestovitch staggered forward into view with the force of his own thrust , he was shot through the body by one of the two new-comers .
The upper part of his face seemed to vanish .
But each carried a light of his own , and in another moment everything in the barn was visible again .
They shot Peter even as he held up his hands in sign of surrender .
'What else was there to do ? '
he said in answer to some internal protest .
The Brissago conference has been written about time after time , as though it were a gathering of the very flower of humanity .
Perched up there by the freak or wisdom of Leblanc , it had a certain Olympian quality , and the natural tendency of the human mind to elaborate such a resemblance would have us give its members the likenesses of gods .
It would be equally reasonable to compare it to one of those enforced meetings upon the mountain-tops that must have occurred in the opening phases of the Deluge .
The strength of the council lay not in itself but in the circumstances that had quickened its intelligence , dispelled its vanities , and emancipated it from traditional ambitions and antagonisms .
It was stripped of the accumulation of centuries , a naked government with all that freedom of action that nakedness affords .
And its problems were set before it with a plainness that was out of all comparison with the complicated and perplexing intimations of the former time .
The world on which the council looked did indeed present a task quite sufficiently immense and altogether too urgent for any wanton indulgence in internal dissension .
It may be interesting to sketch in a few phrases the condition of mankind at the close of the period of warring states , in the year of crisis that followed the release of atomic power .
It was a world extraordinarily limited when one measures it by later standards , and it was now in a state of the direst confusion and distress .
Into the mysteries of the solid globe under his feet he had not yet pierced for five miles , and it was still not forty years since , with a tragic pertinacity , he had clambered to the poles of the earth .
The limitless mineral wealth of the Arctic and Antarctic circles was still buried beneath vast accumulations of immemorial ice , and the secret riches of the inner zones of the crust were untapped and indeed unsuspected .
The higher mountain regions were known only to a sprinkling of guide-led climbers and the frequenters of a few gaunt hotels , and the vast rainless belts of land that lay across the continental masses , from Gobi to Sahara and along the backbone of America , with their perfect air , their daily baths of blazing sunshine , their nights of cool serenity and glowing stars , and their reservoirs of deep-lying water , were as yet only desolations of fear and death to the common imagination .
but this is preposterous !
What are people like ourselves to do in the meanwhile ?
I am a costumier .
All my connections and interests , above all my style , demand Paris .
'One can not suddenly begin to grow potatoes ! '
It is characteristic of the manner in which large enterprises forced themselves upon the Brissago council , that it was not until the end of the first year of their administration and then only with extreme reluctance that they would take up the manifest need for a lingua franca for the world .
They seem to have given little attention to the various theoretical universal languages which were proposed to them .
They wished to give as little trouble to hasty and simple people as possible , and the world-wide alstribution of English gave them a bias for it from the beginning .
The extreme simplicity of its grammar was also in its favour .
Never , of course , had there been so provisional a government .
It was of an extravagant illegality .
It was , indeed , hardly more than a club , a club of about a hundred persons .
At the outset there were ninety-three , and these were increased afterwards by the issue of invitations which more than balanced its deaths , to as many at one time as one hundred and nineteen .
Always its constitution has been miscellaneous .
At no time were these invitations issued with an admission that they recognised a right .
The old institution or monarchy had come out unexpectedly well in the light of the new regime .
Nine of the original members of the first government were crowned heads who had resigned their separate sovereignty , and at no time afterwards did the number of its royal members sink below six .
In their case there was perhaps a kind of attenuated claim to rule , but except for them and the still more infinitesimal pretensions of one or two ax-presidents of republics , no member of the council had even the shade of a right to his participation in its power .
It was natural , therefore , that its opponents should find a common ground in a clamour for representative government , and build high hopes upon a return , to parliamentary institutions .
There is no natural life of man .
He is , and always has been , a sheath of varied and even incompatible possibilities , a palimpsest of inherited dispositions .
It was the habit of many writers in the early twentieth century to speak of competition and the narrow , private life of trade and saving and suspicious isolation as though such things were in some exceptional way proper to the human constitution , and as though openness of mind and a preference for achievement over possession were abnormal and rather unsubstantial qualities .
How wrong that was the history of the decades immediately following the establishment of the world republic witnesses .
Once the world was released from the hardening insecurities of a needless struggle for life that was collectively planless and individually absorbing , it became apparent that there was in the vast mass of people a long , smothered passion to make things .
The world broke out into making , and at first mainly into aesthetic making .
This phase of history , which has been not inaptly termed the 'Efflorescence , ' is still , to a large extent , with us .
The majority of our population consists of artists , and the bulk of activity in the world lies no longer with necessities but with their elaboration , decoration , and refinement .
There has been an evident change in the quality of this making during recent years .
It becomes more purposeful than it was , losing something of its first elegance and prettiness and gaining in intensity ; but that is a change rather of hue than of nature .
That comes with a deepening philosophy and a sounder education .
For the first joyous exercises of fancy we perceive now the deliberation of a more constructive imagination .
There is a natural order in these things , and art comes before science as the satisfaction of more elemental needs must come before art , and as play and pleasure come in a human life before the development of a settled purpose ... .
'Whosoever would save his soul shall lose it , ' he wrote .
'That is the device upon the seal of this document , and the starting point of all we have to do .
It is a mistake to regard it as anything but a plain statement of fact .
It is the basis for your work .
You have to teach self-forgetfulness , and everything else that you have to teach is contributory and subordinate to that end .
Education is the release of man from self .
You have to widen the horizons of your children , encourage and intensify their curiosity and their creative impulses , and cultivate and enlarge their sympathies .
That is what you are for .
Under your guidance and the suggestions you will bring to bear on them , they have to shed the old Adam of instinctive suspicions , hostilities , and passions , and to find themselves again in the great being of the universe .
The little circles of their egotisms have to be opened out until they become arcs in the sweep of the racial purpose .
And this that you teach to others you must learn also sedulously yourselves .
Philosophy , discovery , art , every sort of skill , every sort of service , love : these are the means of salvation from that narrow loneliness of desire , that brooding preoccupation with self and egotistical relationships , which is hell for the individual , treason to the race , and exile from God ... . '
It would have seemed a strange thing to the men of the former time that it should be an open question as it is to-day whether the world is wholly Christian or not Christian at all .
But assuredly we have the spirit , and as surely have we left many temporary forms behind .
Christianity was the first expression of world religion , the first complete repudiation of tribalism and war and disputation .
That it fell presently into the ways of more ancient rituals can not alter that .
The common sense of mankind has toiled through two thousand years of chastening experience to find at last how sound a meaning attaches to the familiar phrases of the Christian faith .
The scientific thinker as he widens out to the moral problems of the collective life , comes inevitably upon the words of Christ , and as inevitably does the Christian , as his thought grows clearer , arrive at the world republic .
As for the claims of the sects , as for the use of a name and successions , we live in a time that has shaken itself free from such claims and consistencies .
His pilot descended to the great courtyard , and Karenin assisted by his secretary clambered down through the wing fabric and made his way to the officials who came out to receive him .
In this place , beyond infections and noise and any distractions , surgery had made for itself a house of research and a healing fastness .
The building itself would have seemed very wonderful to eyes accustomed to the flimsy architecture of an age when power was precious .
It was made of granite , already a little roughened on the outside by frost , but polished within and of a tremendous solidity .
And in a honeycomb of subtly lit apartments , were the spotless research benches , the operating tables , the instruments of brass , and fine glass and platinum and gold .
Men and women came from all parts of the world for study or experimental research .
They wore a common uniform of white and ate at long tables together , but the patients lived in an upper part of the buildings , and were cared for by nurses and skilled attendants ... .
'Just three hundred and ninety-two , ' said Rachel Borken .
'We are not sure enough yet to do things like that , ' he said .
'I have worked about seven years out of the past ten .
At times I go away -- down there .
At least I have to .
There is a sort of grayness comes over all this , one feels hungry for life , real , personal passionate life , love-making , eating and drinking for the fun of the thing , jostling crowds , having adventures , laughter -- above all laughter -- -- '
Karenin laughed cheerfully at his caution ... .
'When , ' asked Karenin suddenly , 'when will you operate ? '
Gardener was about to speak when Karenin went on again .
'I do not see why life should be judged by its last trailing thread of vitality ... .
I know it for the splendid thing it is -- I who have been a diseased creature from the beginning .
I know it well enough not to confuse it with its husks .
Remember that , Gardener , if presently my heart fails me and I despair , and if I go through a little phase of pain and ingratitude and dark forgetfulness before the end ... .
Do n't believe what I may say at the last ... .
If the fabric is good enough the selvage does n't matter .
It ca n't matter .
So long as you are alive you are just the moment , perhaps , but when you are dead then you are all your life from the first moment to the last ... . '
'While I lie here they are clearing up what is left of the bombs in London , ' he said .
'Then they are going to repair the ruins and make it all as like as possible to its former condition before the bombs fell .
Perhaps they will dig out the old house in St John 's Wood to which my father went after his expulsion from Russia ... .
That London of my memories seems to me like a place in another world .
For you younger people it must seem like a place that could never have existed . '
'It was an unwholesome world , ' reflected Karenin .
'I seem to remember everybody about my childhood as if they were ill .
They were sick with confusion .
Everybody was anxious about money and everybody was doing uncongenial things .
They ate a queer mixture of foods , either too much or too little , and at odd hours .
One sees how ill they were by their advertisements .
All this new region of London they are opening up now is plastered with advertisements of pills .
Everybody must have been taking pills .
In one of the hotel rooms in the Strand they have found the luggage of a lady covered up by falling rubble and unburnt , and she was equipped with nine different sorts of pill and tabloid .
The pill-carrying age followed the weapon-carrying age .
They are equally strange to us .
People 's skins must have been in a vile state .
Very few people were properly washed ; they carried the filth of months on their clothes .
All the clothes they wore were old clothes ; our way of pulping our clothes again after a week or so of wear would have seemed fantastic to them .
Their clothing hardly bears thinking about .
And the congestion of them !
Everybody was jostling against everybody in those awful towns .
People were run over and crushed by the hundred ; every year in London the cars and omnibuses alone killed or disabled twenty thousand people , in Paris it was worse ; people used to fall dead for want of air in the crowded ways .
The irritation of London , internal and external , must have been maddening .
It was a maddened world .
It is like thinking of a sick child .
One has the same effect of feverish urgencies and acute irrational disappointments .
'All history , ' he said , 'is a record of a childhood ... .
'All Europe offered its children to him , it sacrificed education , art , happiness and all its hopes of future welfare to follow the clatter of his sabre .
The monstrous worship of that old fool 's `` blood and iron '' passed all round the earth .
Until the atomic bombs burnt our way to freedom again .
'And yet it may be I am unjust to Bismarck , ' said Karenin , following his own thoughts .
'You see , men belong to their own age ; we stand upon a common stock of thought and we fancy we stand upon the ground .
I met a pleasant man the other day , a Maori , whose great-grandfather was a cannibal .
It chanced he had a daguerreotype of the old sinner , and the two were marvellously alike .
One felt that a little juggling with time and either might have been the other .
People are cruel and stupid in a stupid age who might be gentle and splendid in a gracious one .
The world also has its moods .
Think of the mental food of Bismarck 's childhood ; the humiliations of Napoleon 's victories , the crowded , crowning victory of the Battle of the Nations ... .
Everybody in those days , wise or foolish , believed that the division of the world under a multitude of governments was inevitable , and that it was going on for thousands of years more .
It WAS inevitable until it was impossible .
Any one who had denied that inevitability publicly would have been counted -- oh !
Old Bismarck was only just a little -- forcible , on the lines of the accepted ideas .
He thought that since there had to be national governments he would make one that was strong at home and invincible abroad .
Because he had fed with a kind of rough appetite upon what we can see now were very stupid ideas , that does not make him a stupid man .
We 've had advantages ; we 've had unity and collectivism blasted into our brains .
Where should we be now but for the grace of science ?
I should have been an embittered , spiteful , downtrodden member of the Russian Intelligenza , a conspirator , a prisoner , or an assassin .
You , my dear , would have been breaking dingy windows as a suffragette . '
'I know , ' said Karenin at last , 'that many people are saying this sort of thing .
I know that there is a vast release of love-making in the world .
This great wave of decoration and elaboration that has gone about the world , this Efflorescence , has of course laid hold of that .
I know that when you say that the world is set free , you interpret that to mean that the world is set free for love-making .
Down there , -- under the clouds , the lovers foregather .
I know your songs , Kahn , your half-mystical songs , in which you represent this old hard world dissolving into a luminous haze of love -- sexual love ... .
I do n't think you are right or true in that .
You are a young , imaginative man , and you see life -- ardently -- with the eyes of youth .
But the power that has brought man into these high places under this blue-veiled blackness of the sky and which beckons us on towards the immense and awful future of our race , is riper and deeper and greater than any such emotions ... .
'Think what we are .
It is but a yesterday in the endlessness of time that life was a dreaming thing , dreaming so deeply that it forgot itself as it dreamt , its lives , its individual instincts , its moments , were born and wondered and played and desired and hungered and grew weary and died .
Incalculable successions of vision , visions of sunlit jungle , river wilderness , wild forest , eager desire , beating hearts , soaring wings and creeping terror flamed hotly and then were as though they had never been .
Life was an uneasiness across which lights played and vanished .
And then we came , man came , and opened eyes that were a question and hands that were a demand and began a mind and memory that dies not when men die , but lives and increases for ever , an over-mind , a dominating will , a question and an aspiration that reaches to the stars ... .
Hunger and fear and this that you make so much of , this sex , are but the elementals of life out of which we have arisen .
All these elementals , I grant you , have to be provided for , dealt with , satisfied , but all these things have to be left behind . '
'But Love , ' said Kahn .
What is our future -- as women ?
Is it only that we have unlocked the doors of the imagination for you men ?
Let us speak of this question now .
It is a thing constantly in my thoughts , Karenin .
What do you think of us ?
You who must have thought so much of these perplexities . '
'I SAID , ' cried Edwards , 'that man 's imagination was more specialised for sex than the whole being of woman .
What woman would do a thing like that ?
Women do but submit to it or take advantage of it . '
'Of course , in the old days , ' said Edwards , 'men were tied to their city or their country , tied to the homes they owned or the work they did ... . '
'I am interested , ' said Karenin .
'I suppose in a little while men will cease to be tired .
I suppose in a little time you will give us something that will hurry away the fatigue products and restore our jaded tissues almost at once .
This old machine may be made to run without slacking or cessation . '
'That is possible , Karenin .
But there is much to learn . '
Presently he gave a little start .
Karenin desired that he might dream alone for a little while before he returned to the cell in which he was to sleep .
He was given relief for a pain that began to trouble him and wrapped warmly about with furs , for a great coldness was creeping over all things , and so they left him , and he sat for a long time watching the afterglow give place to the darkness of night .
Here the air is full of the clamour of rich and prosperous people invited to pay taxes , and beyond measure bitter .
They are going to live abroad , cut their charities , dismiss old servants , and do all sorts of silly , vindictive things .
We seem to be doing feeble next-to-nothings in the endowment of research .
Not one in twenty of the boys of the middle and upper classes learns German or gets more than a misleading smattering of physical science .
Most of them never learn to speak French .
Heaven alone knows what they do with their brains !
The British reading and thinking public probably does not number fifty thousand people all told .
It is difficult to see whence the necessary impetus for a national renascence is to come ... .
The universities are poor and spiritless , with no ambition to lead the country .
I met a Boy Scout recently .
He was hopeful in his way , but a little inadequate , I thought , as a basis for confidence in the future of the Empire .
This experience has restored all the keenness of my ancient interest in flying , which had become a little fagged and flat by too much hearing and reading about the thing and not enough participation .
Sixteen years ago , in the days of Langley and Lilienthal , I was one of the few journalists who believed and wrote that flying was possible ; it affected my reputation unfavourably , and produced in the few discouraged pioneers of those days a quite touching gratitude .
Over my mantel as I write hangs a very blurred and bad but interesting photograph that Professor Langley sent me sixteen years ago .
It shows the flight of the first piece of human machinery heavier than air that ever kept itself up for any length of time .
It was a model , a little affair that would not have lifted a cat ; it went up in a spiral and came down unsmashed , bringing back , like Noah 's dove , the promise of tremendous things .
Firstly , that I wish this article could be written by Samuel Warren .
And failing that , I wish that Charles Dickens , who wrote in his `` American Notes '' with such passionate disgust and hostility about the first Cunarder , retailing all the discomfort and misery of crossing the Atlantic by steamship , could have shared Mr. Holt 's experience .
It was not that the prophets professed any mystical and inexplicable illumination at which a sceptic might reasonably mock ; they were prepared with ample reasons for the things they foretold .
Now , quite as confidently , they point on to a new series of consequences , high probabilities that follow on all this tremendous development of swift , secure , and cheapened locomotion , just as they followed almost necessarily upon the mechanical developments of the last century .
People have hardly begun to speculate about the consequences of the return of humanity from a closely tethered to a migratory existence .
It is here that the prophet finds his chief opportunity .
Obviously , these great forces of transport are already straining against the limits of existing political areas .
Every country contains now an increasing ingredient of unenfranchised Uitlanders .
Every country finds a growing section of its home-born people either living largely abroad , drawing the bulk of their income from the exterior , and having their essential interests wholly or partially across the frontier .
To us , the great mass of common Englishmen , who have no place in the hierarchy of our land , who do not attend Courts nor encounter uniforms , whose function is at most spectacular , who stand in the street and watch the dignitaries and the liveries pass by , this sense of critical expectation is perhaps greater than it is for those more immediately concerned in the spectacle .
They have had their parts to play , their symbolic acts to perform , they have sat in their privileged places , and we have waited at the barriers until their comfort and dignity was assured .
I can conceive many of them , a little fatigued , preparing now for social dispersal , relaxing comfortably into gossip , discussing the detail of these events with an air of things accomplished .
They will decide whether the Coronation has been a success and whether everything has or has not passed off very well .
For us in the great crowd nothing has as yet succeeded or passed off well or ill. We are intent upon a King newly anointed and crowned , a King of whom we know as yet very little , but who has , nevertheless , roused such expectation as no King before him has done since Tudor times , in the presence of gigantic opportunities .
The deaths and accessions of Kings , the changing of names and coins and symbols and persons , a little force our minds in the marking off of epochs .
We are brought to weigh one generation against another , to reckon up our position and note the characteristics of a new phase .
What lies before us in the next decades ?
Is England going on to fresh achievements , to a renewed and increased predominance , or is she falling into a secondary position among the peoples of the world ?
I have watched a great deal of patriotic effort during the last decade , I have seen enormous expenditures of will , emotion and material for the sake of our future , and I am deeply impressed , not indeed by any effect of lethargy , but by the second-rate quality and the shortness and weakness of aim in very much that has been done .
I miss continually that sharply critical imaginativeness which distinguishes all excellent work , which shines out supremely in Cromwell 's creation of the New Model , or Nelson 's plan of action at Trafalgar , as brightly as it does in Newton 's investigation of gravitation , Turner 's rendering of landscape , or Shakespeare 's choice of words , but which can not be absent altogether if any achievement is to endure .
We seem to have busy , energetic people , no doubt , in abundance , patient and industrious administrators and legislators ; but have we any adequate supply of really creative ability ?
Nor can I believe that financial entanglements greatly strengthen the bonds of an empire in any case .
We lost the American colonies because we interfered with their fiscal arrangements , and it was Napoleon 's attempt to strangle the Continental trade with Great Britain that began his downfall .
I do not find in the ordinary relations of life that business relations necessarily sustain intercourse .
The relations of buyer and seller are ticklish relations , very liable to strains and conflicts .
I do not find people grow fond of their butchers and plumbers , and I doubt whether if one were obliged by some special taxation to deal only with one butcher or one plumber , it would greatly endear the relationship .
Forced buying is irritated buying , and it is the forbidden shop that contains the coveted goods .
Nor do I find , to take another instance , among the hotel staffs of Switzerland and the Riviera -- who live almost entirely upon British gold -- those impassioned British imperialist views the economic link theory would lead me to expect .
And another link , too , upon which much stress is laid but about which I have very grave doubts , is the possibility of a unified organisation of the Empire for military defence .
We are to have , it is suggested , an imperial Army and an imperial Navy , and so far , no doubt , as the guaranteeing of a general peace goes , we may develop a sense of participation in that way .
But it is well in these islands to remember that our extraordinary Empire has no common enemy to weld it together from without .
You see , the British Empire has no common economic interests and no natural common enemy .
It is not adapted to any form of Zollverein or any form of united aggression .
Visibly , on the map of the world it has a likeness to open hands , while the German Empire -- except for a few ill-advised and imitative colonies -- is clenched into a central European unity .
No empire , it may be urged , has ever attempted anything of this sort , but no empire like the British has ever yet existed .
Its conditions and needs are unprecedented , its consolidation is a new problem , to be solved , if it is solved at all , by untried means .
And in the English language as a vehicle of thought and civilisation alone is that means to be found .
Our country is , I think , in a dangerous state of social disturbance .
The discontent of the labouring mass of the community is deep and increasing .
It may be that we are in the opening phase of a real and irreparable class war .
Now for that great multitude of prosperous people who find themselves at once deeply concerned in our present social and economic crisis , and either helplessly entangled in party organisation or helplessly outside politics , the elimination and cure of this disease of statecraft , the professional politician , has become a very urgent matter .
To destroy him , to get him back to his law courts and keep him there , it is necessary to destroy the machinery of the party system that sustains him , and to adopt some electoral method that will no longer put the independent representative man at a hopeless disadvantage against the party nominee .
Such a method is to be found in proportional representation with large constituencies , and to that we must look for our ultimate liberation from our present masters , these politician barristers .
But the Labour situation can not wait for this millennial release , and for the current issue it seems to me patent that every reasonable prosperous man will , even at the cost to himself of some trouble and hard thinking , do his best to keep as much of this great and acute controversy as he possibly can out of the lawyer 's and mere politician 's hands and in his own .
Leave Labour to the lawyers , and we shall go very deeply into trouble indeed before this business is over .
They will score their points , they will achieve remarkable agreements full of the possibility of subsequent surprises , they will make reputations , and do everything Heaven and their professional training have made them to do , and they will exasperate and exasperate !
This is the obvious devotion of a large and growing proportion of the time and energy of the owning and ruling classes to pleasure and excitement , and the way in which this spectacle of amusement and adventure is now being brought before the eyes and into the imagination of the working man .
[ Footnote 1 : Larkinism comes to endorse me since this was written . ]
And concurrently with the systematic reconstruction of a large portion of our industries upon these lines there will have to be a vigorous development of the attempts that are already being made , in garden cities , garden suburbs , and the like , to re-house the mass of our population in a more civilised and more agreeable manner .
Probably that is not going to pay from the point of view of the money-making business man , but we prosperous people have to understand that there are things more important and more profitable than money-making , and we have to tax ourselves not merely in money , but in time , care , and effort in the matter .
Half the money that goes out of England to Switzerland and the Riviera ought to go to the extremely amusing business of clearing up ugly corners and building jolly and convenient workmen 's cottages -- even if we do it at a loss .
It is part of our discharge for the leisure and advantages the system has given us , part of that just give and take , over and above the solicitor 's and bargain-hunter 's and money-lender's conception of justice , upon which social order ultimately rests .
We have to do it not in a mood of patronage , but in a mood of attentive solicitude .
If not on high grounds , then on low grounds our class has to set to work and make those other classes more interested and comfortable and contented .
It is what we are for .
It is quite impossible for workmen and poor people generally to plan estates and arrange their own homes ; they are entirely at the mercy of the wealthy in this matter .
There is not a slum , not a hovel , not an eyesore upon the English landscape for which some well-off owner is not ultimately to be blamed or excused , and the less we leave of such things about the better for us in that day of reckoning between class and class which now draws so near .
Individuals and groups and trades have found themselves in imperfectly apprehended and difficult times , and have reluctantly altered their ways and ideas piecemeal under pressure .
Sometimes they have succeeded in rubbing along upon the new lines , and sometimes the struggle has submerged them , but no community has ever yet had the will and the imagination to recast and radically alter its social methods as a whole .
The idea of such a reconstruction has never been absent from human thought since the days of Plato , and it has been enormously reinforced by the spreading material successes of modern science , successes due always to the substitution of analysis and reasoned planning for trial and the rule of thumb .
But it has never yet been so believed in and understood as to render any real endeavour to reconstruct possible .
The experiment has always been altogether too gigantic for the available faith behind it , and there have been against it the fear of presumption , the interests of all advantaged people , and the natural sloth of humanity .
We do but emerge now from a period of deliberate happy-go-lucky and the influence of Herbert Spencer , who came near raising public shiftlessness to the dignity of a national philosophy .
Everything would adjust itself -- if only it was left alone .
It is to a quite extraordinary extent a thing apart from our national life .
It becomes more and more so .
To go into the House of Commons is to go aside out of the general stream of the community 's vitality into a corner where little is learnt and much is concocted , into a specialised Assembly which is at once inattentive to and monstrously influential in our affairs .
There was a period when the debates in the House of Commons were an integral , almost a dominant , part of our national thought , when its speeches were read over in tens of thousands of homes , and a large and sympathetic public followed the details of every contested issue .
Now a newspaper that dared to fill its columns mainly with parliamentary debates , with a full report of the trivialities the academic points , the little familiar jokes , and entirely insincere pleadings which occupy that gathering would court bankruptcy .
Now such a system of representation is surely a system to be destroyed at any cost , because it stifles our national discussion and thwarts our national will .
And we can leave no possible method of alteration untried .
It is not rational that a great people should be baffled by the mere mechanical degeneration of an electoral method too crudely conceived .
There exist alternatives , and to these alternatives we must resort .
Since John Stuart Mill first called attention to the importance of the matter there has been a systematic study of the possible working of electoral methods , and it is now fairly proved that in proportional representation , with large constituencies returning each many members , there is to be found a way of escape from this disastrous embarrassment of our public business by the party wire-puller and the party nominee .
And as a last example of the present hysterical disposition to scrap things before they have been fairly tried is the outcry against examinations , which has done so much to take the keenness off the edge of school work in the last few years .
Because a great number of examiners chosen haphazard turned out to be negligent and incompetent as examiners , because their incapacity created a cynical trade in cramming , a great number of people have come to the conclusion , just as examinations are being improved into efficiency , that all examinations are bad .
In particular that excellent method of bringing new blood and new energy into the public services and breaking up official gangs and cliques , the competitive examination system , has been discredited , and the wire-puller and the influential person are back again tampering with a steadily increasing proportion of appointments ... .
`` Is a railway porter a railway porter first and a man afterwards , or is he a man first and incidentally a railway porter ? ''
Such is Syndicalism , the cheap Labour Panacea , to which the more passionate and less intelligent portion of the younger workers , impatient of the large constructive developments of modern Socialism , drifts steadily .
It is the direct and logical reaction to our present economic system , which has counted our workers neither as souls nor as heads , but as hands .
They are beginning to accept the suggestions of that method .
It is the culmination in aggression of that , at first , entirely protective trade unionism which the individual selfishness and collective short-sightedness and State blindness of our owning and directing and ruling classes forced upon the working man .
At first trade unionism was essentially defensive ; it was the only possible defence of the workers , who were being steadily pressed over the margin of subsistence .
It was a nearly involuntary resistance to class debasement .
Mr. Vernon Hartshorn has expressed it as that in a recent article .
But his paper , if one read it from beginning to end , displayed , compactly and completely , the unavoidable psychological development of the specialised labour case .
He began in the mildest tones with those now respectable words , a `` guaranteed minimum '' of wages , housing , and so forth , and ended with a very clear intimation of an all-labour community .
And the mention of a compulsory period of labour service for everyone -- a year or so with the pickaxe as well as with the rifle -- leads me to another idea that I believe will stand the test of unlimited criticism , and that is a total condemnation of all these eight-hour-a-day , early-closing , guaranteed-weekly-half-holiday notions that are now so prevalent in Liberal circles .
Under existing conditions , in our system of private enterprise and competition , these restrictions are no doubt necessary to save a large portion of our population from lives of continuous toil , but , like trade unionism , they are a necessity of our present conditions , and not a way to a better social state .
If we rescue ourselves as a community from poverty and discomfort , we must take care not to fling ourselves into something far more infuriating to a normal human being -- and that is boredom .
The prospect of a carefully inspected sanitary life , tethered to some light , little , uninteresting daily job , six or eight hours of it , seems to me -- and I am sure I write here for most normal , healthy , active people -- more awful than hunger and death .
It is far more in the quality of the human spirit , and still more what we all in our hearts want the human spirit to be , to fling itself with its utmost power at a job and do it with passion .
It is along that line that I feel a large part of our labour reorganisation , over and beyond that conscription , must ultimately go .
The community as a whole would , I believe , get far more out of a man if he had such a comparatively brief passion of toil than if he worked , with occasional lapses into unemployment , drearily all his life .
But at present , with our existing system of employment , one can not arrange so comprehensive a treatment of a man 's life .
There is needed some State or quasi-public organisation which shall stand between the man and the employer , act as his banker and guarantor , and exact his proper price .
Then , with his toil over , he would have an adequate pension and be free to do nothing or anything else as he chose .
In a Socialistic order of society , where the State would also be largely the employer , such a method would be , of course , far more easily contrived .
This in general terms is what is here intended by the phrase the Normal Social Life .
It is still the substantial part of the rural life of all Europe and most Asia and Africa , and it has been the life of the great majority of human beings for immemorial years .
It is the root life .
It rests upon the soil , and from that soil below and its reaction to the seasons and the moods of the sky overhead have grown most of the traditions , institutions , sentiments , beliefs , superstitions , and fundamental songs and stories of mankind .
Now this human over-life may take either beneficent or maleficent or neutral aspects towards the general life of humanity .
It may present itself as law and pacification , as a positive addition and superstructure to the Normal Social Life , as roads and markets and cities , as courts and unifying monarchies , as helpful and directing religious organisations , as literature and art and science and philosophy , reflecting back upon the individual in the Normal Social Life from which it arose , a gilding and refreshment of new and wider interests and added pleasures and resources .
One may define certain phases in the history of various countries when this was the state of affairs , when a countryside of prosperous communities with a healthy family life and a wide distribution of property , animated by roads and towns and unified by a generally intelligible religious belief , lived in a transitory but satisfactory harmony under a sympathetic government .
I take it that this is the condition to which the minds of such original and vigorous reactionary thinkers as Mr. G.K. Chesterton and Mr. Hilaire Belloc for example turn , as being the most desirable state of mankind .
The Normal Social Life has been defined as one based on agriculture , traditional and essentially unchanging .
It has needed no toleration and displayed no toleration for novelty and strangeness .
Its beliefs have been on such a nature as to justify and sustain itself , and it has had an intrinsic hostility to any other beliefs .
The God of its community has been a jealous god even when he was only a tribal and local god .
Only very occasionally in history until the coming of the modern period do we find any human community relaxing from this ancient and more normal state of entire intolerance towards ideas or practices other than its own .
When toleration and a receptive attitude towards alien ideas was manifested in the Old World , it was at some trading centre or political centre ; new ideas and new religions came by water along the trade routes .
And such toleration as there was rarely extended to active teaching and propaganda .
Even in liberal Athens the hemlock was in the last resort at the service of the ancient gods and the ancient morals against the sceptical critic .
Both these movements , and , indeed , all movements that are not movements for the subjugation of innovation and the restoration of tradition , are vague in the prospect they contemplate .
They produce no definite forecasts of the quality of the future towards which they so confidently indicate the way .
But this is less true of modern socialism than of its antithesis , and it becomes less and less true as socialism , under an enormous torrent of criticism , slowly washes itself clean from the mass of partial statement , hasty misstatement , sheer error and presumption that obscured its first emergence .
These are people who really do consider the Normal Social Life as the only proper and desirable life for the great mass of humanity , and they are fully prepared to subordinate all exceptional and surplus lives to the moral standards and limitations that arise naturally out of the Normal Social Life .
They desire a state in which property is widely distributed , a community of independent families protected by law and an intelligent democratic statecraft from the economic aggressions of large accumulations and linked by a common religion .
Their attitude to the forces of change is necessarily a hostile attitude .
They are disposed to regard innovations in transit and machinery as undesirable , and even mischievous disturbances of a wholesome equilibrium .
They are at least unfriendly to any organisation of scientific research , and scornful of the pretensions of science .
Criticisms of the methods of logic , scepticism of the more widely diffused human beliefs , they would classify as insanity .
Two able English writers , Mr. G.K. Chesterton and Mr. Belloc , have given the clearest expression to this system of ideals , and stated an admirable case for it .
They present a conception of vinous , loudly singing , earthy , toiling , custom-ruled , wholesome , and insanitary men ; they are pagan in the sense that their hearts are with the villagers and not with the townsmen , Christian in the spirit of the parish priest .
There are no other Conservators so clear-headed and consistent .
But their teaching is merely the logical expression of an enormous amount of conservative feeling .
Vast multitudes of less lucid minds share their hostility to novelty and research ; hate , dread , and are eager to despise science , and glow responsive to the warm , familiar expressions of primordial feelings and immemorial prejudices The rural conservative , the liberal of the allotments and small-holdings type , Mr. Roosevelt -- in his Western-farmer , philoprogenitive phase as distinguished from the phase of his more imperialist moments -- all present themselves as essentially Conservators as seekers after and preservers of the Normal Social Life .
So , too , do Socialists of the William Morris type .
The mind of William Morris was profoundly reactionary He hated the whole trend of later nineteenth-century modernism with the hatred natural to a man of considerable scholarship and intense aesthetic sensibilities .
His mind turned , exactly as Mr. Belloc 's turns , to the finished and enriched Normal Social Life of western Europe in the middle ages , but , unlike Mr. Belloc , he believed that , given private ownership of land and the ordinary materials of life , there must necessarily be an aggregatory process , usury , expropriation , the development of an exploiting wealthy class .
He believed profit was the devil .
His `` News from Nowhere '' pictures a communism that amounted in fact to little more than a system of private ownership of farms and trades without money or any buying and selling , in an atmosphere of geniality , generosity , and mutual helpfulness .
Mr. Belloc , with a harder grip upon the realities of life , would have the widest distribution of proprietorship , with an alert democratic government continually legislating against the protean reappearances of usury and accumulation and attacking , breaking up , and redistributing any large unanticipated bodies of wealth that appeared .
But both men are equally set towards the Normal Social Life , and equally enemies of the New .
The so-called `` socialist '' land legislation of New Zealand again is a tentative towards the realisation of the same school of ideas : great estates are to be automatically broken up , property is to be kept disseminated ; a vast amount of political speaking and writing in America and throughout the world enforces one's impression of the widespread influence of Conservator ideals .
For the greater portion of a century socialism has been before the world , and it is not perhaps premature to attempt a word or so of analysis of that great movement in the new terms we are here employing .
The origins of the socialist idea were complex and multifarious never at any time has it succeeded in separating out a statement of itself that was at once simple , complete and acceptable to any large proportion of those who call themselves socialists .
But always it has pointed to two or three definite things .
The first of these is that unlimited freedoms of private property , with increasing facilities of exchange , combination , and aggrandisement , become more and more dangerous to human liberty by the expropriation and reduction to private wages slavery of larger and larger proportions of the population .
Every school of socialism states this in some more or less complete form , however divergent the remedial methods suggested by the different schools .
And , next , every school of socialism accepts the concentration of management and property as necessary , and declines to contemplate what is the typical Conservator remedy , its re-fragmentation .
Accordingly it sets up not only against the large private owner , but against owners generally , the idea of a public proprietor , the State , which shall hold in the collective interest .
But where the earlier socialisms stopped short , and where to this day socialism is vague , divided , and unprepared , is upon the psychological problems involved in that new and largely unprecedented form of proprietorship , and upon the still more subtle problems of its attainment .
These are vast , and profoundly , widely , and multitudinously difficult problems , and it was natural and inevitable that the earlier socialists in the first enthusiasm of their idea should minimise these difficulties , pretend in the fullness of their faith that partial answers to objections were complete answers , and display the common weaknesses of honest propaganda the whole world over .
Socialism is now old enough to know better .
Few modern socialists present their faith as a complete panacea , and most are now setting to work in earnest upon these long-shirked preliminary problems of human interaction through which the vital problem of a collective head and brain can alone be approached .
A considerable proportion of the socialist movement remains , as it has been from the first , vaguely democratic .
It points to collective ownership with no indication of the administrative scheme it contemplates to realise that intention .
Necessarily it remains a formless claim without hands to take hold of the thing it desires .
Indeed in a large number of cases it is scarcely more than a resentful consciousness in the expropriated masses of social disintegration .
It spends its force very largely in mere revenges upon property as such , attacks simply destructive by reason of the absence of any definite ulterior scheme .
It is an ill-equipped and planless belligerent who must destroy whatever he captures because he can neither use nor take away .
A council of democratic socialists in possession of London would be as capable of an orderly and sustained administration as the Anabaptists in Munster .
But the discomforts and disorders of our present planless system do tend steadily to the development of this crude socialistic spirit in the mass of the proletariat ; merely vindictive attacks upon property , sabotage , and the general strike are the logical and inevitable consequences of an uncontrolled concentration of property in a few hands , and such things must and will go on , the deep undertow in the deliquescence of the Normal Social Life , until a new justice , a new scheme of compensations and satisfactions is attained , or the Normal Social Life re-emerges .
This second method of attack brought the Fabian movement into co-operation with a large amount of benevolent and constructive influence outside the socialist ranks altogether .
Few wealthy people really grudge the poor a share of the necessities of life , and most are quite willing to assist in projects for such a distribution .
But while these schemes naturally involved a very great amount of regulation and regimentation of the affairs of the poor , the Fabian Society fell away more and more from its associated proposals for the socialisation of the rich .
The Fabian project changed steadily in character until at last it ceased to be in any sense antagonistic to wealth as such .
If the lion did not exactly lie down with the lamb , at any rate the man with the gun and the alleged social mad dog returned very peaceably together .
The Fabian hunt was up .
I am careful here to write `` for labour '' and not `` of Labour , '' because it is entirely against the spirit of the Great State that any section of the people should be set aside as a class to do most of the monotonous , laborious , and uneventful things for the community .
That is practically the present arrangement , and that , with a quickened sense of the need of breaking people in to such a life , is the ideal of the bureaucratic Servile State to which , in common with the Conservators , we are bitterly opposed .
And here I know I am at my most difficult , most speculative , and most revolutionary point .
We who look to the Great State as the present aim of human progress believe a state may solve its economic problem without any section whatever of the community being condemned to lifelong labour .
And contemporary events , the phenomena of recent strikes , the phenomena of sabotage , carry out the suggestion that in a community where nearly everyone reads extensively travels about , sees the charm and variety in the lives of prosperous and leisurely people , no class is going to submit permanently to modern labour conditions without extreme resistance , even after the most elaborate Labour Conciliation schemes and social minima are established Things are altogether too stimulating to the imagination nowadays .
Of all impossible social dreams that belief in tranquillised and submissive and virtuous Labour is the wildest of all .
No sort of modern men will stand it .
They will as a class do any vivid and disastrous thing rather than stand it .
Even the illiterate peasant will only endure lifelong toil under the stimulus of private ownership and with the consolations of religion ; and the typical modern worker has neither the one nor the other .
For a time , indeed , for a generation or so even , a labour mass may be fooled or coerced , but in the end it will break out against its subjection , even if it breaks out to a general social catastrophe .
The Marxist and the democratic socialist generally shirk this riddle altogether ; the Fabian conception of a bureaucracy , official to the extent of being a distinct class and cult , exists only as a starting-point for healthy repudiations .
Whatever else may be worked out in the subtler answers our later time prepares , nothing can be clearer than that the necessary machinery of government must be elaborately organised to prevent the development of a managing caste in permanent conspiracy , tacit or expressed , against the normal man .
Quite apart from the danger of unsympathetic and fatally irritating government there can be little or no doubt that the method of making men officials for life is quite the worst way of getting official duties done .
Officialdom is a species of incompetence .
This rather priggish , teachable , and well-behaved sort of boy , who is attracted by the prospect of assured income and a pension to win his way into the Civil Service , and who then by varied assiduities rises to a sort of timidly vindictive importance , is the last person to whom we would willingly entrust the vital interests of a nation .
We want people who know about life at large , who will come to the public service seasoned by experience , not people who have specialised and acquired that sort of knowledge which is called , in much the same spirit of qualification as one speaks of German Silver , Expert Knowledge .
It is clear our public servants and officials must be so only for their periods of service .
They must be taught by life , and not `` trained '' by pedagogues .
In every continuing job there is a time when one is crude and blundering , a time , the best time , when one is full of the freshness and happiness of doing well , and a time when routine has largely replaced the stimulus of novelty .
The Great State will , I feel convinced , regard changes in occupation as a proper circumstance in the life of every citizen ; it will value a certain amateurishness in its service , and prefer it to the trite omniscience of the stale official .
On that score of the necessity or versatility , if on no other score , I am flatly antagonistic to the conceptions of `` Guild Socialism '' which have arisen recently out of the impact of Mr. Penty and Syndicalism upon the uneasy intelligence of Mr. Orage .
By conscription I mean the compulsory enlistment for a term of service in the Army of the whole manhood of the country .
And I am writing now from the point of view merely of military effectiveness .
The educational value of a universal national service , the idea which as a Socialist I support very heartily , of making every citizen give a year or so of his life to our public needs , are matters quite outside my present discussion .
What I am writing about now is this idea that the country can be strengthened for war by making every man in it a bit of a soldier .
But that brings me to my second contention , which is that we do not want such an army .
I believe that the vast masses of men in uniform maintained by the Continental Powers at the present time are enormously overrated as fighting machines .
I see Germany in the likeness of a boxer with a mailed fist as big as and rather heavier than its body , and I am convinced that when the moment comes for that mailed fist to be lifted , the whole disproportionate system will topple over .
The military ascendancy of the future lies with the country that dares to experiment most , that experiments best , and meanwhile keeps its actual fighting force fit and admirable and small and flexible .
The experience of war during the last fifteen years has been to show repeatedly the enormous defensive power of small , scientifically handled bodies of men .
These huge conscript armies are made up not of masses of military muscle , but of a huge proportion of military fat .
Their one way of fighting will be to fall upon an antagonist with all their available weight , and if he is mobile and dexterous enough to decline that issue of adiposity they will become a mere embarrassment to their own people .
Modern weapons and modern contrivance are continually decreasing the number of men who can be employed efficiently upon a length of front .
I doubt if there is any use for more than 400,000 men upon the whole Franco-Belgian frontier at the present time .
Such an army , properly supplied , could -- so far as terrestrial forces are concerned -- hold that frontier against any number of assailants .
The bigger the forces brought against it the sooner the exhaustion of the attacking power .
Now , it is for employment upon that frontier , and for no other conceivable purpose in the world , that Great Britain is asked to create a gigantic conscript army .
During these last few years of worry and bluster across the North Sea we have a little forgotten India in our calculations .
As Germany faces round eastward again , as she must do before very long , we shall find India resuming its former central position in our ideas of international politics .
With India we may pursue one of two policies : we may keep her divided and inefficient for war , as she is at present , and hold her and own her and defend her as a prize , or we may arm her and assist her development into a group of quasi-independent English-speaking States -- in which case she will become our partner and possibly at last even our senior partner .
But that is by the way .
What I am pointing out now is that whether we fight Germany or not , a time is drawing near when Germany will cease to be our war objective and we shall cease to be Germany 's war objective , and when there will have to be a complete revision of our military and naval equipment in relation to those remoter , vaster Asiatic possibilities .
And if the novel is to be recognised as something more than a relaxation , it has also , I think , to be kept free from the restrictions imposed upon it by the fierce pedantries of those who would define a general form for it .
Every art nowadays must steer its way between the rocks of trivial and degrading standards and the whirlpool of arbitrary and irrational criticism .
Whenever criticism of any art becomes specialised and professional whenever a class of adjudicators is brought into existence , those adjudicators are apt to become as a class distrustful of their immediate impressions , and anxious for methods of comparison between work and work , they begin to emulate the classifications and exact measurements of a science , and to set up ideals and rules as data for such classification and measurements .
They develop an alleged sense of technique , which is too often no more than the attempt to exact a laboriousness of method , or to insist upon peculiarities of method which impress the professional critic not so much as being merits as being meritorious .
This sort of thing has gone very far with the critical discussion both of the novel and the play .
You have all heard that impressive dictum that some particular theatrical display , although moving , interesting , and continually entertaining from start to finish , was for occult technical reasons `` not a play , '' and in the same way you are continually having your appreciation of fiction dashed by the mysterious parallel condemnation , that the story you like `` is n't a novel . ''
The novel has been treated as though its form was as well-defined as the sonnet .
Some year or so ago , for example , there was a quite serious discussion , which began , I believe , in a weekly paper devoted to the interests of various nonconformist religious organisations , about the proper length for a novel .
The critic was to begin his painful duties with a yard measure .
The matter was taken up with profound gravity by the _Westminster Gazette_ , and a considerable number of literary men and women were circularised and asked to state , in the face of `` Tom Jones , '' `` The Vicar of Wakefield , '' `` The Shabby-Genteel Story , '' and `` Bleak House , '' just exactly how long the novel ought to be .
Our replies varied according to the civility of our natures , but the mere attempt to raise the question shows , I think , how widespread among the editorial , paragraph-writing , opinion-making sort of people is this notion of prescribing a definite length and a definite form for the novel .
In the newspaper correspondence that followed , our friend the weary giant made a transitory appearance again .
We were told the novel ought to be long enough for him to take up after dinner and finish before his whisky at eleven .
That was obviously a half-forgotten echo of Edgar Allan Poe 's discussion of the short story .
Edgar Allan Poe was very definite upon the point that the short story should be finished at a sitting .
But the novel and short story are two entirely different things , and the train of reasoning that made the American master limit the short story to about an hour of reading as a maximum , does not apply to the longer work .
A short story is , or should be , a simple thing ; it aims at producing one single , vivid effect ; it has to seize the attention at the outset , and never relaxing , gather it together more and more until the climax is reached .
The limits of the human capacity to attend closely therefore set a limit to it ; it must explode and finish before interruption occurs or fatigue sets in .
But the novel I hold to be a discursive thing ; it is not a single interest , but a woven tapestry of interests ; one is drawn on first by this affection and curiosity , and then by that ; it is something to return to , and I do not see that we can possibly set any limit to its extent .
The distinctive value of the novel among written works of art is in characterisation , and the charm of a well-conceived character lies , not in knowing its destiny , but in watching its proceedings .
For my own part , I will confess that I find all the novels of Dickens , long as they are , too short for me .
I am sorry they do not flow into one another more than they do .
I wish Micawber and Dick Swiveller and Sairey Gamp turned up again in other novels than their own , just as Shakespeare ran the glorious glow of Falstaff through a group of plays .
But Dickens tried this once when he carried on the Pickwick Club into `` Master Humphrey 's Clock . ''
That experiment was unsatisfactory , and he did not attempt anything of the sort again .
Following on the days of Dickens , the novel began to contract , to subordinate characterisation to story and description to drama ; considerations of a sordid nature , I am told , had to do with that ; something about a guinea and a half and six shillings with which we will not concern ourselves -- but I rejoice to see many signs to-day that that phase of narrowing and restriction is over , and that there is every encouragement for a return towards a laxer , more spacious form of novel-writing .
The movement is partly of English origin , a revolt against those more exacting and cramping conceptions of artistic perfection to which I will recur in a moment , and a return to the lax freedom of form , the rambling discursiveness , the right to roam , of the earlier English novel , of `` Tristram Shandy '' and of `` Tom Jones '' ; and partly it comes from abroad , and derives a stimulus from such bold and original enterprises as that of Monsieur Rolland in his `` Jean Christophe . ''
Its double origin involves a double nature ; for while the English spirit is towards discursiveness and variety , the new French movement is rather towards exhaustiveness .
Mr. Arnold Bennett has experimented in both forms of amplitude .
His superb `` Old Wives ' Tale , '' wandering from person to person and from scene to scene , is by far the finest `` long novel '' that has been written in English in the English fashion in this generation , and now in `` Clayhanger '' and its promised collaterals , he undertakes that complete , minute , abundant presentation of the growth and modification of one or two individual minds , which is the essential characteristic of the Continental movement towards the novel of amplitude .
While the `` Old Wives ' Tale '' is discursive , `` Clayhanger '' is exhaustive ; he gives us both types of the new movement in perfection .
Take , for example , the immense cluster of difficulties that arises out of the increasing complexity of our state .
On every hand we are creating officials , and compared with only a few years ago the private life in a dozen fresh directions comes into contact with officialdom .
But we still do practically nothing to work out the interesting changes that occur in this sort of man and that , when you withdraw him as it were from the common crowd of humanity , put his mind if not his body into uniform and endow him with powers and functions and rules .
It is manifestly a study of the profoundest public and personal importance .
It is manifestly a study of increasing importance .
The process of social and political organisation that has been going on for the last quarter of a century is pretty clearly going on now if anything with increasing vigour -- and for the most part the entire dependence of the consequences of the whole problem upon the reaction between the office on the one hand and the weak , uncertain , various human beings who take office on the other , does n't seem even to be suspected by the energetic , virtuous and more or less amiable people whose activities in politics and upon the backstairs of politics bring about these developments .
They assume that the sort of official they need , a combination of god-like virtue and intelligence with unfailing mechanical obedience , can be made out of just any young nephew .
And I know of no means of persuading people that this is a rather unjustifiable assumption , and of creating an intelligent controlling criticism of officials and of assisting conscientious officials to an effective self-examination , and generally of keeping the atmosphere of official life sweet and healthy , except the novel .
Yet so far the novel has scarcely begun its attack upon this particular field of human life , and all the attractive varied play of motive it contains .
Of course we have one supreme and devastating study of the illiterate minor official in Bumble .
That one figure lit up and still lights the whole problem of Poor Law administration for the English reading community .
It was a translation of well-meant regulations and pseudo-scientific conceptions of social order into blundering , arrogant , ill-bred flesh and blood .
It was worth a hundred Royal Commissions .
You may make your regulations as you please , said Dickens in effect ; this is one sample of the stuff that will carry them out .
But Bumble stands almost alone .
Instead of realising that he is only one aspect of officialdom , we are all too apt to make him the type of all officials , and not an urban district council can get into a dispute about its electric light without being denounced as a Bumbledom by some whirling enemy or other .
The burthen upon Bumble 's shoulders is too heavy to be borne , and we want the contemporary novel to give us a score of other figures to put beside him , other aspects and reflections upon this great problem of officialism made flesh .
Bumble is a magnificent figure of the follies and cruelties of ignorance in office -- I would have every candidate for the post of workhouse master pass a severe examination upon `` Oliver Twist '' -- but it is not only caricature and satire I demand .
We must have not only the fullest treatment of the temptations , vanities , abuses , and absurdities of office , but all its dreams , its sense of constructive order , its consolations , its sense of service , and its nobler satisfactions .
You may say that is demanding more insight and power in our novels and novelists than we can possibly hope to find in them .
So much the worse for us .
I stick to my thesis that the complicated social organisation of to-day can not get along without the amount of mutual understanding and mutual explanation such a range of characterisation in our novels implies .
The success of civilisation amounts ultimately to a success of sympathy and understanding .
If people can not be brought to an interest in one another greater than they feel to-day , to curiosities and criticisms far keener , and co-operations far subtler , than we have now ; if class can not be brought to measure itself against , and interchange experience and sympathy with class , and temperament with temperament then we shall never struggle very far beyond the confused discomforts and uneasiness of to-day , and the changes and complications of human life will remain as they are now , very like the crumplings and separations and complications of an immense avalanche that is sliding down a hill .
And in this tremendous work of human reconciliation and elucidation , it seems to me it is the novel that must attempt most and achieve most .
The rarer books mentioned in these various guides would remind him , however , of the many even his ample limit of twenty thousand forced him to exclude , and he would , perhaps , consider the need of having two or three libraries each for the storage of a hundred thousand books or so not kept at the local libraries , but which could be sent to them at a day 's notice at the request of any reader .
And then , and only then , would he give his attention to the housing and staffing that this reality of books would demand .
Indeed , it is no paradox to say that `` Utopia , '' which has by a conspiracy of accidents become a proverb for undisciplined fancifulness in social and political matters , is in reality a very unimaginative work .
In that , next to the accident of its priority , lies the secret of its continuing interest .
In some respects it is like one of those precious and delightful scrapbooks people disinter in old country houses ; its very poverty of synthetic power leaves its ingredients , the cuttings from and imitations of Plato , the recipe for the hatching of eggs , the stern resolutions against scoundrels and rough fellows , all the sharper and brighter .
There will always be found people to read in it , over and above the countless multitudes who will continue ignorantly to use its name for everything most alien to More 's essential quality .
In a very obvious way , sociology seemed to Comte to crown the edifice of the sciences ; it was to be to the statesman what pathology and physiology were to the doctor ; and one gathers that , for the most part , he regarded it as an intellectual procedure in no way differing from physics .
His classification of the sciences shows pretty clearly that he thought of them all as exact logical systematisations of fact arising out of each other in a synthetic order , each lower one containing the elements of a lucid explanation of those above it -- physics explaining chemistry ; chemistry , physiology ; physiology , sociology ; and so forth .
His actual method was altogether unscientific ; but through all his work runs the assumption that in contrast with his predecessors he is really being as exact and universally valid as mathematics .
To Herbert Spencer -- very appropriately since his mental characteristics make him the English parallel to Comte -- we owe the naturalisation of the word in English .
His mind being of greater calibre than Comte 's , the subject acquired in his hands a far more progressive character .
Herbert Spencer was less unfamiliar with natural history than with any other branch of practical scientific work ; and it was natural he should turn to it for precedents in sociological research .
His mind was invaded by the idea of classification , by memories of specimens and museums ; and he initiated that accumulation of desiccated anthropological anecdotes that still figures importantly in current sociological work .
On the lines he initiated sociological investigation , what there is of it , still tends to go .
From these two sources mainly the work of contemporary sociologists derives .
But there persists about it a curious discursiveness that reflects upon the power and value of the initial impetus .
Branford , the able secretary of the Sociological Society , recently attempted a useful work in a classification of the methods of what he calls `` approach , '' a word that seems to me eminently judicious and expressive .
A review of the first volume the Sociological Society has produced brings home the aptness of this image of exploratory operations , of experiments in `` taking a line . ''
The names of Dr. Beattie Crozier and Mr. Benjamin Kidd recall works that impress one as large-scale sketches of a proposed science rather than concrete beginnings and achievements .
The search for an arrangement , a `` method , '' continues as though they were not .
The desperate resort to the analogical method of Commenius is confessed by Dr. Steinmetz , who talks of social morphology , physiology , pathology , and so forth .
There is also a less initiative disposition in the Vicomte Combes de Lestrade and in the work of Professor Giddings .
In other directions sociological work is apt to lose its general reference altogether , to lapse towards some department of activity not primarily sociological at all .
Examples of this are the works of Mr. and Mrs. Sidney Webb , M. Ostrogorski and M. Gustave le Bon .
From a contemplation of all this diversity Professor Durkheim emerges , demanding a `` synthetic science , '' `` certain synthetic conceptions '' -- and Professor Karl Pearson endorses the demand -- to fuse all these various activities into something that will live and grow .
What is it that tangles this question so curiously that there is not only a failure to arrive at a conclusion , but a failure to join issue ?
Now , what is called the scientific method is the method of ignoring individualities ; and , like many mathematical conventions , its great practical convenience is no proof whatever of its final truth .
Let me admit the enormous value , the wonder of its results in mechanics , in all the physical sciences , in chemistry , even in physiology -- but what is its value beyond that ?
Is the scientific method of value in biology ?
The great advances made by Darwin and his school in biology were not made , it must be remembered , by the scientific method , as it is generally conceived , at all .
He conducted a research into pre-documentary history .
He collected information along the lines indicated by certain interrogations ; and the bulk of his work was the digesting and critical analysis of that .
For documents and monuments he had fossils and anatomical structures and germinating eggs too innocent to lie , and so far he was nearer simplicity .
But , on the other hand , he had to correspond with breeders and travellers of various sorts , classes entirely analogous , from the point of view of evidence , to the writers of history and memoirs .
I question profoundly whether the word `` science , '' in current usage anyhow , ever means such patient disentanglement as Darwin pursued .
It means the attainment of something positive and emphatic in the way of a conclusion , based on amply repeated experiments capable of infinite repetition , `` proved , '' as they say , `` up to the hilt . ''
Almost all the sociological literature beyond the province of history that has stood the test of time and established itself in the esteem of men is frankly Utopian .
Plato , when his mind turned to schemes of social reconstruction thrust his habitual form of dialogue into a corner ; both the `` Republic '' and the `` Laws '' are practically Utopias in monologue ; and Aristotle found the criticism of the Utopian suggestions of his predecessors richly profitable .
Directly the mind of the world emerged again at the Renascence from intellectual barbarism in the brief breathing time before Sturm and the schoolmasters caught it and birched it into scholarship and a new period of sterility , it went on from Plato to the making of fresh Utopias .
Not without profit did More discuss pauperism in this form and Bacon the organisation of research ; and the yeast of the French Revolution was Utopias .
Even Comte , all the while that he is professing science , fact , precision , is adding detail after detail to the intensely personal Utopia of a Western Republic that constitutes his one meritorious gift to the world .
Sociologists can not help making Utopias ; though they avoid the word , though they deny the idea with passion , their very silences shape a Utopia .
Why should they not follow the precedent of Aristotle , and accept Utopias as material ?
This method would give not only a boundary shape to all sociological activities , but a scheme of arrangement for text books and lectures , and points of direction and reference for the graduation and post graduate work of sociological students .
Only one group of inquiries commonly classed as sociological would have to be left out of direct relationship with this Ideal State ; and that is inquiries concerning the rough expedients to meet the failure of imperfect institutions .
Social emergency work of all sorts comes under this head .
What to do with the pariah dogs of Constantinople , what to do with the tramps who sleep in the London parks , how to organise a soup kitchen or a Bible coffee van , how to prevent ignorant people , who have nothing else to do , getting drunk in beer-houses , are no doubt serious questions for the practical administrator , questions of primary importance to the politician ; but they have no more to do with sociology than the erection of a temporary hospital after the collision of two trains has to do with railway engineering .
So far I have discussed only the possibility of divorce without offences , the sort of divorce that arises out of estrangement and incompatibilities .
But divorce , as it is known in most Christian countries , has a punitive element , and is obtained through the failure of one of the parties to observe the conditions of the bond and the determination of the other to exact suffering .
Divorce as it exists at present is not a readjustment but a revenge .
It is the nasty exposure of a private wrong .
In England a husband may divorce his wife for a single act of infidelity , and there can be little doubt that we are on the eve of an equalisation of the law in this respect .
I will confess I consider this an extreme concession to the passion of jealousy , and one likely to tear off the roof from many a family of innocent children .
Only infidelity leading to supposititious children in the case of the wife , or infidelity obstinately and offensively persisted in or endangering health in the case of the husband , really injure the home sufficiently to justify a divorce on the assumptions of our present argument .
If we are going to make the welfare of the children our criterion in these matters , then our divorce law does in this direction already go too far .
A husband or wife may do far more injury to the home by constantly neglecting it for the companionship of some outside person with whom no `` matrimonial offence '' is ever committed .
Of course , if our divorce law exists mainly for the gratification of the fiercer sexual resentments , well and good , but if that is so , let us abandon our pretence that marriage is an institution for the establishment and protection of homes .
And while on the one hand existing divorce laws appear to be obsessed by sexual offences , other things of far more evil effect upon the home go without a remedy .
There are , for example , desertion , domestic neglect , cruelty to the children drunkenness or harmful drug-taking , indecency of living and uncontrollable extravagance .
I can not conceive how any logical mind , having once admitted the principle of divorce , can hesitate at making these entirely home-wrecking things the basis of effective pleas .
But in another direction , some strain of sentimentality in my nature makes me hesitate to go with the great majority of divorce law reformers .
I can not bring myself to agree that either a long term of imprisonment or the misfortune of insanity should in itself justify a divorce .
I admit the social convenience , but I wince at the thought of those tragic returns of the dispossessed .
So far as insanity goes , I perceive that the cruelty of the law would but endorse the cruelty of nature .
But I do not like men to endorse the cruelty of nature .
`` If Youth but Knew '' is the title of a book published some years ago , but still with a quite living interest , by `` Kappa '' ; it is the bitter complaint of a distressed senior against our educational system .
He is hugely disappointed in the public-school boy , and more particularly in one typical specimen .
He is -- if one might hazard a guess -- an uncle bereft of great expectations .
He finds an echo in thousands of other distressed uncles and parents .
They use the most divergent and inadequate forms of expression for this vague sense that the result has not come out good enough ; they put it contradictorily and often wrongly , but the sense is widespread and real and justifiable and we owe a great debt to `` Kappa '' for an accurate diagnosis of what in the aggregate amounts to a grave national and social evil .
And if we do not find him a refreshing and inspiring person , and his mind a fountain of thought in which we bathe and are restored , is it likely our sons will ?
If the schoolmaster at large is grey and dull , shirking interesting topics and emphatic speech , what must he be like in the monotonous class-room ?
These may seem wanton charges to some , but I am not speaking without my book .
Monthly I am brought into close contact with the pedagogic intelligence through the medium of three educational magazines .
A certain morbid habit against which I struggle in vain makes me read everything I catch a schoolmaster writing .
I am , indeed , one of the faithful band who read the Educational Supplement of the _Times_ .
In these papers schoolmasters write about their business , lectures upon the questions of their calling are reported at length , and a sort of invalid discussion moves with painful decorum through the correspondence column .
The scholastic mind so displayed in action fascinates me .
It is like watching a game of billiards with wooden cushes and beechwood balls .
I submit this may be a very good training for polite servants , but it is not the way to make masters in the world .
If we English believe we are indeed a masterful people , we must be prepared to expose our children to more and more various stimulations than we do ; they must grow up free , bold , adventurous , initiated , even if they have to take more risks in the doing of that .
An able and stimulating teacher is as rare as a fine artist , and is a thing worth having for your son , even at the price of shocking your wife by his lack of respect for that magnificent compromise , the Establishment , or you by his Socialism or by his Catholicism or Darwinism , or even by his erroneous choice of ties and collars .
Boys who are to be free , masterly men must hear free men talking freely of religion , of philosophy , of conduct .
They must have heard men of this opinion and that , putting what they believe before them with all the courage of conviction .
They must have an idea of will prevailing over form .
It is far more important that boys should learn from original , intellectually keen men than they should learn from perfectly respectable men , or perfectly orthodox men , or perfectly nice men .
The vital thing to consider about your son 's schoolmaster is whether he talked lifeless twaddle yesterday by way of a lesson , and not whether he loved unwisely or was born of poor parents , or was seen wearing a frock-coat in combination with a bowler , or confessed he doubted the Apostles ' Creed , or called himself a Socialist , or any disgraceful thing like that , so many years ago .
It is that sort of thing `` Kappa '' must invert if he wants a change in our public schools .
You may arrange and rearrange curricula , abolish Greek , substitute `` science '' -- it will not matter a rap .
Even those model canoes of yours , `` Kappa , '' will be wasted if you still insist upon model schoolmasters .
So long as we require our schoolmasters to be politic , conforming , undisturbing men , setting up Polonius as an ideal for them , so long will their influence deaden the souls of our sons .
The reasons for the fall in the birth-rate are obvious enough .
It is a necessary consequence of the individualistic competition of modern life .
People talk of modern women `` shirking '' motherhood , but it would be a silly sort of universe in which a large proportion of women had any natural and instinctive desire to shirk motherhood , and , I believe , a huge proportion of modern women are as passionately predisposed towards motherhood as ever women were .
But modern conditions conspire to put a heavy handicap upon parentage and an enormous premium upon the partial or complete evasion of offspring , and that is where the clue to the trouble lies .
Our social arrangements discourage parentage very heavily , and the rational thing for a statesman to do in the matter is not to grow eloquent , but to do intelligent things to minimise that discouragement .
The alternative to that is racial replacement and social decay .
That is the essential idea conveyed by this phrase , the Endowment of Motherhood .
Of course , if these subsidies resulted in too rapid a rise in the birth-rate , it would be practicable to diminish the inducement ; and if , on the other hand , the birth-rate still fell , it would be easy to increase the inducement until it sufficed .
The Endowment of Motherhood does not attract the bureaucratic type of reformer because it offers a minimum chance of meddlesome interference with people 's lives .
There would be no chance of `` seeking out '' anybody and applying benevolent but grim compulsions on the strength of it .
In spite of its wide scope it would be much less of a public nuisance than that Wet Children 's Charter , which exasperates me every time I pass a public-house on a rainy night .
But , on the other hand , there would be an enormous stimulus to people to raise the quality of their homes , study infantile hygiene , seek out good schools for them -- and do their duty as all good parents naturally want to do now -- if only economic forces were not so pitilessly against them -- thoroughly and well .
These people always say the same things , and say them in the same note .
And why should they do that if they are really individuals ?
The misunderstanding that has given rise to this proposition that this is an age of specialisation , and through that no end of mischief in misdirected technical education and the like , is essentially a confusion between specialisation and the division of labour .
No doubt this is an age when everything makes for wider and wider co-operations .
Work that was once done by one highly specialised man -- the making of a watch , for example -- is now turned out wholesale by elaborate machinery , or effected in great quantities by the contributed efforts of a number of people .
Each of these people may bring a highly developed intelligence to bear for a time upon the special problem in hand , but that is quite a different thing from specialising to do that thing .
It is interesting to glance for a moment at the possible source of this mischievous confusion between specialisation and the division of labour .
I have already glanced at the possibility of a diabolical world manufacturing gramophone records for our bishops and statesmen and suchlike leaders of thought , but if we dismiss that as a merely elegant trope , I must confess I think it is the influence of Herbert Spencer .
His philosophy is pervaded by an insistence which is , I think , entirely without justification , that the universe , and every sort of thing in it , moves from the simple and homogeneous to the complex and heterogeneous .
An unwary man obsessed with that idea would be very likely to assume without consideration that men were less specialised in a barbaric state of society than they are to-day .
I think I have given reasons for believing that the reverse of this is nearer the truth .
My answer to that question would be an emphatic No .
My answer would be that the idea of representative government is the only possible idea for the government of a civilised community .
But I would add that so far representative government has not had even the beginnings of a fair trial .
So far we have not had representative government , but only a devastating caricature .
The answer to that must determine our attitude to a great number of fundamental questions .
If no better governing body is possible than the stupid , dilatory and forensic assemblies that rule in France , Britain and America to-day , then the civilised human community has reached its climax .
That more comprehensive collective handling of the common interests to which science and intelligent Socialism point , that collective handling which is already urgently needed if the present uncontrolled waste of natural resources and the ultimate bankruptcy of mankind is to be avoided , is quite beyond the capacity of such assemblies ; already there is too much in their clumsy and untrustworthy hands , and the only course open to us is an attempt at enlightened Individualism , an attempt to limit and restrict State activities in every possible way , and to make little private temporary islands of light and refinement amidst the general disorder and decay .
All collectivist schemes , all rational Socialism , if only Socialists would realise it , all hope for humanity , indeed , are dependent ultimately upon the hypothetical possibility of a better system of government than any at present in existence .
Now let us consider what would be the necessary consequences of the establishment of Proportional Representation in such a community as Great Britain -- that is to say , the redistribution of the country into great constituencies such as London or Ulster or Wessex or South Wales , each returning a score or more of members , and the establishment of voting by the single transferable vote .
The first , immediate , most desirable result would be the disappearance of the undistinguished party candidate ; he would vanish altogether .
He would be no more seen .
Proportional Representation would not give him the ghost of a chance .
The very young man of good family , the subsidised barrister , the respectable nobody , the rich supporter of the party would be ousted by known men .
No candidate who had not already distinguished himself , and who did not stand for something in the public eye , would have a chance of election .
There alone we have a sufficient reason for anticipating a very thorough change in the quality and character of the average legislator .
The arguments against Proportional Representation that have been advanced hitherto are trivial in comparison with its enormous advantages .
Implicit in them all is the supposition that public opinion is at bottom a foolish thing , and that electoral methods are to pacify rather than express a people .
It is possibly true that notorious windbags , conspicuously advertised adventurers , and the heroes of temporary sensations may run a considerable chance upon the lists .
My own estimate of the popular wisdom is against the idea that any vividly prominent figure must needs get in ; I think the public is capable of appreciating , let us say , the charm and interest of Mr. Sandow or Mr. Jack Johnson or Mr. Harry Lauder or Mr. Evan Roberts without wanting to send these gentlemen into Parliament .
And I think that the increased power that the Press would have through its facilities in making reputations may also be exaggerated .
Reputations are mysterious things and not so easily forced , and even if it were possible for a section of the Press to limelight a dozen or so figures up to the legislature , they would still have , I think , to be interesting , sympathetic and individualised figures ; and at the end they would be only half a dozen among four hundred men of a repute more naturally achieved .
A third objection is that this reform would give us group politics and unstable government .
It might very possibly give us unstable ministries , but unstable ministries may mean stable government , and such stable ministries as that which governs England at the present time may , by clinging obstinately to office , mean the wildest fluctuations of policy .
Mr. Ramsay Macdonald has drawn a picture of the too-representative Parliament of Proportional Representation , split up into groups each pledged to specific measures and making the most extraordinary treaties and sacrifices of the public interest in order to secure the passing of these definite bills .
But Mr. Ramsay Macdonald is exclusively a parliamentary man ; he knows contemporary parliamentary `` shop '' as a clerk knows his `` guv'nor , '' and he thinks in the terms of his habitual life ; he sees representatives only as politicians financed from party headquarters ; it is natural that he should fail to see that the quality and condition of the sanely elected Member of Parliament will be quite different from these scheming climbers into positions of trust with whom he deals to-day .
It is the party system based on insane voting that makes governments indivisible wholes and gives the group and the cave their terrors and their effectiveness .
Mr. Ramsay Macdonald is as typical a product of existing electoral methods as one could well have , and his peculiarly keen sense of the power of intrigue in legislation is as good evidence as one could wish for of the need for drastic change .
These figures may be difficult to grasp .
The facts may be seen in a more concrete form by the visitor to Ellis Island , the receiving station for the immigrants into New York Harbour .
One goes to this place by tugs from the United States barge office in Battery Park , and in order to see the thing properly one needs a letter of introduction to the commissioner in charge .
Then one is taken through vast barracks littered with people of every European race , every type of low-class European costume , and every degree of dirtiness , to a central hall in which the gist of the examining goes on .
The floor of this hall is divided up into a sort of maze of winding passages between lattice work , and along these passages , day after day , incessantly , the immigrants go , wild-eyed Gipsies , Armenians , Greeks , Italians , Ruthenians , Cossacks , German peasants , Scandinavians , a few Irish still , impoverished English , occasional Dutch ; they halt for a moment at little desks to exhibit papers , at other little desks to show their money and prove they are not paupers , to have their eyes scanned by this doctor and their general bearing by that .
Their thumb-marks are taken , their names and heights and weights and so forth are recorded for the card index ; and so , slowly , they pass along towards America , and at last reach a little wicket , the gate of the New World .
Through this metal wicket drips the immigration stream -- all day long , every two or three seconds , an immigrant with a valise or a bundle , passes the little desk and goes on past the well-managed money-changing place , past the carefully organised separating ways that go to this railway or that , past the guiding , protecting officials -- into a new world .
The great majority are young men and young women between seventeen and thirty , good , youthful , hopeful peasant stock .
They stand in a long string , waiting to go through that wicket , with bundles , with little tin boxes , with cheap portmanteaus with odd packages , in pairs , in families , alone , women with children , men with strings of dependents , young couples .
All day that string of human beads waits there , jerks forward , waits again ; all day and every day , constantly replenished , constantly dropping the end beads through the wicket , till the units mount to hundreds and the hundreds to thousands ... .
In such a prosperous year as 1906 more immigrants passed through that wicket into America than children were born in the whole of France .
And in nearly every European country , though it may be somewhat despoiled here and shorn of exclusive predominance there , or represented by a dislocated `` reformed '' member , is the Church , custodian of a great moral tradition , closely associated with the national universities and the organisation of national thought .
The typical European town has its castle or great house , its cathedral or church , its middle-class and lower-class quarters .
Five miles off one can see that the American town is on an entirely different plan .
In his remarkable `` American Scene , '' Mr. Henry James calls attention to the fact that the Church as one sees it and feels it universally in Europe is altogether absent , and he adds a comment as suggestive as it is vague .
Speaking of the appearance of the Churches , so far as they do appear amidst American urban scenery , he says :
`` And however one indicates one 's impression of the clearance , the clearance itself , in its completeness , with the innumerable odd connected circumstances that bring it home , represents , in the history of manners and morals , a deviation in the mere measurement of which hereafter may well reside a certain critical thrill .
I say hereafter because it is a question of one of those many measurements that would as yet , in the United States , be premature .
Of all the solemn conclusions one feels as 'barred , ' the list is quite headed in the States , I think , by this particular abeyance of judgment .
When an ancient treasure of precious vessels , overscored with glowing gems and wrought artistically into wondrous shapes , has , by a prodigious process , been converted through a vast community into the small change , the simple circulating medium of dollars and 'nickels , ' we can only say that the consequent permeation will be of values of a new order .
Of _what_ order we must wait to see . ''
America has no Church .
Neither has it a peasantry nor an aristocracy , and until well on in the Victorian epoch it had no disproportionately rich people .
The War of Independence raised that Whig suspicion of and hostility to government and the freedom of private property and the repudiation of any but voluntary emotional and supererogatory co-operation in the national purpose to the level of a religion , and the American Constitution with but one element of elasticity in the Supreme Court decisions , established these principles impregnably in the political structure .
Personal freedom , defiance of authority , and the stars and stripes have always gone together in men's minds ; and subsequent waves of immigration , the Irish fleeing famine , for which they held the English responsible , and the Eastern European Jews escaping relentless persecutions , brought a persuasion of immense public wrongs , as a necessary concomitant of systematic government , to refresh without changing this defiant thirst for freedom at any cost .
In my book , `` The Future in America , '' I have tried to make an estimate of the working quality of this American tradition of unconditional freedom for the adult male citizen .
I have shown that from the point of view of anyone who regards civilisation as an organisation of human interdependence and believes that the stability of society can be secured only by a conscious and disciplined co-ordination of effort , it is a tradition extraordinarily and dangerously deficient in what I have called a `` _sense of the State_ . ''
And by a `` sense of the State '' I mean not merely a vague and sentimental and showy public-spiritedness -- of that the States have enough and to spare -- but a real sustaining conception of the collective interest embodied in the State as an object of simple duty and as a determining factor in the life of each individual .
It involves a sense of function and a sense of `` place , '' a sense of a general responsibility and of a general well-being overriding the individual 's well-being , which are exactly the senses the American tradition attacks and destroys .
In Mr. Robert Hunter 's `` Poverty '' one reads of `` not less than eighty thousand children , most of whom are little girls , at present employed in the textile mills of this country .
In the South there are now six times as many children at work as there were twenty years ago .
Child labour is increasing yearly in that section of the country .
Each year more little ones are brought in from the fields and hills to live in the degrading and demoralising atmosphere of the mill towns ... . ''
His doubts , his questionings , his aspirations , are dealt with by Mr. Brisbane with a simple direct fatherliness with all the beneficent persuasiveness of a revivalist preacher .
Millions read these leaders and feel a momentary benefit , en route for the more actual portions of the paper .
He asks : `` Why are all men gamblers ? ''
He discusses our Longing for Immortal Imperfection , and `` Did we once live on the moon ? ''
He recommends the substitution of whisky and soda for neat whisky , drawing an illustration from the comparative effect of the diluted and of the undiluted liquid as an eye-wash ( `` Try whisky on your friend 's eyeball ! ''
is the heading ) , sleep ( `` The man who loses sleep will make a failure of his life , or at least diminish greatly his chances of success '' ) , and the education of the feminine intelligence ( `` The cow that kicks her weaned calf is all heart '' ) .
He makes identically the same confident appeal to the moral motive which was for so long the salvation of the Puritan individualism from which the American tradition derives .
`` That hand , '' he writes , `` which supports the head of the new-born baby , the mother's hand , supports the civilisation of the world . ''
`` Let us ask ourselves this question : 'Was there any _one thing_ that distinguished _all_ their lives , that united all these men , active in fields so different ? '
`` You can help carry a load for an old man .
You can encourage and help a poor devil trying to reform .
You can set a good example to children .
You can stick to the men with whom you work , fighting honestly for their welfare .
`` The day will come when we shall prefer helping our neighbour to robbing him -- legally -- of a million dollars .
`` Do what good you can _now_ , while it is unusual , and have the satisfaction of being a pioneer and an eccentric . ''
The effectual modifying force at work is not the strangeness nor the temperamental maladjustment of the new elements of population , but the conscious realisation of the inadequacy of the tradition on the part of the more intelligent sections of the American population .
That blind national conceit that would hear no criticism and admit no deficiency has disappeared .
In the last decade such a change has come over the American mind as sometimes comes over a vigorous and wilful child .
Suddenly it seems to have grown up , to have begun to weigh its powers and consider its possible deficiencies .
There was a time when American confidence and self-satisfaction seemed impregnable ; at the slightest qualm of doubt America took to violent rhetoric as a drunkard resorts to drink .
Now the indictment I have drawn up harshly , bluntly and unflatteringly in Sec .
4 would receive the endorsement of American after American .
The falling birth-rate of all the best elements in the State , the cankering effect of political corruption , the crumbling of independence and equality before the progressive aggregation of wealth -- he has to face them , he can not deny them .
There has arisen a new literature , the literature of national self-examination , that seems destined to modify the American tradition profoundly .
To me it seems to involve the hope and possibility of a conscious collective organisation of social life .
In the making of very rich men there is always a factor of good fortune and a factor of design and will .
One meets rich men at times who seem to be merely lucky gamblers , who strike one as just the thousandth man in a myriad of wild plungers , who are , in fact , chance nobodies washed up by an eddy .
Others , again , strike one as exceptionally lucky half-knaves .
But there are others of a growth more deliberate and of an altogether higher personal quality .
One takes such men as Mr. J.D .
Rockefeller or Mr. Pierpont Morgan -- the scale of their fortunes makes them public property -- and it is clear that we are dealing with persons on quite a different level of intellectual power from the British Colonel Norths , for example , or the South African Joels .
In my `` Future in America '' I have taken the former largely at Miss Tarbell 's estimate , and treated him as a case of acquisitiveness raised in Baptist surroundings .
But I doubt very much if that exhausts the man as he is to-day .
Given a man brought up to saving and `` getting on '' as if to a religion , a man very acquisitive and very patient and restrained , and indubitably with great organising power , and he grows rich beyond the dreams of avarice .
And having done so , there he is .
What is he going to do ?
Every step he takes up the ascent to riches gives him new perspectives and new points of view .
A third influence that may also contribute very materially to the reconstruction of the American tradition is the Socialist movement .
It is true that so far American Socialism has very largely taken an Anarchistic form , has been , in fact , little more than a revolutionary movement of the wages-earning class against the property owner .
It has already been pointed out that it derives not from contemporary English Socialism but from the Marxist social democracy of the continent of Europe , and has not even so much of the constructive spirit as has been developed by the English Socialists of the Fabian and Labour Party group or by the newer German evolutionary Socialists .
Nevertheless , whenever Socialism is intelligently met by discussion or whenever it draws near to practicable realisation , it becomes , by virtue of its inherent implications , a constructive force , and there is no reason to suppose that it will not be intelligently met on the whole and in the long run in America .
The alternative to a developing Socialism among the labouring masses in America is that revolutionary Anarchism from which it is slowly but definitely marking itself off .
In America we have to remember that we are dealing with a huge population of people who are for the most part , and more and more evidently destined under the present system of free industrial competition , to be either very small traders , small farmers on the verge of debt , or wages-earners for all their lives .
They are going to lead limited lives and worried lives -- and they know it .
Nearly everyone can read and discuss now , the process of concentrating property and the steady fixation of conditions that were once fluid and adventurous goes on in the daylight visibly to everyone .
And it has to be borne in mind also that these people are so far under the sway of the American tradition that each thinks himself as good as any man and as much entitled to the fullness of life .
Whatever social tradition their fathers had , whatever ideas of a place to be filled humbly and seriously and duties to be done , have been left behind in Europe .
No Church dominates the scenery of this new land , and offers in authoritative and convincing tones consolations hereafter for lives obscurely but faithfully lived .
Whatever else happens in this national future , upon one point the patriotic American may feel assured , and that is of an immense general discontent in the working class and of a powerful movement in search of a general betterment .
The practical forms and effects of that movement will depend almost entirely upon the average standard of life among the workers and their general education .
Sweated and ill-organised foreigners , such as one finds in New Jersey living under conditions of great misery , will be fierce , impatient and altogether dangerous .
They will be acutely exasperated by every picture of plutocratic luxury in their newspaper , they will readily resort to destructive violence .
The western miner , the western agriculturist , worried beyond endurance between the money-lender and railway combinations will be almost equally prone to savage methods of expression .
_The Appeal to Reason_ , for example , to which I have made earlier reference in this chapter , is furious to wreck the present capitalistic system , but it is far too angry and impatient for that satisfaction to produce any clear suggestion of what shall replace it .
These facts go to the very root of the American problem .
I have already pointed out that , in spite of a colossal immigration , the population of the United States was at the end of the nineteenth century over twenty millions short of what it should have been through its own native increase had the birth-rate of the opening of the century been maintained .
For a hundred years America has been `` fed '' by Europe .
That feeding process will not go on indefinitely .
The immigration came in waves as if reservoir after reservoir was tapped and exhausted .
Nowadays England , Scotland , Ireland , France and Scandinavia send hardly any more ; they have no more to send .
Germany and Switzerland send only a few .
The South European and Austrian supply is not as abundant as it was .
There may come a time when Europe and Western Asia will have no more surplus population to send , when even Eastern Asia will have passed into a less fecund phase , and when America will have to look to its own natural increase for the continued development of its resources .
I find in the London _New Age_ for August 15th , 1908 , a description by Mr. Jerome K. Jerome of `` John Smith , '' the average British voter .
John Smith might serve in some respects for the common man of all the modern civilisations .
Among other things that John Smith thinks and wants , he wants :
Now , no doubt Mr. Jerome is writing with emphasis here .
But there is sufficient truth in the passage for it to stand here as a rough symbol of another factor in this question .
John Smithism , that manly and individualist element in the citizen , stands over against and resists all the forces of organisation that would subjugate it to a collective purpose .
It is careless of coming national cessation and depopulation , careless of the insurgent spirit beneath the acquiescences of Mrs. Smith , careless of its own inevitable defeat in the economic struggle , careless because it can understand none of these things ; it is obstinately muddle-headed , asserting what it conceives to be itself against the universe and all other John Smiths whatsoever .
It is a factor with all other factors .
The creative , acquisitive , aggressive spirit of those bigger John Smiths who succeed as against the myriads of John Smiths who fail , the wider horizons and more efficient methods of the educated man , the awakening class-consciousness of women , the inevitable futility of John Smithism , the sturdy independence that makes John Smith resent even disciplined co-operation with Tom Brown to achieve a common end , his essential incapacity , indeed , for collective action ; all these things are against the ultimate triumph , and make for the ultimate civilisation even of John Smith .
What we moderns , with our little three hundred years or so of security , do not recognise is that things that go up and down may , given a certain combination of chances , go down steadily , down and down .
Here , then , are two associated possibilities with which to modify our expectation of an America advancing steadily on the road to an organised civilisation , of New York rebuilding herself in marble , spreading like a garden city over New Jersey and Long Island and New York State , becoming a new and greater Venice , queen of the earth .
Consciously and deliberately the ideal citizen will seek beauty in himself and in his way of living .
He will be temperate rather than harshly abstinent , and he will keep himself fit and in training as an elementary duty .
He will not be a fat or emaciated person .
Fat , panting men , and thin , enfeebled ones can not possibly be considered good citizens any more than dirty or verminous people .
He will be just as fine and seemly in his person as he can be , not from vanity and self-assertion but to be pleasing and agreeable to his fellows .
The ugly dress and ugly bearing of the `` good man '' of to-day will be as incomprehensible to him as the filth of a palaeolithic savage is to us .
He will not speak of his `` frame , '' and hang clothes like sacks over it ; he will know and feel that he and the people about him have wonderful , delightful and beautiful bodies .
So far , then , as mechanical science goes I am inclined to think the coming period will be , from the point of view of the common man , almost without sensational interest .
There will be an immense amount of enrichment and filling-in , but of the sort that does not get prominently into the daily papers .
At every point there will be economies and simplifications of method , discoveries of new artificial substances with new capabilities , and of new methods of utilising power .
There will be a progressive change in the apparatus and quality of human life -- the sort of alteration of the percentages that causes no intellectual shock .
Electric heating , for example , will become practicable in our houses , and then cheaper , and at last so cheap and good that nobody will burn coal any more .
Little electric contrivances will dispense with menial service in more and more directions .
The builder will introduce new , more convenient , healthier and prettier substances , and the young architect will become increasingly the intelligent student of novelty .
The steam engine , the coal yard , and the tail chimney , and indeed all chimneys , will vanish quietly from our urban landscape .
The speeding up and cheapening of travel , and the increase in its swiftness and comfort will go on steadily -- widening experience .
A more systematic and understanding social science will be estimating the probable growth and movement of population , and planning town and country on lines that would seem to-day almost inconceivably wise and generous .
All this means a quiet broadening and aeration and beautifying of life .
Utopian requirements , so far as the material side of things goes , will be executed and delivered with at last the utmost promptness ... .
It is in quite other directions that the scientific achievements to astonish our children will probably be achieved .
Progress never appears to be uniform in human affairs .
There are intricate correlations between department and department .
One field must mark time until another can come up to it with results sufficiently arranged and conclusions sufficiently simplified for application Medicine waits on organic chemistry , geology on mineralogy , and both on the chemistry of high pressures and temperature .
And subtle variations in method and the prevailing mental temperament of the type of writer engaged , produce remarkable differences in the quality and quantity of the stated result .
Moreover , there are in the history of every scientific province periods of seed-time , when there is great activity without immediate apparent fruition , and periods , as , for example , the last two decades of electrical application , of prolific realisation .
It is highly probable that the physiologist and the organic chemist are working towards co-operations that may make the physician 's sphere the new scientific wonderland .
But medicine is not the only field to which we may reasonably look for a sudden development of wonders .
Compared with the sciences of matter , psychology and social science have as yet given the world remarkably little cause for amazement .
Not only is our medicine feeble and fragmentary , but our educational science is the poorest miscellany of aphorisms and dodges .
Indeed , directly one goes beyond the range of measurement and weighing and classification , one finds a sort of unprogressive floundering going on , which throws the strongest doubts upon the practical applicability of the current logical and metaphysical conceptions in those fields .
We have emerged only partially from the age of the schoolmen In these directions we have not emerged at all .
It is quite possible that in university lecture rooms and forbidding volumes of metaphysical discussion a new emancipation of the human intellect and will is even now going on .
Presently men may be attacking the problems of the self-control of human life and of human destiny in new phrases and an altogether novel spirit .
And with the development of philosophical and scientific method that will go on with this great increase in man 's control over himself , another issue that is now a mere pious aspiration above abysses of ignorance and difficulty , will come to be a manageable matter .
It has been the perpetual wonder of philosophers from Plato onward that men have bred their dogs and horses and left any man or woman , however vile , free to bear offspring in the next generation of men .
Still that goes on .
Beautiful and wonderful people die childless and bury their treasure in the grave , and we rest content with a system of matrimony that seems designed to perpetuate mediocrity .
A day will come when men will be in possession of knowledge and opportunity that will enable them to master this position , and then certainly will it be assured that every generation shall be born better than was the one before it .
And with that the history of humanity will enter upon a new phase , a phase which will be to our lives as daylight is to the dreaming of a child as yet unborn .
There is nothing else in all the world that so turns against the powers that have made it , unless it be man 's follower fire .
But fire is witless ; a little stream , a changing breeze can stop it .
If fire were human it would build boats across the rivers and outmanoeuvre the wind .
It would lie in wait in sheltered places , smouldering , husbanding its fuel until the grass was yellow and the forests sere .
But fire is a mere creature of man 's ; our world before his coming knew nothing of it in any of its habitable places , never saw it except in the lightning flash or remotely on some volcanic coronet .
Man brought it into the commerce of life , a shining , resentful slave , to hound off the startled beasts from his sleeping-place and serve him like a dog .
TONO-BUNGAY by H.G Wells BOOK THE FIRST THE DAYS BEFORE TONO-BUNGAY WAS INVENTED CHAPTER THE FIRST OF BLADESOVER HOUSE , AND MY MOTHER ; AND THE CONSTITUTION OF SOCIETY I Most people in this world seem to live `` in character '' ; they have a beginning , a middle and an end , and the three are congruous one with another and true to the rules of their type .
You can speak of them as being of this sort of people or that .
They are , as theatrical people say , no more ( and no less ) than `` character actors . ''
They have a class , they have a place , they know what is becoming in them and what is due to them , and their proper size of tombstone tells at last how properly they have played the part .
But there is also another kind of life that is not so much living as a miscellaneous tasting of life .
One gets hit by some unusual transverse force , one is jerked out of one 's stratum and lives crosswise for the rest of the time , and , as it were , in a succession of samples .
That has been my lot , and that is what has set me at last writing something in the nature of a novel .
I have got an unusual series of impressions that I want very urgently to tell .
I have seen life at very different levels , and at all these levels I have seen it with a sort of intimacy and in good faith .
I have been a native in many social countries .
I have been the unwelcome guest of a working baker , my cousin , who has since died in the Chatham infirmary ; I have eaten illegal snacks -- the unjustifiable gifts of footmen -- in pantries , and been despised for my want of style ( and subsequently married and divorced ) by the daughter of a gasworks clerk ; and -- to go to my other extreme -- I was once -- oh , glittering days !
-- an item in the house-party of a countess .
She was , I admit , a countess with a financial aspect , but still , you know , a countess .
I 've seen these people at various angles .
At the dinner-table I 've met not simply the titled but the great .
On one occasion -- it is my brightest memory -- I upset my champagne over the trousers of the greatest statesman in the empire -- Heaven forbid I should be so invidious as to name him !
-- in the warmth of our mutual admiration .
And once ( though it is the most incidental thing in my life ) I murdered a man ... .
Yes , I 've seen a curious variety of people and ways of living altogether .
Odd people they all are great and small , very much alike at bottom and curiously different on their surfaces .
I wish I had ranged just a little further both up and down , seeing I have ranged so far .
Royalty must be worth knowing and very great fun .
But my contacts with princes have been limited to quite public occasions , nor at the other end of the scale have I had what I should call an inside acquaintance with that dusty but attractive class of people who go about on the high-roads drunk but enfamille ( so redeeming the minor lapse ) , in the summertime , with a perambulator , lavender to sell , sun-brown children , a smell , and ambiguous bundles that fire the imagination .
Navvies , farm-labourers , sailormen and stokers , all such as sit in 1834 beer-houses , are beyond me also , and I suppose must remain so now for ever .
My intercourse with the ducal rank too has been negligible ; I once went shooting with a duke , and in an outburst of what was no doubt snobbishness , did my best to get him in the legs .
I 'm sorry I have n't done the whole lot though ... .
You will ask by what merit I achieved this remarkable social range , this extensive cross-section of the British social organism .
It was the Accident of Birth .
It always is in England .
Indeed , if I may make the remark so cosmic , everything is .
But that is by the way .
I was my uncle 's nephew , and my uncle was no less a person than Edward Ponderevo , whose comet-like transit of the financial heavens happened -- it is now ten years ago !
Do you remember the days of Ponderevo , the great days , I mean , of Ponderevo ?
Perhaps you had a trifle in some world-shaking enterprise !
Then you know him only too well .
Astraddle on Tono-Bungay , he flashed athwart the empty heavens -- like a comet -- rather , like a stupendous rocket !
-- and overawed investors spoke of his star .
At his zenith he burst into a cloud of the most magnificent promotions .
What a time that was !
The Napoleon of domestic conveniences !
I was his nephew , his peculiar and intimate nephew .
I was hanging on to his coat-tails all the way through .
I made pills with him in the chemist 's shop at Wimblehurst before he began .
I was , you might say , the stick of his rocket ; and after our tremendous soar , after he had played with millions , a golden rain in the sky , after my bird's-eye view of the modern world , I fell again , a little scarred and blistered perhaps , two and twenty years older , with my youth gone , my manhood eaten in upon , but greatly edified , into this Thames-side yard , into these white heats and hammerings , amidst the fine realites of steel -- to think it all over in my leisure and jot down the notes and inconsecutive observations that make this book .
It was more , you know , than a figurative soar .
The zenith of that career was surely our flight across the channel in the Lord Roberts B ... .
I warn you this book is going to be something of an agglomeration .
I want to trace my social trajectory ( and my uncle 's ) as the main line of my story , but as this is my first novel and almost certainly my last , I want to get in , too , all sorts of things that struck me , things that amused me and impressions I got -- even although they do n't minister directly to my narrative at all .
I want to set out my own queer love experiences too , such as they are , for they troubled and distressed and swayed me hugely , and they still seem to me to contain all sorts of irrational and debatable elements that I shall be the clearer-headed for getting on paper .
And possibly I may even flow into descriptions of people who are really no more than people seen in transit , just because it amuses me to recall what they said and did to us , and more particularly how they behaved in the brief but splendid glare of Tono-Bungay and its still more glaring offspring .
It lit some of them up , I can assure you !
Indeed , I want to get in all sorts of things .
My ideas of a novel all through are comprehensive rather than austere ... .
Tono-Bungay still figures on the hoardings , it stands in rows in every chemist 's storeroom , it still assuages the coughs of age and brightens the elderly eye and loosens the elderly tongue ; but its social glory , its financial illumination , have faded from the world for ever .
And I , sole scorched survivor from the blaze , sit writing of it here in an air that is never still for the clang and thunder of machines , on a table littered with working drawings , and amid fragments of models and notes about velocities and air and water pressures and trajectories -- of an altogether different sort from that of Tono-Bungay .
II I write that much and look at it , and wonder whether , after all , this is any fair statement of what I am attempting in this book .
I 've given , I see , an impression that I want to make simply a hotch-potch of anecdotes and experiences with my uncle swimming in the middle as the largest lump of victual .
I 'll own that here , with the pen already started , I realise what a fermenting mass of things learnt and emotions experienced and theories formed I 've got to deal with , and how , in a sense , hopeless my book must be from the very outset .
I suppose what I 'm really trying to render is nothing more nor less than Life -- as one man has found it .
I want to tell -- MYSELF , and my impressions of the thing as a whole , to say things I have come to feel intensely of the laws , traditions , usages , and ideas we call society , and how we poor individuals get driven and lured and stranded among these windy , perplexing shoals and channels .
I 've got , I suppose , to a time of life when things begin to take on shapes that have an air of reality , and become no longer material for dreaming , but interesting in themselves .
I 've reached the criticising , novel-writing age , and here I am writing mine -- my one novel -- without having any of the discipline to refrain and omit that I suppose the regular novel-writer acquires .
I 've read an average share of novels and made some starts before this beginning , and I 've found the restraints and rules of the art ( as I made them out ) impossible for me .
I like to write , I am keenly interested in writing , but it is not my technique .
I 'm an engineer with a patent or two and a set of ideas ; most of whatever artist there is in me has been given to turbine machines and boat building and the problem of flying , and do what I will I fail to see how I can be other than a lax , undisciplined story-teller .
I must sprawl and flounder , comment and theorise , if I am to get the thing out I have in mind .
And it isn't a constructed tale I have to tell , but unmanageable realities .
My love-story -- and if only I can keep up the spirit of truth-telling all through as strongly as I have now , you shall have it all -- falls into no sort of neat scheme of telling .
It involves three separate feminine persons .
It 's all mixed up with the other things ... .
But I 've said enough , I hope , to excuse myself for the method or want of method in what follows , and I think I had better tell without further delay of my boyhood and my early impressions in the shadow of Bladesover House .
III There came a time when I realised that Bladesover House was not all it seemed , but when I was a little boy I took the place with the entirest faith as a complete authentic microcosm .
I believed that the Bladesover system was a little working-model -- and not so very little either -- of the whole world .
Let me try and give you the effect of it .
Bladesover lies up on the Kentish Downs , eight miles perhaps from Ashborough ; and its old pavilion , a little wooden parody of the temple of Vesta at Tibur , upon the hill crest behind the house , commands in theory at least a view of either sea , of the Channel southward and the Thames to the northeast .
The park is the second largest in Kent , finely wooded with well-placed beeches , many elms and some sweet chestnuts , abounding in little valleys and hollows of bracken , with springs and a stream and three fine ponds and multitudes of fallow deer .
The house was built in the eighteenth century , it is of pale red brick in the style of a French chateau , and save for one pass among the crests which opens to blue distances , to minute , remote , oast-set farm-houses and copses and wheat fields and the occasional gleam of water , its hundred and seventeen windows look on nothing but its own wide and handsome territories .
A semi-circular screen of great beeches masks the church and village , which cluster picturesquely about the high road along the skirts of the great park .
Northward , at the remotest corner of that enclosure , is a second dependent village , Ropedean , less fortunate in its greater distance and also on account of a rector .
This divine was indeed rich , but he was vindictively economical because of some shrinkage of his tithes ; and by reason of his use of the word Eucharist for the Lord 's Supper he had become altogether estranged from the great ladies of Bladesover .
So that Ropedean was in the shadows through all that youthful time .
The great house , the church , the village , and the labourers and the servants in their stations and degrees , seemed to me , I say , to be a closed and complete social system .
About us were other villages and great estates , and from house to house , interlacing , correlated , the Gentry , the fine Olympians , came and went .
The country towns seemed mere collections of ships , marketing places for the tenantry , centres for such education as they needed , as entirely dependent on the gentry as the village and scarcely less directly so .
I thought this was the order of the whole world .
I thought London was only a greater country town where the gentle-folk kept town-houses and did their greater shopping under the magnificent shadow of the greatest of all fine gentlewomen , the Queen .
It seemed to be in the divine order .
That all this fine appearance was already sapped , that there were forces at work that might presently carry all this elaborate social system in which my mother instructed me so carefully that I might understand my `` place , '' to Limbo , had scarcely dawned upon me even by the time that Tono-Bungay was fairly launched upon the world .
Mrs. Booch was a smaller woman , brown haired , with queer little curls on either side of her face , large blue eyes and a small set of stereotyped remarks that constituted her entire mental range .
Mrs. Latude-Fernay has left , oddly enough , no memory at all except her name and the effect of a green-grey silk dress , all set with gold and blue buttons .
I fancy she was a large blonde .
Then there was Miss Fison , the maid who served both Lady Drew and Miss Somerville , and at the end of the table opposite my mother , sat Rabbits the butler .
Rabbits , for a butler , was an unassuming man , and at tea he was not as you know butlers , but in a morning coat and a black tie with blue spots .
Still , he was large , with side whiskers , even if his clean-shaven mouth was weak and little .
I sat among these people on a high , hard , early Gregorian chair , trying to exist , like a feeble seedling amidst great rocks , and my mother sat with an eye upon me , resolute to suppress the slightest manifestation of vitality .
It was hard on me , but perhaps it was also hard upon these rather over-fed , ageing , pretending people , that my youthful restlessness and rebellious unbelieving eyes should be thrust in among their dignities .
`` Sugar , Mrs .
my mother used to ask .
The word sugar would stir the mind of Mrs. Mackridge .
`` They say , '' she would begin , issuing her proclamation -- at least half her sentences began `` they say '' -- '' sugar is fatt-an-ing , nowadays .
Many of the best people do not take it at all . ''
Then , to the table at large : `` Poor Sir Roderick , before he died , consumed great quan-ta-ties of sugar .
I have sometimes fancied it may have hastened his end . ''
But such occasions were rare , and I suppose that between ten and fourteen I averaged fifty days a year at Bladesover .
These readings whetted my taste for more , and surreptitiously I raided the bookcases in the big saloon .
I got through quite a number of books before my sacrilegious temerity was discovered by Ann , the old head-housemaid .
I remember that among others I tried a translation of Plato 's `` Republic '' then , and found extraordinarily little interest in it ; I was much too young for that ; but `` Vathek '' -- '' Vathek '' was glorious stuff .
When everybody HAD to kick !
The thought of `` Vathek '' always brings back with it my boyish memory of the big saloon at Bladesover .
I won his heart by a version of Vathek , and after that we were inseparable yarning friends .
We merged our intellectual stock so completely that I wonder sometimes how much I did not become Ewart , how much Ewart is not vicariously and derivatively me .
`` Nannie , '' she said , pointing , and Nannie left a question of my mother's disregarded to attend to her ; `` is he a servant boy ? ''
Then she gave herself up to cake with an appearance of entire forgetfulness of me that filled me with hate and a passionate desire to compel her to admire me ... .
And the next day before tea , I did for the first time in my life , freely , without command or any compulsion , wash my hands .
But she had been a little pressing to have it clear that I was not and could not be a servant .
`` You 'll never be a servant -- ever ! ''
I ran my mind hastily over the professions .
`` Snifty beast ! ''
said my lady , and tried to get on with the conversation ; but that governess made things impossible .
Some earlier grudge in the day 's affairs must have been in Archie's mind .
`` We let you play with us , '' said Archie ; `` but we ca n't have things like that . ''
`` We do n't want you to play with us at all , '' said Archie .
`` He drops his aitches like anything . ''
Then young Garvell , giving way before my slogging , stumbled and fell over a big flint , and I , still following the tradition of my class and school , promptly flung myself on him to finish him .
We were busy with each other on the ground when we became aware of a dreadful interruption .
`` Oh , Lady Drew ! ''
I heard Beatrice cry .
`` They 're fighting !
They're fighting something awful ! ''
The powers of justice in Bladesover made an extraordinary mess of my case .
`` I wo n't beg his pardon , '' I said , speaking for the first time .
I felt I had much to embitter me ; the game had and the beginnings of fairness by any standards I knew ... .
But the thing that embittered me most was that the Honourable Beatrice Normandy should have repudiated and fled from me as though I was some sort of leper , and not even have taken a chance or so , to give me a good-bye .
She might have done that anyhow !
Supposing I had told on her !
But the son of a servant counts as a servant .
She had forgotten and now remembered .
When I was thus banished from Bladesover House , as it was then thought for good and all , I was sent by my mother in a vindictive spirit , first to her cousin Nicodemus Frapp , and then , as a fully indentured apprentice , to my uncle Ponderevo .
And I loafed about this wilderness of crowded dinginess , with young , receptive , wide-open eyes , and through the blessing ( or curse ) of some fairy godmother of mine , asking and asking again : `` But after all , WHY -- ''
`` There 's no hell , '' I said , `` and no eternal punishment .
No God would be such a fool as that . ''
The last I remember of that great discussion was my cousin deploring the fact that he `` should ever sleep in the same bed with an Infidel ! ''
`` I was only talking sense , '' I said .
I slept not only through that night , but for all my nights since then .
So far as any fear of Divine injustice goes , I sleep soundly , and shall , I know , to the end of things .
That declaration was an epoch in my spiritual life .
But I did n't expect to have the whole meeting on Sunday turned on to me .
My mother looked up , went very white , and put her hand to her bosom .
I suppose there was a fearful fuss about me .
And of course I was quite unable to explain my reappearance .
But I held out stoutly , `` I won't go back to Chatham ; I 'll drown myself first . ''
The next day my mother carried me off to Wimblehurst , took me fiercely and aggressively to an uncle I had never heard of before , near though the place was to us .
She gave me no word as to what was to happen , and I was too subdued by her manifest wrath and humiliation at my last misdemeanour to demand information .
I do n't for one moment think Lady Drew was `` nice '' about me .
The finality of my banishment was endorsed and underlined and stamped home .
I wished very much now that I had run away to sea , in spite of the coal dust and squalour Rochester had revealed to me .
Perhaps over seas one came to different lands .
She took little interest in such qualities as cleverness .
She mused on scenes she had long dismissed from her mind .
`` Teddy , '' she said at last in the tone of one who has been feeling in the dark and finds .
`` He was called Teddy ... about your age ... .
Now he must be twenty-six or seven . ''
`` That must be him , '' said my mother , catching at her breath .
After Bladesover that apartment struck me as stuffy and petty , but it was very comfortable in comparison with the Frapp living-room .
It had a faint , disintegrating smell of meals about it , and my most immediate impression was of the remarkable fact that something was hung about or wrapped round or draped over everything .
There was bright-patterned muslin round the gas-bracket in the middle of the room , round the mirror over the mantel , stuff with ball-fringe along the mantel and casing in the fireplace , -- I first saw ball-fringe here -- and even the lamp on the little bureau wore a shade like a large muslin hat .
The table-cloth had ball-fringe and so had the window curtains , and the carpet was a bed of roses .
There were little cupboards on either side of the fireplace , and in the recesses , ill-made shelves packed with books , and enriched with pinked American cloth .
There was a dictionary lying face downward on the table , and the open bureau was littered with foolscap paper and the evidences of recently abandoned toil .
My eye caught `` The Ponderevo Patent Flat , a Machine you can Live in , '' written in large firm letters .
My uncle opened a little door like a cupboard door in the corner of this room , and revealed the narrowest twist of staircase I had ever set eyes upon .
Some one to see you .
But there 's no Development -- no growth .
They just come along here and buy pills when they want 'em -- and a horseball or such .
They 've got to be ill before there 's a prescription .
That sort they are .
You ca n't get 'em to launch out , you ca n't get 'em to take up anything new .
For instance , I 've been trying lately -- induce them to buy their medicines in advance , and in larger quantities .
But they won't look for it !
Then I tried to float a little notion of mine , sort of an insurance scheme for colds ; you pay so much a week , and when you 've got a cold you get a bottle of Cough Linctus so long as you can produce a substantial sniff .
they 've no capacity for ideas , they do n't catch on ; no Jump about the place , no Life .
-- they trickle , and what one has to do here is to trickle too -- Zzzz . ''
My uncle rose and in the most friendly way led me through the shop .
He stood on his doorstep and jerked amiable directions to me .
The three of them regarded me .
I had long been obsessed by the idea that having no Latin was a disadvantage in the world , and Archie Garvell had driven the point of this pretty earnestly home .
The literature I had read at Bladesover had all tended that way .
Latin had had a quality of emancipation for me that I find it difficult to convey .
And suddenly , when I had supposed all learning was at an end for me , I heard this !
`` You 'll have to learn Latin because you have to learn Latin , '' said my mother , `` not because you want to .
And afterwards you will have to learn all sorts of other things ... . ''
I parted from my mother that day in a dream , so sudden and important was this new aspect of things to me .
I was to learn Latin !
Now that the humiliation of my failure at Bladesover was past for her , now that she had a little got over her first intense repugnance at this resort to my uncle and contrived something that seemed like a possible provision for my future , the tenderness natural to a parting far more significant than any of our previous partings crept into her manner .
For the first and last time in my life I saw my mother 's tears .
Then she had gone , leaving me discomforted and perplexed , forgetting for a time even that I was to learn Latin , thinking of my mother as of something new and strange .
I remember , but rather indistinctly , my mother 's white paneled housekeeper 's room and the touch of oddness about it that she was not there , and the various familiar faces made strange by black , and I seem to recall the exaggerated self-consciousness that arose out of their focussed attention .
No doubt the sense of the new silk hat came and went and came again in my emotional chaos .
Then something comes out clear and sorrowful , rises out clear and sheer from among all these rather base and inconsequent things , and once again I walk before all the other mourners close behind her coffin as it is carried along the churchyard path to her grave , with the old vicar 's slow voice saying regretfully and unconvincingly above me , triumphant solemn things .
And so we came to my mother 's waiting grave .
When I came back at last to the real Bladesover on an inconsequent visit , everything was far smaller than I could have supposed possible .
It was as though everything had shivered and shrivelled a little at the Lichtenstein touch .
The harp was still in the saloon , but there was a different grand piano with a painted lid and a metrostyle pianola , and an extraordinary quantity of artistic litter and bric-a-brac scattered about .
There was the trail of the Bond Street showroom over it all .
The furniture was still under chintz , but it was n't the same sort of chintz although it pretended to be , and the lustre-dangling chandeliers had passed away .
Lady Lichtenstein 's books replaced the brown volumes I had browsed among -- they were mostly presentation copies of contemporary novels and the National Review and the Empire Review , and the Nineteenth Century and after jostled current books on the tables -- English new books in gaudy catchpenny `` artistic '' covers , French and Italian novels in yellow , German art handbooks of almost incredible ugliness .
There were abundant evidences that her ladyship was playing with the Keltic renascence , and a great number of ugly cats made of china -- she `` collected '' china and stoneware cats -- stood about everywhere -- in all colours , in all kinds of deliberately comic , highly glazed distortion .
So far as I can remember now , except for that one emotional phase by the graveside , I passed through all these experiences rather callously .
I had already , with the facility of youth , changed my world , ceased to think at all of the old school routine and put Bladesover aside for digestion at a latter stage .
I took up my new world in Wimblehurst with the chemist 's shop as its hub , set to work at Latin and materia medica , and concentrated upon the present with all my heart .
Wimblehurst is an exceptionally quiet and grey Sussex town rare among south of England towns in being largely built of stone .
I found something very agreeable and picturesque in its clean cobbled streets , its odd turnings and abrupt corners ; and in the pleasant park that crowds up one side of the town .
The whole place is under the Eastry dominion and it was the Eastry influence and dignity that kept its railway station a mile and three-quarters away .
Eastry House is so close that it dominates the whole ; one goes across the marketplace ( with its old lock-up and stocks ) , past the great pre-reformation church , a fine grey shell , like some empty skull from which the life has fled , and there at once are the huge wrought-iron gates , and one peeps through them to see the facade of this place , very white and large and fine , down a long avenue of yews .
Eastry was far greater than Bladesover and an altogether completer example of the eighteenth century system .
It ruled not two villages , but a borough , that had sent its sons and cousins to parliament almost as a matter of right so long as its franchise endured .
Every one was in the system , every one -- except my uncle .
He stood out and complained .
My uncle was the first real breach I found in the great front of Bladesover the world had presented me , for Chatham was not so much a breach as a confirmation .
But my uncle had no respect for Bladesover and Eastry -- none whatever .
He did not believe in them .
He was blind even to what they were .
He propounded strange phrases about them , he exfoliated and wagged about novel and incredible ideas .
`` Rather a nuisance to the doctors , '' I reflected .
`` They got to look out for themselves .
By Jove , yes .
They 'll do you if they can , and you do them .
That makes it romantic .
That's the Romance of Commerce , George .
You 're in the mountains there !
Think of having all the quinine in the world , and some millionaire 's pampered wife gone ill with malaria , eh ?
That 's a squeeze , George , eh ?
Millionaire on his motor car outside , offering you any price you liked .
That 'ud wake up Wimblehurst ... .
You have n't an Idea down here .
He passed into a rapt dream , from which escaped such fragments as : `` Fifty per cent .
advance sir ; security -- to-morrow .
My uncle ranged over the gilt labels of his bottles and drawers for a while , dreaming of corners in this and that .
But at last he reverted to Wimblehurst again .
`` You got to be in London when these things are in hand .
For me the years at Wimblehurst were years of pretty active growth .
Most of my leisure and much of my time in the shop I spent in study .
I speedily mastered the modicum of Latin necessary for my qualifying examinations , and -- a little assisted by the Government Science and Art Department classes that were held in the Grammar School -- went on with my mathematics .
There were classes in physics , in chemistry , in mathematics and machine drawing , and I took up these subjects with considerable avidity .
Exercise I got chiefly in the form of walks .
There was some cricket in the summer and football in the winter sustained by young men 's clubs that levied a parasitic blackmail of the big people and the sitting member , but I was never very keen at these games .
I did n't find any very close companions among the youths of Wimblehurst .
They struck me , after my cockney schoolmates , as loutish and slow , servile and furtive , spiteful and mean .
WE used to swagger , but these countrymen dragged their feet and hated an equal who did n't ; we talked loud , but you only got the real thoughts of Wimblehurst in a knowing undertone behind its hand .
And even then they were n't much in the way of thoughts .
`` Look at him , George , looking dignified .
I 'd like to put an old label on to him round the middle like his bottles are , with Ol Pondo on it .
That 's Latin for Impostor , George MUST be .
He 'd look lovely with a stopper . ''
She had evidently been the wit and joy of a large circle of schoolfellows , and this style had become a second nature with her .
It made her very delightful to me in that quiet place .
Her customary walk even had a sort of hello !
Her chief preoccupation in life was , I believe , to make my uncle laugh , and when by some new nickname , some new quaintness or absurdity , she achieved that end , she was , behind a mask of sober amazement , the happiest woman on earth .
My uncle 's laugh when it did come , I must admit was , as Baedeker says , `` rewarding . ''
It began with gusty blowings and snortings , and opened into a clear `` Ha ha ! ''
but in fullest development it included , in those youthful days , falling about anyhow and doubling up tightly , and whackings of the stomach , and tears and cries of anguish .
I never in my life heard my uncle laugh to his maximum except at her ; he was commonly too much in earnest for that , and he did n't laugh much at all , to my knowledge , after those early years .
Also she threw things at him to an enormous extent in her resolve to keep things lively in spite of Wimblehurst ; sponges out of stock she threw , cushions , balls of paper , clean washing , bread ; and once up the yard when they thought that I and the errand boy and the diminutive maid of all work were safely out of the way , she smashed a boxful of eight-ounce bottles I had left to drain , assaulting my uncle with a new soft broom .
Sometimes she would shy things at me -- but not often .
There seemed always laughter round and about her -- all three of us would share hysterics at times -- and on one occasion the two of them came home from church shockingly ashamed of themselves , because of a storm of mirth during the sermon .
The vicar , it seems , had tried to blow his nose with a black glove as well as the customary pocket-handkerchief .
And afterwards she had picked up her own glove by the finger , and looking innocently but intently sideways , had suddenly by this simple expedient exploded my uncle altogether .
We had it all over again at dinner .
Or some one with an immense air of innocence would remark to the world generally , `` They 're talkin ' of rebuildin ' Wimblehurst all over again , I 'm told .
Anybody heard anything of it ?
Going to make it a reg'lar smartgoin ' , enterprisin ' place -- kind of Crystal Pallas . ''
I remember that either coming or going on that occasion , Ruck , the butcher , stood in his doorway and regarded us with a grin that showed his long teeth .
`` It 's these Crises , George , '' he said , `` try Character .
Your aunt 's come out well , my boy . ''
He made meditative noises for a space .
`` The Battle of Life , George , my boy , '' he would cry , or `` Ups and Downs ! ''
`` It 's where you 'll bump up against Chance like this , George , that you feel the need of religion .
Your hard-and-fast scientific men -- your Spencers and Huxleys -- they do n't understand that .
I 've thought of it a lot lately -- in bed and about .
I was thinking of it this morning while I shaved .
It 's not irreverent for me to say it , I hope -- but God comes in on the off-chance , George .
Do n't you be too cocksure of anything , good or bad .
That 's what I make out of it .
I could have sworn .
Well , do you think I -- particular as I am -- would have touched those Union Pacifics with trust money at all , if I had n't thought it a thoroughly good thing -- good without spot or blemish ?
... And it was bad !
`` I wish , '' said I , becoming for a moment outrageous , `` YOU were being Led to give me some account of my money , uncle . ''
And in the end I had to .
Many things have happened since then , but the last glance I had of Wimblehurst two years ago remarked no change whatever in its pleasant tranquillity .
They had not even built any fresh houses -- at least not actually in the town , though about the station there had been some building .
But it was a good place to do work in , for all its quiescence .
I was soon beyond the small requirements of the Pharmaceutical Society's examination , and as they do not permit candidates to sit for that until one and twenty , I was presently filling up my time and preventing my studies becoming too desultory by making an attack upon the London University degree of Bachelor of Science , which impressed me then as a very splendid but almost impossible achievement .
The degree in mathematics and chemistry appealed to me as particularly congenial -- albeit giddily inaccessible .
I set to work .
I had presently to arrange a holiday and go to London to matriculate , and so it was I came upon my aunt and uncle again .
In many ways that visit marked an epoch .
It was my first impression of London at all .
I was then nineteen , and by a conspiracy of chances my nearest approach to that human wilderness had been my brief visit to Chatham .
Chatham too had been my largest town .
So that I got London at last with an exceptional freshness of effect , as the sudden revelation of a whole unsuspected other side to life .
`` London , '' she said , did n't `` get blacks '' on her .
It pleased my uncle extremely to find I had never seen London before .
He took possession of the metropolis forthwith .
`` London , George , '' he said , `` takes a lot of understanding .
It 's a great place .
The richest town in the world , the biggest port , the greatest manufacturing town , the Imperial city -- the centre of civilisation , the heart of the world !
See those sandwich men down there !
That third one 's hat !
You do n't see poverty like that in Wimblehurst George !
And many of them high Oxford honour men too .
Brought down by drink !
It 's a wonderful place , George -- a whirlpool , a maelstrom !
whirls you up and whirls you down . ''
`` If I make it at all , '' I said .
`` For my part I think shall be satisfied with something less than a fortune . ''
`` So HE old says . ''
She jerked her head at my uncle .
`` You may joke , '' said my uncle , and hummed for a moment .
`` Well , George , there 's one thing you can rely upon , I 'm doing nothing in a hurry .
I turn over this one and that , and I do n't talk -- indiscreetly .
There 's -- No !
I do n't think I can tell you that .
And yet , why NOT ? ''
His face flushed slightly , he leant forward over the little table towards me .
said my uncle , rejoicing and expanding .
`` What IS it ?
That's what you got to ask ?
What wo n't it be ? ''
He dug me violently in what he supposed to be my ribs .
`` George , '' he cried -- '' George , watch this place !
There 's more to follow . ''
My uncle sighed , and leant back in his chair .
`` I wish I could make all this business as clear to you as it is to me , '' he said .
`` However -- Go on !
Say what you have to say . ''
After I left my uncle that evening I gave way to a feeling of profound depression .
My uncle and aunt seemed to me to be leading -- I have already used the word too often , but I must use it again -- DINGY lives .
They seemed to be adrift in a limitless crowd of dingy people , wearing shabby clothes , living uncomfortably in shabby second-hand houses , going to and fro on pavements that had always a thin veneer of greasy , slippery mud , under grey skies that showed no gleam of hope of anything for them but dinginess until they died .
It seemed absolutely clear to me that my mother 's little savings had been swallowed up and that my own prospect was all too certainly to drop into and be swallowed up myself sooner or later by this dingy London ocean .
The London that was to be an adventurous escape from the slumber of Wimblehurst , had vanished from my dreams .
I saw my uncle pointing to the houses in Park Lane and showing a frayed shirt-cuff as he did so .
I heard my aunt : `` I 'm to ride in my carriage then .
So he old says . ''
I am most reminded of Bladesover and Eastry by all those regions round about the West End parks ; for example , estate parks , each more or less in relation to a palace or group of great houses .
The roads and back ways of Mayfair and all about St. James 's again , albeit perhaps of a later growth in point of time , were of the very spirit and architectural texture of the Bladesover passages and yards ; they had the same smells , the space , the large cleanest and always going to and fro where one met unmistakable Olympians and even more unmistakable valets , butlers , footmen in mufti .
There were moments when I seemed to glimpse down areas the white panelling , the very chintz of my mother 's room again .
I could trace out now on a map what I would call the Great-House region ; passing south-westward into Belgravia , becoming diffused and sporadic westward , finding its last systematic outbreak round and about Regent's Park .
The Duke of Devonshire 's place in Piccadilly , in all its insolent ugliness , pleases me particularly ; it is the quintessence of the thing ; Apsley House is all in the manner of my theory , Park Lane has its quite typical mansions , and they run along the border of the Green Park and St. James 's .
And I struck out a truth one day in Cromwell Road quite suddenly , as I looked over the Natural History Museum `` By Jove , '' said I `` but this is the little assemblage of cases of stuffed birds and animals upon the Bladesover staircase grown enormous , and yonder as the corresponding thing to the Bladesover curios and porcelain is the Art Museume and there in the little observatories in Exhibition Road is old Sir Cuthbert 's Gregorian telescope that I hunted out in the storeroom and put together . ''
And diving into the Art Museum under this inspiration , I came to a little reading-room and found as I had inferred , old brown books !
I had come to London as a scholar .
I had taken the Vincent Bradley scholarship of the Pharmaceutical Society , but I threw this up when I found that my work of the Science and Art Department in mathematics , physics and chemistry had given me one of the minor Technical Board Scholarships at the Consolidated Technical Schools at South Kensington .
This latter was in mechanics and metallurgy ; and I hesitated between the two .
The Vincent Bradley gave me L70 a year and quite the best start-off a pharmaceutical chemist could have ; the South Kensington thing was worth about twenty-two shillings a week , and the prospects it opened were vague .
But it meant far more scientific work than the former , and I was still under the impulse of that great intellectual appetite that is part of the adolescence of men of my type .
Moreover it seemed to lead towards engineering , in which I imagined -- I imagine to this day -- my particular use is to be found .
I took its greater uncertainty as a fair risk .
I came up very keen , not doubting that the really hard and steady industry that had carried me through Wimblehurst would go on still in the new surroundings .
When I look back now at my Wimblehurst days , I still find myself surprised at the amount of steady grinding study , of strenuous self-discipline that I maintained throughout my apprenticeship .
In many ways I think that time was the most honourable period in my life .
I wish I could say with a certain mind that my motives in working so well were large and honourable too .
To a certain extent they were so ; there was a fine sincere curiosity , a desire for the strength and power of scientific knowledge and a passion for intellectual exercise ; but I do not think those forces alone would have kept me at it so grimly and closely if Wimblehurst had not been so dull , so limited and so observant .
Directly I came into the London atmosphere , tasting freedom , tasting irresponsibility and the pull of new forces altogether , my discipline fell from me like a garment .
Wimblehurst to a youngster in my position offered no temptations worth counting , no interests to conflict with study , no vices -- such vices as it offered were coarsely stripped of any imaginative glamourfull drunkenness , clumsy leering shameful lust , no social intercourse even to waste one 's time , and on the other hand it would minister greatly to the self-esteem of a conspicuously industrious student .
One was marked as `` clever , '' one played up to the part , and one 's little accomplishment stood out finely in one 's private reckoning against the sunlit small ignorance of that agreeable place .
One went with an intent rush across the market square , one took one 's exercise with as dramatic a sense of an ordered day as an Oxford don , one burnt the midnight oil quite consciously at the rare respectful , benighted passer-by .
And one stood out finely in the local paper with one's unapproachable yearly harvest of certificates .
Thus I was not only a genuinely keen student , but also a little of a prig and poseur in those days -- and the latter kept the former at it , as London made clear .
My apprehension of spaces and places was reinforced by a quickened apprehension of persons .
A constant stream of people passed by me , eyes met and challenged mine and passed -- more and more I wanted then to stay -- if I went eastward towards Piccadilly , women who seemed then to my boyish inexperience softly splendid and alluring , murmured to me as they passed .
The very hoardings clamoured strangely at one 's senses and curiosities .
One bought pamphlets and papers full of strange and daring ideas transcending one 's boldest ; in the parks one heard men discussing the very existence of God , denying the rights of property , debating a hundred things that one dared not think about in Wimblehurst .
And after the ordinary overcast day , after dull mornings , came twilight , and London lit up and became a thing of white and yellow and red jewels of light and wonderful floods of golden illumination and stupendous and unfathomable shadows -- and there were no longer any mean or shabby people -- but a great mysterious movement of unaccountable beings ... .
Always I was coming on the queerest new aspects .
Late one Saturday night I found myself one of a great slow-moving crowd between the blazing shops and the flaring barrows in the Harrow Road ; I got into conversation with two bold-eyed girls , bought them boxes of chocolate , made the acquaintance of father and mother and various younger brothers and sisters , sat in a public-house hilariously with them all , standing and being stood drinks , and left them in the small hours at the door of `` home , '' never to see them again .
And once I was accosted on the outskirts of a Salvation Army meeting in one of the parks by a silk-hatted young man of eager and serious discourse , who argued against scepticism with me , invited me home to tea into a clean and cheerful family of brothers and sisters and friends , and there I spent the evening singing hymns to the harmonium ( which reminded me of half-forgotten Chatham ) , and wishing all the sisters were not so obviously engaged ... .
I walked round , wrung his hand , and we surveyed one another .
He was lying on a small wooden fold-up bed , the scanty covering of which was supplemented by an overcoat and an elderly but still cheerful pair of check trousers , and he was wearing pajamas of a virulent pink and green .
His neck seemed longer and more stringy than it had been even in our schooldays , and his upper lip had a wiry black moustache .
The rest of his ruddy , knobby countenance , his erratic hair and his general hairy leanness had not even -- to my perceptions grown .
I felt a pipe was becoming after all , and that lit , I gave him a favourable sketch of my career .
To me it was a most memorable talk because it opened out quite new horizons of thought .
I 'd been working rather close and out of touch with Ewart 's free gesticulating way .
He was pessimistic that day and sceptical to the very root of things .
He made me feel clearly , what I had not felt at all before , the general adventurousness of life , particularly of life at the stage we had reached , and also the absence of definite objects , of any concerted purpose in the lives that were going on all round us .
He made me feel , too , how ready I was to take up commonplace assumptions .
Just as I had always imagined that somewhere in social arrangements there was certainly a Head-Master who would intervene if one went too far , so I had always had a sort of implicit belief that in our England there were somewhere people who understood what we were all , as a nation , about .
That crumpled into his pit of doubt and vanished .
It was only very slowly I came to gauge Ewart 's real position in the scheme of things , to understand how deliberate and complete was this detachment of his from the moral condemnation and responsibilities that played so fine a part in his talk .
His was essentially the nature of an artistic appreciator ; he could find interest and beauty in endless aspects of things that I marked as evil , or at least as not negotiable ; and the impulse I had towards self-deception , to sustained and consistent self-devotion , disturbed and detached and pointless as it was at that time , he had indeed a sort of admiration for but no sympathy .
Like many fantastic and ample talkers he was at bottom secretive , and he gave me a series of little shocks of discovery throughout our intercourse .
The first of these came in the realisation that he quite seriously meant to do nothing in the world at all towards reforming the evils he laid bare in so easy and dexterous a manner .
The next came in the sudden appearance of a person called `` Milly '' -- I 've forgotten her surname -- whom I found in his room one evening , simply attired in a blue wrap -- the rest of her costume behind the screen -- smoking cigarettes and sharing a flagon of an amazingly cheap and self-assertive grocer 's wine Ewart affected , called `` Canary Sack . ''
said Ewart , as I came in .
`` This is Milly , you know .
She 's been being a model -- she IS a model really ... .
( keep calm , Ponderevo ! )
Have some sack ? ''
`` These socialists have no sense of proportion , '' he said .
`` What can you expect of them ? ''
It is odd that I ca n't remember when first I saw Marion , who became my wife -- whom I was to make wretched , who was to make me wretched , who was to pluck that fine generalised possibility of love out of my early manhood and make it a personal conflict .
I became aware of her as one of a number of interesting attractive figures that moved about in my world , that glanced back at my eyes , that flitted by with a kind of averted watchfulness .
I would meet her coming through the Art Museum , which was my short cut to the Brompton Road , or see her sitting , reading as I thought , in one of the bays of the Education Library .
But really , as I found out afterwards , she never read .
She used to come there to eat a bun in quiet .
She was a very gracefully-moving figure of a girl then , very plainly dressed , with dark brown hair I remember , in a knot low on her neck behind that confessed the pretty roundness of her head and harmonised with the admirable lines of ears and cheek , the grave serenity of mouth and brow .
I do remember , though , how one afternoon I discovered the peculiar appeal of her form for me .
I had been restless with my work and had finally slipped out of the Laboratory and come over to the Art Museum to lounge among the pictures .
I came upon her in an odd corner of the Sheepshanks gallery , intently copying something from a picture that hung high .
I had just been in the gallery of casts from the antique , my mind was all alive with my newly awakened sense of line , and there she stood with face upturned , her body drooping forward from the hips just a little -- memorably graceful -- feminine .
An accident brought us together .
I found myself one Monday morning in an omnibus staggering westward from Victoria -- I was returning from a Sunday I 'd spent at Wimblehurst in response to a unique freak of hospitality on the part of Mr. Mantell .
She was the sole other inside passenger .
And when the time came to pay her fare , she became an extremely scared , disconcerted and fumbling young woman ; she had left her purse at home .
Luckily I had some money .
That encounter , I have no doubt , exercised me enormously .
I lay awake at night rehearsing it , and wondering about the next phase of our relationship .
That took the form of the return of my twopence .
I was in the Science Library , digging something out of the Encyclopedia Britannica , when she appeared beside me and placed on the open page an evidently premeditated thin envelope , bulgingly confessing the coins within .
`` It was so very kind of you , '' she said , `` the other day .
I do n't know what I should have done , Mr. -- ''
Her mother must once have been a pretty woman ; she had regular features and Marion 's hair without its lustre , but she was thin and careworn .
The aunt , Miss Ramboat , was a large , abnormally shy person very like her brother , and I do n't recall anything she said on this occasion .
`` I love you , '' I whispered suddenly with my heart beating wildly , drew her to me , drew all her beauty to me and kissed her cool and unresisting lips .
`` But I love you , '' I insisted .
It was clear there would be nothing for me in the schools as I had once dared to hope ; there seemed , indeed , scarcely anything in the world except an illpaid assistantship in some provincial organized Science School or grammar school .
I knew that for that sort of work , without a degree or any qualification , one earned hardly a bare living and had little leisure to struggle up to anything better .
If only I had even as little as fifty pounds I might hold out in London and take my B.Sc .
degree , and quadruple my chances !
My bitterness against my uncle returned at the thought .
After all , he had some of my money still , or ought to have .
Why should n't I act within my rights , threaten to 'take proceedings ' ?
I meditated for a space on the idea , and then returned to the Science Library and wrote him a very considerable and occasionally pungent letter .
His voice grew lower and more cunning .
He made explanations that to my inexperience did not completely explain .
I retain an impression of a long credit and a share with a firm of wholesale chemists , of a credit and a prospective share with some pirate printers , of a third share for a leading magazine and newspaper proprietor .
`` Let me go back and look at the game again , '' I said .
`` Let me see upstairs and round about . ''
`` I 'd like to know what sort of trading is n't a swindle in its way .
Everybody who does a large advertised trade is selling something common on the strength of saying it 's uncommon .
Look at Chickson -- they made him a baronet .
Look at Lord Radmore , who did it on lying about the alkali in soap !
Rippin ' ads those were of his too ! ''
I said , and shrugged my shoulders .
`` You 're a bit stiff , George .
There 's no fraud in this affair , I 'll bet my hat .
But what do you propose to do ?
Go as chemist to some one who IS running a business , and draw a salary without a share like I offer you .
Much sense in that !
It comes out of the swindle as you call it -- just the same . ''
`` Some businesses are straight and quiet , anyhow ; supply a sound article that is really needed , do n't shout advertisements . ''
I remember certain phases of my indecisions very well .
And as I went along the embankment the first effect was all against my uncle .
He shrank -- for a little while he continued to shrink -- in perspective until he was only a very small shabby little man in a dirty back street , sending off a few hundred bottles of rubbish to foolish buyers .
The great buildings on the right of us , the Inns and the School Board place -- as it was then -- Somerset House , the big hotels , the great bridges , Westminster 's outlines ahead , had an effect of grey largeness that reduced him to the proportions of a busy black beetle in a crack in the floor .
But as a matter of fact I did n't tell him .
I threw out that I was doubtful whether I ought to go into trade , or stick to teaching in view of my deepening socialist proclivities ; and he , warming with the unaccustomed generosity of a sixteen-penny Chianti , ran on from that without any further inquiry as to my trouble .
I made noises of remonstrance .
I 'll put it on his corners , -- four mustard pots .
I dare say he 'd be glad of a mustard plaster now to cool him , poor devil , where he is .
But anyhow , -- here goes ! ''
`` Look here , '' I said ; `` I want you , Marion .
Do n't you understand ?
I want you . ''
`` Well then , '' I said , `` promise to marry me ! ''
`` If I do , what difference will it make ? ''
`` We ca n't marry -- in the street . ''
`` Will you marry me if I get three hundred a year ? ''
I held out my hand and looked her in the eyes .
`` It 's a bargain , '' I said .
She hesitated and touched my hand for an instant .
`` It 's silly , '' she remarked as she did so .
`` It means really we 're -- '' She paused .
said my aunt as I appeared .
`` It 's George ! ''
`` I 've had false ideas about the world , '' I said .
they do n't matter now !
Yes , I 'll come , I 'll take my chance with you , I wo n't hesitate again . ''
`` The romance of modern commerce , George ! ''
my uncle would say , rubbing his hands together and drawing in air through his teeth .
`` The romance of modern commerce , eh ?
Under the shadow of our great leading line we were presently taking subsidiary specialties into action ; `` Tono-Bungay Hair Stimulant '' was our first supplement .
Then came `` Concentrated Tono-Bungay '' for the eyes .
That did n't go , but we had a considerable success with the Hair Stimulant .
We broached the subject , I remember , in a little catechism beginning : `` Why does the hair fall out ?
Because the follicles are fagged .
What are the follicles ?
... '' So it went on to the climax that the Hair Stimulant contained all `` The essential principles of that most reviving tonic , Tono-Bungay , together with an emollient and nutritious oil derived from crude Neat 's Foot Oil by a process of refinement , separation and deodorization ... .
It will be manifest to any one of scientific attainments that in Neat 's Foot Oil derived from the hoofs and horns of beasts , we must necessarily have a natural skin and hair lubricant . ''
My uncle 's last addition to the Tono-Bungay group was the Tono-Bungay Mouthwash .
The reader has probably read a hundred times that inspiring inquiry of his , `` You are Young Yet , but are you Sure Nothing has Aged your Gums ? ''
`` George , whad'yer think of T.B .
He would Zzzz , with his glasses reflecting the red of the glowing coals .
`` No good hiding our light under a Bushel , '' he would remark .
We had a sort of endless band of bottles sliding along an inclined glass trough made slippery with running water .
At one end a girl held them up to the light , put aside any that were imperfect and placed the others in the trough ; the filling was automatic ; at the other end a girl slipped in the cork and drove it home with a little mallet .
Each tank , the little one for the vivifying ingredients and the big one for distilled water , had a level indicator , and inside I had a float arrangement that stopped the slide whenever either had sunk too low .
Another girl stood ready with my machine to label the corked bottles and hand them to the three packers , who slipped them into their outer papers and put them , with a pad of corrugated paper between each pair , into a little groove from which they could be made to slide neatly into position in our standard packing-case .
It sounds wild , I know , but I believe I was the first man in the city of London to pack patent medicines through the side of the packing-case , to discover there was a better way in than by the lid .
Our cases packed themselves , practically ; had only to be put into position on a little wheeled tray and when full pulled to the lift that dropped them to the men downstairs , who padded up the free space and nailed on top and side .
Our girls , moreover , packed with corrugated paper and matchbook-wood box partitions when everybody else was using expensive young men to pack through the top of the box with straw , many breakages and much waste and confusion .
`` It 's just on all fours with the rest of things , '' he remarked ; `` only more so .
You need n't think you 're anything out of the way . ''
There was a just-perceptible listening hang in the work about us .
`` Shabby , '' said my uncle , nodding his head .
`` Bound to get found out ! ''
`` Tono-Bungay 's all right , '' said my uncle , suddenly grave .
`` We aren't talking of Tono-Bungay . ''
`` Or a friable biscuit .
You might advertise : 'Why are Birds so Bright ?
Because they digest their food perfectly !
Why do they digest their food so perfectly ?
Because they have a gizzard !
Why has n't man a gizzard ?
Because he can buy Ponderevo 's Asphalt Triturating , Friable Biscuit -- Which is Better . '
And the make-up of Marion 's mind in the matter was an equally irrational affair .
Her training had been one , not simply of silences , but suppressions .
An enormous force of suggestion had so shaped her that the intense natural fastidiousness of girlhood had developed into an absolute perversion of instinct .
For all that is cardinal in this essential business of life she had one inseparable epithet -- '' horrid . ''
Without any such training she would have been a shy lover , but now she was an impossible one .
For the rest she had derived , I suppose , partly from the sort of fiction she got from the Public Library , and partly from the workroom talk at Smithie 's .
So far as the former origin went , she had an idea of love as a state of worship and service on the part of the man and of condescension on the part of the woman .
There was nothing `` horrid '' about it in any fiction she had read .
The man gave presents , did services , sought to be in every way delightful .
The woman `` went out '' with him , smiled at him , was kissed by him in decorous secrecy , and if he chanced to offend , denied her countenance and presence .
Usually she did something `` for his good '' to him , made him go to church , made him give up smoking or gambling , smartened him up .
Quite at the end of the story came a marriage , and after that the interest ceased .
`` Look here , Marion , '' I said , `` are you going to marry me or are you not ? ''
`` To marry on -- yes . ''
I said , standing up ; `` let 's go towards the sunset , dear , and talk about it all .
Do you know -- this is a most beautiful world , an amazingly beautiful world , and when the sunset falls upon you it makes you into shining gold .
No , not gold -- into golden glass ... .
Into something better that either glass or gold .
We furnished that double-fronted house from attic -- it ran to an attic -- to cellar , and created a garden .
`` But , George , '' said her father , `` what sort of marriage do you want ?
You do n't want to go to one of those there registry offices ? ''
`` I should n't feel married , '' said Mrs. Ramboat .
`` Very well , '' I said , standing up , white and tense and it amazed me , but I was also exultant ; `` then we wo n't marry at all . ''
We got a jar of shandy-gaff , some food , and , on Ewart 's suggestion , two Japanese sunshades in Staines ; we demanded extra cushions at the boathouse and we spent an enormously soothing day in discourse and meditation , our boat moored in a shady place this side of Windsor .
I seem to remember Ewart with a cushion forward , only his heels and sunshade and some black ends of hair showing , a voice and no more , against the shining , smoothly-streaming mirror of the trees and bushes .
This was so manifestly true that it silenced me altogether .
`` And if you belong to her and she to you , Ponderevo -- which end 's the head ? ''
`` Well , that 's Mr. Grundy in one mood -- and it puts Mrs. Grundy -- She 's a much-maligned person , Ponderevo -- a rake at heart -- and it puts her in a most painful state of fluster -- most painful !
She 's an amenable creature .
When Grundy tells her things are shocking , she 's shocked -- pink and breathless .
She goes about trying to conceal her profound sense of guilt behind a haughty expression ... .
He kicked his legs about extravagantly , and I laughed again .
`` That 's Grundy in one mood , Ponderevo .
It is n't Mrs. Grundy .
That 's one of the lies we tell about women .
They 're too simple .
They take on just what men tell 'em . ''
`` I 'm coming to that .
The homes of the women , Ponderevo , will be set in the wall of their city ; each woman will have her own particular house and home , furnished after her own heart in her own manner -- with a little balcony on the outside wall .
Built into the wall -- and a little balcony .
And there she will go and look out , when the mood takes her , and all round the city there will be a broad road and seats and great shady trees .
And men will stroll up and down there when they feel the need of feminine company ; when , for instance , they want to talk about their souls or their characters or any of the things that only women will stand ... .
The women will lean over and look at the men and smile and talk to them as they fancy .
And each woman will have this ; she will have a little silken ladder she can let down if she chooses -- if she wants to talk closer ... ''
he remarked , `` Walham Green !
What a chap you are , Ponderevo ! ''
and he made an abrupt end to his discourse .
He would n't even reply to my tentatives for a time .
`` I had a quite different idea . ''
You see I had told him nothing about Marion until about a week before the wedding ; both he and my aunt had been taken altogether by surprise .
They could n't , as people say , `` make it out . ''
My aunt was intensely interested , much more than my uncle ; it was then , I think , for the first time that I really saw that she cared for me .
She got me alone , I remember , after I had made my announcement .
`` Now , George , '' she said , `` tell me everything about her .
Why did n't you tell -- ME at least -- before ? ''
In the vestry she turned away as we signed , and I verily believe she was crying , though to this day I ca n't say why she should have cried , and she was near crying too when she squeezed my hand at parting -- and she never said a word or looked at me , but just squeezed my hand ... .
The queer things my aunt said were nothing to the queer things she did n't say .
I remember her in our drawing-room one day , and how she cocked her eye -- it 's the only expression -- at the India-rubber plant in a Doulton-ware pot which Marion had placed on the corner of the piano .
My eye would seek her as I went through on business things -- I dictated some letters to her and so discovered she had pretty , soft-looking hands with pink nails .
Once or twice , meeting casually , we looked one another for the flash of a second in the eyes .
One day I came into Raggett Street at lunch time and she was alone , sitting at her desk .
She glanced up as I entered , and then became very still , with a downcast face and her hands clenched on the table .
I walked right by her to the door of the inner office , stopped , came back and stood over her .
`` Along the Embankment to Charing Cross , '' she answered as intimately .
`` None of the others go that way ... ''
`` Yes , half-past five ... ''
She stood very still , a dusky figure against the bright window .
I stared at her .
It was the most amazing moment in any life ... .
`` Tea , M 'm , '' she said -- and vanished , leaving the door open .
`` I will go upstairs , '' said I , and stopped .
`` I will go upstairs '' I repeated , `` and put my bag in the spare room . ''
I struggled with tangled ideas and emotions .
`` I do n't know what love is .
It 's all sorts of things -- it 's made of a dozen strands twisted in a thousand ways . ''
`` Then we ca n't very well go on living together , '' she said .
`` Can we ? ''
`` You 'll have an income .
They call it alimony .
From a third to a half of my present income -- more if you like -- I do n't mind -- three hundred a year , say .
You 've got your old people to keep and you 'll need all that . ''
`` And all this life you 've hated ''
`` We 've settled all that , '' I said .
`` Your aunt will rejoice at all this .
She never cared for me ... ''
It was wide open , but she had disappeared ... .
We went across the evening fields in silence , towards a sky of deepening gold and purple , and Effie was close beside me always , very close , glancing up ever and again at my face .
`` What am I to do with life ? ''
that was the question that besieged me .
I wondered if all the world was even as I , urged to this by one motive and to that by another , creatures of chance and impulse and unmeaning traditions .
Had I indeed to abide by what I had said and done and chosen ?
Was there nothing for me in honour but to provide for Effie , go back penitent to Marion and keep to my trade in rubbish -- or find some fresh one -- and so work out the residue of my days ?
I did n't accept that for a moment .
But what else was I to do ?
I wondered if my case was the case of many men , whether in former ages , too , men had been so guideless , so uncharted , so haphazard in their journey into life .
In the Middle Ages , in the old Catholic days , one went to a priest , and he said with all the finality of natural law , this you are and this you must do .
I wondered whether even in the Middle Ages I should have accepted that ruling without question .
`` Gloomkins , '' said she .
I came into the inner office suddenly one day -- it must have been just before the time of Marion 's suit for restitution -- and sat down before my uncle .
`` Things are wrong . ''
`` She 's been a stupid girl , George , '' he said ; `` I partly understand .
But you 're quit of her now , practically , and there 's just as good fish in the sea -- ''
it 's not that ! ''
`` That 's only the part that shows .
I'm sick -- I 'm sick of all this damned rascality . ''
Nearly eight years slipped by .
I grew in experience , in capacity , until I was fully a man , but with many new interests , living on a larger scale in a wider world than I could have dreamt of in my Marion days .
Her letters become rare and insignificant .
At last came a gap of silence that made me curious .
For eighteen months or more I had nothing from Marion save her quarterly receipts through the bank .
Then I damned at Smithie , and wrote a card to Marion .
`` I want , '' said my uncle , `` half a pound of every sort of soap you got .
Yes , I want to take them now .
Wait a moment , George ... .
Now what sort of soap d'you call THAT ? ''
`` No objection to our advertising you wide and free ? ''
`` We 've got to bring the Home Up to Date ?
That 's my idee , George .
We got to make a civilised domestic machine out of these relics of barbarism .
I 'm going to hunt up inventors , make a corner in d'mestic ideas .
Balls of string that wo n't dissolve into a tangle , and gum that wo n't dry into horn .
Then after conveniences -- beauty .
All these few things ought to be made fit to look at ; it 's your aunt 's idea , that .
Get one of those new art chaps to design all the things they make ugly now .
Patent carpet-sweepers by these greenwood chaps , housemaid 's boxes it 'll be a pleasure to fall over -- rich coloured house-flannels .
Hang 'em up on the walls like warming-pans .
All the polishes and things in such tins -- you 'll want to cuddle 'em , George !
'Sted of all the silly ugly things we got .
But that I will tell about later .
The point I was coming to was that I did not realise until after the crash how recklessly my uncle had kept his promise of paying a dividend of over eight per cent .
on the ordinary shares of that hugely over-capitalised enterprise , Household Services .
Then came a room with a couple of secretaries -- no typewriters , because my uncle hated the clatter -- and a casual person or two sitting about , projectors whose projects were being entertained .
Here and in a further room nearer the private apartments , my uncle 's correspondence underwent an exhaustive process of pruning and digestion before it reached him .
Then the two little rooms in which my uncle talked ; my magic uncle who had got the investing public -- to whom all things were possible .
As one came in we would find him squatting with his cigar up and an expression of dubious beatitude upon his face , while some one urged him to grow still richer by this or that .
He was , on the whole , a very happy man throughout all that wildly enterprising time .
He made and , as I shall tell in its place , spent great sums of money .
He was constantly in violent motion , constantly stimulated mentally and physically and rarely tired .
About him was an atmosphere of immense deference much of his waking life was triumphal and all his dreams .
I doubt if he had any dissatisfaction with himself at all until the crash bore him down .
Things must have gone very rapidly with him ... .
I think he must have been very happy .
He felt he could make them , and they felt so too .
He had but to say `` No ! ''
and they faded out of existence ... .
He had become a sort of vortex to which wealth flowed of its own accord .
His possessions increased by heaps ; his shares , his leaseholds and mortgages and debentures .
`` Coining '' would have been a better word than minting !
And yet , you know , in a sense he was right .
Civilisation is possible only through confidence , so that we can bank our money and go unarmed about the streets .
The bank reserve or a policeman keeping order in a jostling multitude of people , are only slightly less impudent bluffs than my uncle 's prospectuses .
They could n't for a moment `` make good '' if the quarter of what they guarantee was demanded of them .
The whole of this modern mercantile investing civilisation is indeed such stuff as dreams are made of .
A mass of people swelters and toils , great railway systems grow , cities arise to the skies and spread wide and far , mines are opened , factories hum , foundries roar , ships plough the seas , countries are settled ; about this busy striving world the rich owners go , controlling all , enjoying all , confident and creating the confidence that draws us all together into a reluctant , nearly unconscious brotherhood .
I wonder and plan my engines .
The flags flutter , the crowds cheer , the legislatures meet .
Yet it seems to me indeed at times that all this present commercial civilisation is no more than my poor uncle's career writ large , a swelling , thinning bubble of assurances ; that its arithmetic is just as unsound , its dividends as ill-advised , its ultimate aim as vague and forgotten ; that it all drifts on perhaps to some tremendous parallel to his individual disaster ...
`` Where is it ?
`` There it is , '' said Gordon-Nasmyth , `` worth three pounds an ounce , if it 's worth a penny ; two great heaps of it , rotten stuff and soft , ready to shovel and wheel , and you may get it by the ton ! ''
We went into the particulars of that difficulty .
`` They would n't catch me , because I 'd sink first .
Give me a yacht , '' said Gordon-Nasmyth ; `` that 's all I need . ''
There was evidently a curious strain of secretiveness in him .
He didn't like to give us samples , and he would n't indicate within three hundred miles the position of this Mordet Island of his .
He had it clear in his mind that he had a secret of immense value , and he had no idea at all of just how far he ought to go with business people .
And so presently , to gain time for these hesitations of his , he began to talk of other things .
He talked very well .
He talked of the Dutch East Indies and of the Congo , of Portuguese East Africa and Paraguay , of Malays and rich Chinese merchants , Dyaks and negroes and the spread of the Mahometan world in Africa to-day .
And all this time he was trying to judge if we were good enough to trust with his adventure .
Our cosy inner office became a little place , and all our business cold and lifeless exploits beside his glimpses of strange minglings of men , of slayings unavenged and curious customs , of trade where no writs run , and the dark treacheries of eastern ports and uncharted channels .
We had neither of us gone abroad except for a few vulgar raids on Paris ; our world was England , are the places of origin of half the raw material of the goods we sold had seemed to us as remote as fairyland or the forest of Arden .
But Gordon-Nasmyth made it so real and intimate for us that afternoon -- for me , at any rate -- that it seemed like something seen and forgotten and now again remembered .
And in the end he produced his sample , a little lump of muddy clay speckled with brownish grains , in a glass bottle wrapped about with lead and flannel -- red flannel it was , I remember -- a hue which is , I know , popularly supposed to double all the mystical efficacies of flannel .
I made some commercial inquiries , and there seemed even then much truth in Gordon-Nasmyth 's estimate of the value of the stuff .
It was before the days of Capern 's discovery of the value of canadium and his use of it in the Capern filament , but the cerium and thorium alone were worth the money he extracted for the gas-mantles then in vogue .
There were , however , doubts .
Indeed , there were numerous doubts .
What were the limits of the gas-mantle trade ?
How much thorium , not to speak of cerium , could they take at a maximum .
Suppose that quantity was high enough to justify our shipload , came doubts in another quarter .
Were the heaps up to sample ?
Were they as big as he said ?
Was Gordon-Nasmyth -- imaginative ?
And if these values held , could we after all get the stuff ?
It was n't ours .
It was on forbidden ground .
You see , there were doubts of every grade and class in the way of this adventure .
But that was one of our last enterprises before our great crisis , and I will tell of it in its place .
One must feel it to understand .
He certainly did not keep up the dignity of the Sacred Grove , an important critical organ which he acquired one day -- by saying `` snap '' -- for eight hundred pounds .
He got it `` lock , stock and barrel '' -- under one or other of which three aspects the editor was included .
Even at that price it did n't pay .
If you are a literary person you will remember the bright new cover he gave that representative organ of British intellectual culture , and how his sound business instincts jarred with the exalted pretensions of a vanishing age .
One old wrapper I discovered the other day runs : --
Weekly Magazine of Art , Philosophy , Science and Belles Lettres .
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
NOT A DRUG BUT A LIVE AMERICAN REMEDY .
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -
Individual ; The Dignity of Letters .
The Stage ; the Paradox of Acting .
Travel Biography , Verse , Fiction , etc .
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- THE BEST PILL IN THE WORLD FOR AN IRREGULAR LIVER
But my uncle 's thoughts ran in a different channel , and he made that vision the test of a spirited but inconclusive harangue upon Tariff Reform .
As I recall this side of our life , the figure of my round-eyes , button-nosed , pink-and-white Aunt Susan tends always to the central position .
We drove the car and sustained the car , she sat in it with a magnificent variety of headgear poised upon her delicate neck , and always with that faint ghost of a lisp no misspelling can render -- commented on and illuminated the new aspects .
And I remember her coming in late one evening with a note-book in her hand .
Beckenham , in the persons of a vicar , a doctor 's wife , and a large proud lady called Hogberry , `` called '' on my uncle and aunt almost at once , so soon in fact as the lawn was down again , and afterwards my aunt made friends with a quiet gentlewoman next door , a propos of an overhanging cherry tree and the need of repairing the party fence .
So she resumed her place in society from which she had fallen with the disaster of Wimblehurst .
She made a partially facetious study of the etiquette of her position , had cards engraved and retaliated calls .
And then she received a card for one of Mrs. Hogberry 's At Homes , gave an old garden party herself , participated in a bazaar and sale of work , and was really becoming quite cheerfully entangled in Beckenham society when she was suddenly taken up by the roots again by my uncle and transplanted to Chiselhurst .
Marion and I had arrived a little estranged , and I remember her as a silent presence , a shadow across all that sunlit emptiness of intercourse .
We had embittered each other with one of those miserable little disputes that seemed so unavoidable between us .
She had , with the help of Smithie , dressed rather elaborately for the occasion , and when she saw me prepared to accompany her in , I think it was a grey suit , she protested that silk hat and frock coat were imperative .
I was recalcitrant , she quoted an illustrated paper showing a garden party with the King present , and finally I capitulated -- but after my evil habit , resentfully ... .
those old quarrels , how pitiful they were , how trivial !
And how sorrowful they are to recall !
I think they grow more sorrowful as I grow older , and all the small passionate reasons for our mutual anger fade and fade out of memory .
`` Yes , '' I found myself admitting with great enthusiasm , `` there is something .
And yet again -- ''
I know there 's something about a cat , too .
But it is n't the same . ''
`` It makes all the difference , do n't you think ? ''
She sighed and said again very softly , `` Yes .
`` Let me take your cup , '' I said abruptly , and , that secured , made for the table by the summer-house .
I had no intention then of deserting my aunt .
But close at hand the big French window of the drawing-room yawned inviting and suggestive .
I can feel all that temptation now , and particularly the provocation of my collar .
In an instant I was lost .
I would -- Just for a moment !
I dashed in , put down the cup on the keys of the grand piano and fled upstairs , softly , swiftly , three steps at a time , to the sanctuary of my uncle 's study , his snuggery .
I arrived there breathless , convinced there was no return for me .
I was very glad and ashamed of myself , and desperate .
By means of a penknife I contrived to break open his cabinet of cigars , drew a chair to the window , took off my coat , collar and tie , and remained smoking guiltily and rebelliously , and peeping through the blind at the assembly on the lawn until it was altogether gone ... .
`` Old FLY , he means , George -- French ! ''
`` We are n't keeping pace with our own progress , George .
We're bumping against new people , and they set up to be gentlefolks -- etiquette dinners and all the rest of it .
They give themselves airs and expect us to be fish-out-of-water .
We are n't going to be .
They think we 've no Style .
Well , we give them Style for our advertisements , and we 're going to give 'em Style all through ... .
You need n't be born to it to dance well on the wires of the Bond Street tradesmen .
`` Runcorn had n't cigars like these , '' he said , truncating one lovingly .
`` We beat him at cigars .
We 'll beat him all round . ''
`` Got to get the hang of etiquette , '' he went on to the fire .
Dine every night in evening dress ... .
Get a brougham or something .
Learn up golf and tennis and things .
It is n't only freedom from Goochery . ''
`` Always ready to learn ! ''
`` Ever since you gave me the chance of Latin .
So far we do n't seem to have hit upon any Latin-speaking stratum in the population . ''
There was a time -- it must have been very early -- when I saw him deeply impressed by the splendours of the dining-room of the National Liberal Club .
Heaven knows who our host was or what that particular little `` feed '' was about now !
-- all that sticks is the impression of our straggling entry , a string of six or seven guests , and my uncle looking about him at the numerous bright red-shaded tables , at the exotics in great Majolica jars , at the shining ceramic columns and pilasters , at the impressive portraits of Liberal statesmen and heroes , and all that contributes to the ensemble of that palatial spectacle .
He was betrayed into a whisper to me , `` This is all Right , George ! ''
That artless comment seems almost incredible as I set it down ; there came a time so speedily when not even the clubs of New York could have overawed my uncle , and when he could walk through the bowing magnificence of the Royal Grand Hotel to his chosen table in that aggressively exquisite gallery upon the river , with all the easy calm of one of earth's legitimate kings .
For me , at least , it marked an epoch in my uncle 's career when I learnt one day that he had `` shopped '' Lady Grove .
I realised a fresh , wide , unpreluded step .
He took me by surprise with the sudden change of scale from such portable possessions as jewels and motor-cars to a stretch of countryside .
The transaction was Napoleonic ; he was told of the place ; he said `` snap '' ; there were no preliminary desirings or searchings .
Then he came home and said what he had done .
Even my aunt was for a day or so measurably awestricken by this exploit in purchase , and we both went down with him to see the house in a mood near consternation .
It struck us then as a very lordly place indeed .
I remember the three of us standing on the terrace that looked westward , surveying the sky-reflecting windows of the house , and a feeling of unwarrantable intrusion comes back to me .
My aunt made him no answer .
It was by our captured crusader that the vicar found us .
He came round the corner at us briskly , a little out of breath .
He had an air of having been running after us since the first toot of our horn had warned the village of our presence .
He was an Oxford man , clean-shaven , with a cadaverous complexion and a guardedly respectful manner , a cultivated intonation , and a general air of accommodation to the new order of things .
These Oxford men are the Greeks of our plutocratic empire .
He was a Tory in spirit , and what one may call an adapted Tory by stress of circumstances ; that is to say , he was no longer a legitimist ; he was prepared for the substitution of new lords for old .
We were pill vendors he knew , and no doubt horribly vulgar in soul ; but then it might have been some polygamous Indian rajah , a great strain on a good man 's tact , or some Jew with an inherited expression of contempt .
Anyhow , we were English , and neither Dissenters nor Socialists , and he was cheerfully prepared to do what he could to make gentlemen of both of us .
He might have preferred Americans for some reasons ; they are not so obviously taken from one part of the social system and dumped down in another , and they are more teachable ; but in this world we can not always be choosers .
So he was very bright and pleasant with us , showed us the church , gossiped informingly about our neighbours on the countryside -- Tux , the banker ; Lord Boom , the magazine and newspaper proprietor ; Lord Carnaby , that great sportsman , and old Lady Osprey .
And finally he took us by way of a village lane -- three children bobbed convulsively with eyes of terror for my uncle -- through a meticulous garden to a big , slovenly Vicarage with faded Victorian furniture and a faded Victorian wife , who gave us tea and introduced us to a confusing family dispersed among a lot of disintegrating basket chairs upon the edge of a well-used tennis lawn .
The vicar introduced us sketchily , and the faded Victorian wife regarded my aunt with a mixture of conventional scorn and abject respect , and talked to her in a languid , persistent voice about people in the neighbourhood whom my aunt could not possibly know .
My aunt received these personalia cheerfully , with her blue eyes flitting from point to point , and coming back again and again to the pinched faces of the daughters and the cross upon the eldest 's breast .
Encouraged by my aunt 's manner , the vicar 's wife grew patronising and kindly , and made it evident that she could do much to bridge the social gulf between ourselves and the people of family about us .
`` Caught meningitis and was carried off in a week . ''
`` Generous proportions ! ''
said the eldest son , and the guffaws were renewed .
The vicar 's face for one moment betrayed dismay .
Perhaps he was thinking of his country walks amids the hawthorns and honeysuckle .
It seems to me now but a step from the buying of Lady Grove to the beginning of Crest Hill , from the days when the former was a stupendous achievement to the days when it was too small and dark and inconvenient altogether for a great financier 's use .
For me that was a period of increasing detachment from our business and the great world of London ; I saw it more and more in broken glimpses , and sometimes I was working in my little pavilion above Lady Grove for a fortnight together ; even when I came up it was often solely for a meeting of the aeronautical society or for one of the learned societies or to consult literature or employ searchers or some such special business .
For my uncle it was a period of stupendous inflation .
Each time I met him I found him more confident , more comprehensive , more consciously a factor in great affairs .
Soon he was no longer an associate of merely business men ; he was big enough for the attentions of greater powers .
I grew used to discovering some item of personal news about him in my evening paper , or to the sight of a full-page portrait of him in a sixpenny magazine .
Usually the news was of some munificent act , some romantic piece of buying or giving or some fresh rumour of reconstruction .
He saved , you will remember , the Parbury Reynolds for the country .
Or at times , it would be an interview or my uncle's contribution to some symposium on the `` Secret of Success , '' or such-like topic .
Or wonderful tales of his power of work , of his wonderful organisation to get things done , of his instant decisions and remarkable power of judging his fellow-men .
They repeated his great mot : `` Eight hour working day -- I want eighty hours ! ''
In spite of my preoccupation with my experiments , work , I did , I find now that I come to ransack my impressions , see a great deal of the great world during those eventful years ; I had a near view of the machinery by which an astounding Empire is run , rubbed shoulders and exchanged experiences with bishops and statesmen , political women and women who were not political , physicians and soldiers , artists and authors , the directors of great journals , philanthropists and all sorts of eminent , significant people .
I saw the statesmen without their orders and the bishops with but a little purple silk left over from their canonicals , inhaling , not incensen but cigar smoke .
I could look at them all the better because , for the most part , they were not looking at me but at my uncle , and calculating consciously or unconsciously how they might use him and assimilate him to their system , the most unpremeditated , subtle , successful and aimless plutocracy that ever encumbered the destinies of mankind .
Not one of them , so far as I could see , until disaster overtook him , resented his lies , his almost naked dishonesty of method , the disorderly disturbance of this trade and that , caused by his spasmodic operations .
I can see them now about him , see them polite , watchful , various ; his stiff compact little figure always a centre of attention , his wiry hair , his brief nose , his under-lip , electric with self-confidence .
Wandering marginally through distinguished gatherings , I would catch the whispers : `` That 's Mr .
`` In that hole in the To'nem Court Road , eh ?
It 's been a Straight Square Fight , and here we are ! ''
Then he broke out at a new place in a tone of detached criticism .
`` It 's a wonderful system this old British system , George .
It 's staid and stable and yet it has a place for new men .
We come up and take our places .
It 's almost expected .
We take a hand .
That 's where our Democracy differs from America .
Over there a man succeeds ; all he gets is money .
Here there 's a system open to every one -- practically ... .
Chaps like Boom -- come from nowhere . ''
I reflected upon the spirit of his words .
Suddenly I kicked my feet in the air , rolled on my side and sat up suddenly on my deck chair with my legs down .
`` Subscription to the party funds .
Have we got to that ? ''
My uncle astonished me by losing his temper .
He mingled those comforting suggestions of a potent and exceptional human being emancipated from the pettier limitations of integrity with the Napoleonic legend .
It gave his imagination a considerable outlet .
The real mischief of Napoleon 's immensely disastrous and accidental career began only when he was dead and the romantic type of mind was free to elaborate his character .
I do believe that my uncle would have made a far less egregious smash if there had been no Napoleonic legend to misguide him .
He was in many ways better and infinitely kinder than his career .
But when in doubt between decent conduct and a base advantage , that cult came in more and more influentially : `` think of Napoleon ; think what the inflexibly-wilful Napoleon would have done with such scruples as yours ; '' that was the rule , and the end was invariably a new step in dishonour .
All the intimate moments in this affair were hidden from me , but in the end my aunt triumphed .
He did not so much throw as jerk over Mrs. Scrymgeour , and she did not so much make a novel of it as upset a huge pailful of attenuated and adulterated female soul upon this occasion .
My aunt did not appear in that , even remotely .
So that it is doubtful if the lady knew the real causes of her abandonment .
The Napoleonic hero was practically unmarried , and he threw over his lady as Napoleon threw over Josephine for a great alliance .
`` That chap in the corner , George .
The man in a cherry-coloured coat .
He 'd look silly if I stuck a poker through his Gizzard ! ''
`` He 'd look , '' I reflected , `` much as he does now .
As though he was amused . ''
He broke out into a new grievance .
`` That damned vicar , '' he complained , `` thinks I ought to think myself lucky to get this place !
Every time I meet him I can see him think it ... .
One of these days , George I 'll show him what a Mod'un house is like ! ''
He began with a wave of his arm .
`` That 's the place , George , '' he said .
`` A mammoth house it ought to be , George -- to suit these hills . ''
`` And the morning sun in its eye . ''
It is curious how many of these modern financiers of chance and bluff have ended their careers by building .
It was not merely my uncle .
Sooner or later they all seem to bring their luck to the test of realisation , try to make their fluid opulence coagulate out as bricks and mortar , bring moonshine into relations with a weekly wages-sheet .
Then the whole fabric of confidence and imagination totters -- and down they come ... .
`` Yes , indeed .
We think nothing of it now at all -- comparatively .
And that big house -- ''
He raised his eyebrows .
For nearly all the time that my uncle was incubating and hatching Crest Hill I was busy in a little transverse valley between that great beginning and Lady Grove with more and more costly and ambitious experiments in aerial navigation .
This work was indeed the main substance of my life through all the great time of the Tono-Bungay symphony .
I have told already how I came to devote myself to this system of inquiries , how in a sort of disgust with the common adventure of life I took up the dropped ends of my college studies , taking them up again with a man 's resolution instead of a boy 's ambition .
From the first I did well at this work .
It -- was , I think , largely a case of special aptitude , of a peculiar irrelevant vein of faculty running through my mind .
It is one of those things men seem to have by chance , that has little or nothing to do with their general merit , and which it is ridiculous to be either conceited or modest about .
I did get through a very big mass of work in those years , working for a time with a concentrated fierceness that left little of such energy or capacity as I possess unused .
I worked out a series of problems connected with the stability of bodies pitching in the air and the internal movements of the wind , and I also revolutionised one leading part at last of the theory of explosive engines .
These things are to be found in the Philosophical Transactions , the Mathematical Journal , and less frequently in one or two other such publications , and they needn't detain us here .
Indeed , I doubt if I could write about them here .
One acquires a sort of shorthand for one 's notes and mind in relation to such special work .
I have never taught ; nor lectured , that is to say , I have never had to express my thoughts about mechanical things in ordinary everyday language , and I doubt very much if I could do so now without extreme tedium .
When I came gliding down to the safe spread of level green I had chosen , I was as cool and ready as a city clerk who drops off an omnibus in motion , and I had learnt much more than soaring .
I tilted up her nose at the right moment , levelled again and grounded like a snowflake on a windless day .
I lay flat for an instant and then knelt up and got on my feet atremble , but very satisfied with myself .
Cothope was running down the hill to me .
`` Air and sunlight , '' said the earl .
`` You ca n't have too much of them .
But before our time they used to build for shelter and water and the high road . ''
`` I do n't blame him , '' said my uncle .
`` Mostly it 's imagination .
That and leisure , George .
When I was a young man I was kept pretty busy .
Even then -- ! ''
We were breakfasting together in the big window bay at Lady Grove that looks upon the iris beds ; my uncle was in London .
`` It IS odd I did n't tell you , '' I admitted .
Beatrice was dressed very quietly in brown , with a simple but courageous broad-brimmed hat , and an unexpected quality of being grown-up and responsible .
She guided her step-mother through the first encounter , scrutinised my aunt , and got us all well in movement through the house , and then she turned her attention to me with a quick and half-confident smile .
`` Yes -- and cried -- for all the evil I had done you , I suppose ... .
I've often thought of it since .
Lady Osprey , with her skirts gathered for the ascent to the gallery and her hand on the newel , turned and addressed a look full of meaning overflowing indeed with meanings -- at her charge .
The chief meaning no doubt was caution about myself , but much of it was just meaning at large .
I chanced to catch the response in a mirror and detected Beatrice with her nose wrinkled into a swift and entirely diabolical grimace .
Lady Osprey became a deeper shade of pink and speechless with indignation -- it was evident she disavowed all further responsibility , as she followed my aunt upstairs .
`` And you recognised me ? ''
`` One does n't forget those childish things . ''
`` Well , '' I said , `` we do what we can . ''
Beatrice sat bunched together in a chair and regarded me with exactly the same scrutiny , I thought , the same adventurous aggression , that I had faced long ago at the tea-table in my mother 's room .
She was amazingly like that little Princess of my Bladesover memories , the wilful misbehaviours of her hair seemed the same -- her voice ; things one would have expected to be changed altogether .
She formed her plans in the same quick way , and acted with the same irresponsible decision .
`` If it 's climbing , '' I said .
I told her something of my experimental work .
She had never heard of the soaring aeroplane , and was excited by the thought , and keen to hear about it .
She had thought all the work so far had been a mere projecting of impossible machines .
For her Pilcher and Lilienthal had died in vain .
She did not know such men had lived in the world .
`` I 'll take my chance some day .
Some day soon . ''
She looked at me thoughtfully , smiled , and our talk was at an end .
In the spring of that year I had got to a flying machine that lacked nothing but longitudinal stability .
My model flew like a bird for fifty or a hundred yards or so , and then either dived and broke its nose or , what was commoner , reared up , slid back and smashed its propeller .
The rhythm of the pitching puzzled me .
I felt it must obey some laws not yet quite clearly stated .
I became therefore a student of theory and literature for a time ; I hit upon the string of considerations that led me to what is called Ponderevo 's Principle and my F.R.S.
, and I worked this out in three long papers .
Meanwhile I made a lot of turn-table and glider models and started in upon an idea of combining gas-bags and gliders .
Balloon work was new to me .
I had made one or two ascents in the balloons of the Aero Club before I started my gasometer and the balloon shed and gave Cothope a couple of months with Sir Peter Rumchase .
My uncle found part of the money for these developments ; he was growing interested and competitive in this business because of Lord Boom 's prize and the amount of reclame involved , and it was at his request that I named my first navigable balloon Lord Roberts Alpha .
Lord Roberts A very nearly terminated all my investigations .
My idea both in this and its more successful and famous younger brother , Lord Roberts B , was to utilise the idea of a contractile balloon with a rigid flat base , a balloon shaped rather like an inverted boat that should almost support the apparatus , but not quite .
The gas-bag was of the chambered sort used for these long forms , and not with an internal balloonette .
The trouble was to make the thing contractile .
This I sought to do by fixing a long , fine-meshed silk net over it that was fastened to be rolled up on two longitudinal rods .
Practically I contracted my sausage gas-bag by netting it down .
The ends were too complex for me to describe here , but I thought them out elaborately and they were very carefully planned .
Lord Roberts A was furnished with a single big screw forward , and there was a rudder aft .
The engine was the first one to be , so to speak , right in the plane of the gas-bag .
I lay immediately under the balloon on a sort of glider framework , far away from either engine or rudder , controlling them by wire-pulls constructed on the principle of the well-known Bowden brake of the cyclist .
Beatrice disengaged herself from me , stood for a moment trembling , and then sat down on the turf `` I 'll just sit down for a moment , '' she said .
As for me , I was filled with a new outrageous idea , begotten I scarcely know how from this incident , with its instant contacts and swift emotions , and that was that I must make love to and possess Beatrice .
I see no particular reason why that thought should have come to me in that moment , but it did .
I do not believe that before then I had thought of our relations in such terms at all .
Suddenly , as I remember it , the factor of passion came .
She crouched there , and I stood over her , and neither of us said a word .
But it was just as though something had been shouted from the sky .
All the whole I must admit it was not a situation that lent itself to eloquence .
I lay on my back and talked through bandages , and with some little difficulty , for my tongue and mouth had swollen .
But I was feverish and in pain , and the emotional suspense I had been in so long with regard to her became now an unendurable impatience .
`` L'Homme qui Rit !
-- I did n't know .
But that 's all right .
Jolly flowers those are ! ''
She whitened and said nothing .
I suddenly felt I must plead with her .
`` Damn these bandages ! ''
I said , breaking into ineffectual febrile rage .
She stood helpless for a moment , then took me firmly by the shoulders and pushed me back upon the pillow .
She gripped the wrist of the hand I had raised to my face .
She sat on the edge of the bed .
A flush had come to her cheeks , and her eyes were very bright .
`` I asked you , '' she repeated , `` not to talk . ''
`` What do you mean ? ''
She came to the table beside my bed and pulled the Michaelmas daisies awry .
`` Why did you talk like that ? ''
she said in a tone of infinite bitterness .
`` To begin like that ! ''
We stared at one another .
`` Dear , '' she said , `` I love you .
If it will make you happy to marry me , I will marry you .
I was in a mood just now -- a stupid , inconsiderate mood .
Of course I will marry you .
You are my prince , my king .
Women are such things of mood -- or I would have behaved differently .
We say 'No ' when we mean 'Yes ' -- and fly into crises .
So now , Yes -- yes -- yes .
I can't even kiss you .
Give me your hand to kiss that .
Understand , I am yours .
I am yours just as if we had been married fifty years .
Your wife -- Beatrice .
Now -- now will you rest ? ''
She laid her head down beside mine for a moment and then she kissed my hand .
That exasperated me and perplexed me beyond measure .
`` I 'm rich without intending it .
Let me mean it , give me an honourable excuse for it , and I 'll put all this rotten old Warren of England at your feet ! ''
I said such things as that .
I write them down here in all their resounding base pride .
I said these empty and foolish things , and they are part of me .
Why should I still cling to pride and be ashamed ?
I shouted her down .
`` Damn Boom ! ''
he said , and his eyes over his glasses met mine defiantly .
`` We ca n't , I suppose , run close hauled for a bitstop expenditure ? ''
He crumpled up his nose into an expression of impatient distaste at my unreasonableness .
He grimaced with his mouth -- in the queerest way at the telegram .
For a moment neither of us spoke .
`` I 'M going .
I 'll get that quap or bust . ''
`` Nasmyth does , and he 'll tell me . ''
`` He 'll tell me all right , now he 's smashed . ''
`` We 've interests there .
It is urgent I should go .
I do n't know when I may return . ''
`` At the back of the house is a garden -- a door in the wall -- on the lane .
`` That 's all right , '' she laughed .
`` We can go along the lane and into the Old Woking Road .
Of course you do n't .
One never meets anybody . ''
She put her hands on my shoulders and drew me down to kiss her .
`` It 's all right , '' I said .
`` I 'm glad we 're dead , '' she whispered .
`` I 'm glad we 're dead .
I was tired of it , dear .
I was so tired of it , dear , and so entangled . ''
`` And why do I love you ? ''
she asked ; `` not only what is fine in you , but what is n't ?
Why do I love your dullness , your arrogance ?
To -- night I love the very raindrops on the fur of your coat !
`` Come back , '' she whispered .
`` I shall wait for you . ''
She slipped from my arms and paused , regarding me .
For an instant the world seemed full of fantastic possibilities .
He had learnt the sea in the Roumanian navy , and English out of a book ; he would still at times pronounce the e 's at the end of `` there '' and `` here '' ; he was a naturalised Englishman , and he drove me into a reluctant and uncongenial patriotism by his everlasting carping at things English .
Pollack would set himself to `` draw him out . ''
Heaven alone can tell how near I came to murder .
He had all those violent adjuncts to speech we Western Europeans have abandoned , shruggings of the shoulders , waving of the arms , thrusting out of the face , wonderful grimaces and twiddlings of the hands under your nose until you wanted to hit them away .
Day after day it went on , and I had to keep any anger to myself , to reserve myself for the time ahead when it would be necessary to see the quap was got aboard and stowed -- knee deep in this man 's astonishment .
I knew he would make a thousand objections to all we had before us .
He talked like a drugged man .
It ran glibly over his tongue .
And all the time one could see his seamanship fretting him , he was gnawed by responsibility , perpetually uneasy about the ship 's position , perpetually imagining dangers .
If a sea hit us exceptionally hard he 'd be out of the cabin in an instant making an outcry of inquiries , and he was pursued by a dread of the hold , of ballast shifting , of insidious wicked leaks .
As we drew near the African coast his fear of rocks and shoals became infectious .
`` That 's what E is -- a DAGO ! ''
He nodded darkly and almost forbiddingly .
Forward the crew lived lives very much after the fashion of ours , more crowded , more cramped and dirty , wetter , steamier , more verminous .
The coarse food they had was still not so coarse but that they did not think they were living `` like fighting cocks . ''
So far as I could make out they were all nearly destitute men ; hardly any of them had a proper sea outfit , and what small possessions they had were a source of mutual distrust .
And as we pitched and floundered southward they gambled and fought , were brutal to one another , argued and wrangled loudly , until we protested at the uproar .
`` Gordon-Nasmyth would haf told me long ago what it ees for we haf come . ''
Sooner or later the ridiculous embargo that now lies upon all the coast eastward of Mordet Island will be lifted and the reality of the deposits of quap ascertained .
I am sure that we were merely taking the outcrop of a stratum of nodulated deposits that dip steeply seaward .
Those heaps were merely the crumbled out contents of two irregular cavities in the rock ; they are as natural as any talus or heap of that kind , and the mud along the edge of the water for miles is mixed with quap , and is radio-active and lifeless and faintly phosphorescent at night .
But the reader will find the full particulars of my impression of all this in the Geological Magazine for October , 1905 , and to that I must refer him .
There , too , he will find my unconfirmed theories of its nature .
If I am right it is something far more significant from the scientific point of view than those incidental constituents of various rare metals , pitchblende , rutile , and the like , upon which the revolutionary discoveries of the last decade are based .
Those are just little molecular centres of disintegration , of that mysterious decay and rotting of those elements , elements once regarded as the most stable things in nature .
But there is something -- the only word that comes near it is CANCEROUS -- and that is not very near , about the whole of quap , something that creeps and lives as a disease lives by destroying ; an elemental stirring and disarrangement , incalculably maleficent and strange .
He was n't by any means a pretty figure .
He was very black and naked except for a dirty loin-cloth , his legs were ill-shaped and his toes spread wide and the upper edge of his cloth and a girdle of string cut his clumsy abdomen into folds .
His forehead was low , his nose very flat and his lower lip swollen and purplish-red .
His hair was short and fuzzy , and about his neck was a string and a little purse of skin .
He carried a musket , and a powder-flask was stuck in his girdle .
It was a curious confrontation .
There opposed to him stood I , a little soiled , perhaps , but still a rather elaborately civilised human being , born , bred and trained in a vague tradition .
In my hand was an unaccustomed gun .
And each of us was essentially a teeming , vivid brain , tensely excited by the encounter , quite unaware of the other 's mental content or what to do with him .
He was frightfully smashed out in front ; he must have died in the instant .
I stooped and raised him by his shoulder and realised that .
I dropped him , and stood about and peered about me through the trees .
`` My word ! ''
He was the second dead human being -- apart , I mean , from surgical properties and mummies and common shows of that sort -- that I have ever seen .
I stood over him wondering , wondering beyond measure .
A practical idea came into that confusion .
Had any one heard the gun ?
Methodically I buried his swollen and mangled carcass again , and returned to the ship for another night of dreams .
Next day for all the morning I resisted the impulse to go to him , and played nap with Pollack with my secret gnawing at me , and in the evening started to go and was near benighted .
I never told a soul of them of this thing I had done .
Next day I went early , and he had gone , and there were human footmarks and ugly stains round the muddy hole from which he had been dragged .
We were none too soon .
People had been reconnoitring us , the telegraph had been at work , and we were not four hours at sea before we ran against the gunboat that had been sent down the coast to look for us and that would have caught us behind the island like a beast in a trap .
It was a night of driving cloud that gave intermittent gleams of moonlight ; the wind and sea were strong and we were rolling along through a drift of rails and mist .
Suddenly the world was white with moonshine .
The gunboat came out as a long dark shape wallowing on the water to the east .
The mate turned to me .
`` The captain be damned '' said I , and we let him sleep through two hours of chase till a rainstorm swallowed us up .
Then we changed our course and sailed right across them , and by morning only her smoke was showing .
I was released from the spell of that bloodstained black body all mixed up with grey-black mud .
I was going back to baths and decent food and aeronautics and Beatrice .
I was going back to Beatrice and my real life again -- out of this well into which I had fallen .
It would have needed something more than sea-sickness and quap fever to prevent my spirits rising .
I firmly believe the water came through the wood .
First it began to ooze , then to trickle .
It was like trying to carry moist sugar in a thin paper bag .
Soon we were taking in water as though we had opened a door in her bottom .
My steward gave me what he had , but I landed at Plymouth still largely ignorant of the course of events .
I shook off Pollack , and left the captain and mate in an hotel , and the men in a Sailor 's Home until I could send to pay them off , and I made my way to the station .
The next day was one of those days of strong perception that stand out clear in one 's memory when the common course of days is blurred .
I can recall now the awakening in the large familiar room that was always kept for me , and how I lay staring at its chintz-covered chairs , its spaced fine furniture , its glimpse of the cedars without , and thought that all this had to end .
It came like a blow in the face now ; all that , too , had to end !
`` I just stuck on and did what I could with the stuff .
I got a bit of money of my own -- and I said to myself , 'Well , here you are with the gear and no one to look after you .
You wo n't get such a chance again , my boy , not in all your born days .
Why not make what you can with it ? '
`` It 's all ready , '' said Cothope , and added as an afterthought , `` unless they cut off the gas .
There came into my head some prowling dream of meeting her .
I went along the lane towards Woking , the lane down which we had walked five months ago in the wind and rain .
I mooned for a time in our former footsteps , then swore and turned back across the fields , and then conceived a distaste for Cothope and went Downward .
At last I found myself looking down on the huge abandoned masses of the Crest Hill house .
That gave my mind a twist into a new channel .
My uncle came uppermost again .
What a strange , melancholy emptiness of intention that stricken enterprise seemed in the even evening sunlight , what vulgar magnificence and crudity and utter absurdity !
It was as idiotic as the pyramids .
I sat down on the stile , staring at it as though I had never seen that forest of scaffold poles , that waste of walls and bricks and plaster and shaped stones , that wilderness of broken soil and wheeling tracks and dumps before .
It struck me suddenly as the compactest image and sample of all that passes for Progress , of all the advertisement-inflated spending , the aimless building up and pulling down , the enterprise and promise of my age .
This was our fruit , this was what he had done , I and my uncle , in the fashion of our time .
We were its leaders and exponents , we were the thing it most flourishingly produced .
For this futility in its end , for an epoch of such futility , the solemn scroll of history had unfolded ... .
For this the armies drilled , for this the Law was administered and the prisons did their duty , for this the millions toiled and perished in suffering , in order that a few of us should build palaces we never finished , make billiard-rooms under ponds , run imbecile walls round irrational estates , scorch about the world in motor-cars , devise flying-machines , play golf and a dozen such foolish games of ball , crowd into chattering dinner parties , gamble and make our lives one vast , dismal spectacle of witless waste !
So it struck me then , and for a time I could think of no other interpretation .
It came to me like a revelation , a revelation at once incredible and indisputable of the abysmal folly of our being .
`` It 's cruel , '' he blubbered at last .
`` They asked me questions .
They KEP' asking me questions , George . ''
`` Yes , but they wo n't do very much to you for that .
They 'll only bring you up for the rest of your examination . ''
For the first time in his life , I believe , he felt and looked ashamed .
It filled me with remorse to see him suffer so .
`` We 've all done things , '' I said .
`` It 's part of the game the world makes us play .
If they want to arrest you -- and you 've got no cards in your hand -- !
They must n't arrest you . ''
His little bloodshot eyes stared at Crest Hill .
I turned at something in her voice , and got a moon light gleam of tears upon her face .
`` Could SHE have helped ? ''
I went over the plans I had made for communicating , and the things I thought she might do .
I had given her the address of a solicitor she might put some trust in .
`` But you must act for yourself , '' I insisted .
I must have dozed , and it was still dark when I realised with a start that we were nearly due south of , and a long way from , a regularly-flashing lighthouse , standing out before the glow of some great town , and then that the thing that had awakened me was the cessation of our engine , and that we were driving back to the west .
Presently the sun rose over the pines , and the sand grew rapidly warm .
My uncle had done eating , and sat with his wrists resting on his knees , the most hopeless looking of lost souls .
`` They 'll catch us here , just as much as in an inn , '' he grumbled and then lay still .
This explained us pretty well , I thought , and we got most heartening coffee and a cart to a little roadside station .
My uncle grew more and more manifestly ill with every stage of our journey .
I got him to Bayonne , where he refused at first to eat , and was afterwards very sick , and then took him shivering and collapsed up a little branch line to a frontier place called Luzon Gare .
Usually he was propped up against pillows , because so he breathed more easily .
He slept hardly at all .
I have a confused memory of vigils and mornings and afternoons spent by that bedside , and how the religieuse hovered about me , and how meek and good and inefficient she was , and how horribly black were her nails .
Other figures come and go , and particularly the doctor , a young man plumply rococo , in bicycling dress , with fine waxen features , a little pointed beard , and the long black frizzy hair and huge tie of a minor poet .
Bright and clear-cut and irrelevant are memories of the Basque hostess of my uncle 's inn and of the family of Spanish people who entertained me and prepared the most amazingly elaborate meals for me , with soup and salad and chicken and remarkable sweets .
They were all very kind and sympathetic people , systematically so .
And constantly , without attracting attention , I was trying to get newspapers from home .
He knew he was almost certainly dying .
In a way that took the burthen of his cares off his mind .
There was no more Neal to face , no more flights or evasions , no punishments .
Close at hand was the doctor with one of those cruel and idiotic injection needles modern science puts in the hands of these half-educated young men , keeping my uncle flickeringly alive for no reason whatever .
The religieuse hovered sleepily in the background with an overdue and neglected dose .
In addition , the landlady had not only got up herself , but roused an aged crone of a mother and a partially imbecile husband , and there was also a fattish , stolid man in grey alpaca , with an air of importance -- who he was and how he got there , I do n't know .
I rather fancy the doctor explained him to me in French I did not understand .
And they were all there , wearily nocturnal , hastily and carelessly dressed , intent upon the life that flickered and sank , making a public and curious show of its going , queer shapes of human beings lit by three uncertain candles , and every soul of them keenly and avidly resolved to be in at the death .
The doctor stood , the others were all sitting on chairs the landlady had brought in and arranged for them .
`` Did n't bother you ? ''
`` Death ends all .
After so much -- Such splendid beginnin 's .
He would not answer .
`` Aspirations , '' he whispered .
He fell into a broken monologue , regardless of me .
`` Trailing clouds of glory , '' he said , and `` first-rate poet , first-rate ... .George was always hard .
He looked at me as though the decision rested with me .
It was dark night when I left his deathbed and went back to my own inn down the straggling street of Luzon .
Part of the fog became a big mastiff that came towards me and stopped and slunk round me , growling , barked gruffly , and shortly and presently became fog again .
`` I wonder , George , if they 'll let him talk in Heaven ... . ''
`` Whose horse is that ? ''
She swung herself down into my arms , and stood beside me face to face .
`` I 've never seen this cottage of yours , '' she said , `` and I want to . ''
`` Did you get what you went for to Africa ? ''
`` It 's comfortable , '' she remarked .
`` Does this thing play ? ''
I roused myself from my preoccupation .
She looked up , twined back a whisp of hair , and answered dispassionately --
She flung out her hands at me .
`` Do n't spoil it , '' she cried .
`` I have given you all I have , I have given you all I can .
If I could do it , if I was good enough to do it , I would .
But I am a woman spoilt and ruined , dear , and you are a ruined man .
When we are making love we're lovers -- but think of the gulf between us in habits and ways of thought , in will and training , when we are not making love .
Think of it -- and do n't think of it !
Do n't think of it yet .
We have snatched some hours .
We still may have some hours ! ''
`` And I want to close it and leave it at that .
You see , dear , what else is there to do ? ''
I cried ; `` but this is cowardice and folly !
Are you afraid of life ?
You of all people !
What does it matter what has been or what we were ?
Here we are with the world before us !
Start clean and new with me .
We 'll fight it through !
I 'm not such a simple lover that I'll not tell you plainly when you go wrong , and fight our difference out with you .
It 's the one thing I want , the one thing I need -- to have you , and more of you and more !
This love-making -- it 's love-making .
It 's just a part of us , an incident -- ''
She shook her head and stopped me abruptly .
`` It 's all , '' she said .
`` I 'm wiser than you .
Wiser beyond words . ''
She turned her eyes to me and they shone with tears .
She held out her hands and I took them .
`` Yours , '' she said , in a weary unimpassioned voice ; `` all that I had -- such as it was .
Will you forget ? ''
That should have been the last I saw of her , but , indeed , I was destined to see her once again .
Two days after I was at Lady Grove , I forget altogether upon what errand , and as I walked back to the station believing her to be gone away she came upon me , and she was riding with Carnaby , just as I had seen them first .
The encounter jumped upon us unprepared .
She rode by , her eyes dark in her white face , and scarcely noticed me .
She winced and grew stiff at the sight of me and bowed her head .
But Carnaby , because he thought I was a broken and discomfited man , saluted me with an easy friendliness , and shouted some genial commonplace to me .
In the next place , and parallel with the motor truck , there will develop the hired or privately owned motor carriage .
This , for all except the longest journeys , will add a fine sense of personal independence to all the small conveniences of first-class railway travel .
It will be capable of a day 's journey of three hundred miles or more , long before the developments to be presently foreshadowed arrive .
One will change nothing -- unless it is the driver -- from stage to stage .
One will be free to dine where one chooses , hurry when one chooses , travel asleep or awake , stop and pick flowers , turn over in bed of a morning and tell the carriage to wait -- unless , which is highly probable , one sleeps aboard .
Countless modifying influences will , of course , come into operation .
For example , it has been assumed , perhaps rashly , that the railway influence will certainly remain jealous and hostile to these growths : that what may be called the `` Bicycle Ticket Policy '' will be pursued throughout .
Assuredly there will be fights of a very complicated sort at first , but once one of these specialized lines is in operation , it may be that some at least of the railway companies will hasten to replace their flanged rolling stock by carriages with rubber tyres , remove their rails , broaden their cuttings and embankments , raise their bridges , and take to the new ways of traffic .
Or they may find it answer to cut fares , widen their gauges , reduce their gradients , modify their points and curves , and woo the passenger back with carriages beautifully hung and sumptuously furnished , and all the convenience and luxury of a club .
Few people would mind being an hour or so longer going to Paris from London , if the railway travelling was neither rackety , cramped , nor tedious .
One could be patient enough if one was neither being jarred , deafened , cut into slices by draughts , and continually more densely caked in a filthy dust of coal ; if one could write smoothly and easily at a steady table , read papers , have one 's hair cut , and dine in comfort [ 9 ] -- none of which things are possible at present , and none of which require any new inventions , any revolutionary contrivances , or indeed anything but an intelligent application of existing resources and known principles .
Our rage for fast trains , so far as long-distance travel is concerned , is largely a passion to end the extreme discomfort involved .
It is in the daily journey , on the suburban train , that daily tax of time , that speed is in itself so eminently desirable , and it is just here that the conditions of railway travel most hopelessly fail .
It must always be remembered that the railway train , as against the motor , has the advantage that its wholesale traction reduces the prime cost by demanding only one engine for a great number of coaches .
This will not serve the first-class long-distance passenger , but it may the third .
Against that economy one must balance the necessary delay of a relatively infrequent service , which latter item becomes relatively greater and greater in proportion to the former , the briefer the journey to be made .
An imagination prone to the picturesque insists at this stage upon a vision of the latter days of one of the less happily situated lines .
Along a weedy embankment there pants and clangs a patched and tarnished engine , its paint blistered , its parts leprously dull .
It is driven by an aged and sweated driver , and the burning garbage of its furnace distils a choking reek into the air .
A huge train of urban dust trucks bangs and clatters behind it , _en route_ to that sequestered dumping ground where rubbish is burnt to some industrial end .
But that is a lapse into the merely just possible , and at most a local tragedy .
Almost certainly the existing lines of railway will develop and differentiate , some in one direction and some in another , according to the nature of the pressure upon them .
Almost all will probably be still in existence and in divers ways busy , spite of the swarming new highways I have ventured to foreshadow , a hundred years from now .
Enough of this present speculation .
I have indicated now the general lines of the roads and streets and ways and underways of the Twentieth Century .
But at present they stand vacant in our prophecy , not only awaiting the human interests -- the characters and occupations , and clothing of the throng of our children and our children 's children that flows along them , but also the decorations our children 's children's taste will dictate , the advertisements their eyes will tolerate , the shops in which they will buy .
To all that we shall finally come , and even in the next chapter I hope it will be made more evident how conveniently these later and more intimate matters follow , instead of preceding , these present mechanical considerations .
And of the beliefs and hopes , the thought and language , the further prospects of this multitude as yet unborn -- of these things also we shall make at last certain hazardous guesses .
But at first I would submit to those who may find the `` machinery in motion '' excessive in this chapter , we must have the background and fittings -- the scene before the play .
[ 7 ] The historian of the future , writing about the nineteenth century , will , I sometimes fancy , find a new meaning in a familiar phrase .
It is the custom to call this the most `` Democratic '' age the world has ever seen , and most of us are beguiled by the etymological contrast , and the memory of certain legislative revolutions , to oppose one form of stupidity prevailing to another , and to fancy we mean the opposite to an `` Aristocratic '' period .
But indeed we do not .
So far as that political point goes , the Chinaman has always been infinitely more democratic than the European .
But the world , by a series of gradations into error , has come to use `` Democratic '' as a substitute for `` Wholesale , '' and as an opposite to `` Individual , '' without realizing the shifted application at all .
Thereby old `` Aristocracy , '' the organization of society for the glory and preservation of the Select Dull , gets to a flavour even of freedom .
When the historian of the future speaks of the past century as a Democratic century , he will have in mind , more than anything else , the unprecedented fact that we seemed to do everything in heaps -- we read in epidemics ; clothed ourselves , all over the world , in identical fashions ; built and furnished our houses in stereo designs ; and travelled -- that naturally most individual proceeding -- in bales .
To make the railway train a perfect symbol of our times , it should be presented as uncomfortably full in the third class -- a few passengers standing -- and everybody reading the current number either of the _Daily Mail_ , _Pearson 's Weekly_ , _Answers_ , _Tit Bits_ , or whatever Greatest Novel of the Century happened to be going ... .
But , as I hope to make clearer in my later papers , this `` Democracy , '' or Wholesale method of living , like the railways , is transient -- a first makeshift development of a great and finally ( to me at least ) quite hopeful social reorganization .
[ 8 ] So we begin to see the possibility of laying that phantom horse that haunts the railways to this day so disastrously .
Now , is this growth of large towns really , as one may allege , a result of the development of railways in the world , or is it simply a change in human circumstances that happens to have arisen at the same time ?
It needs only a very general review of the conditions of the distribution of population to realize that the former is probably the true answer .
Now , if this meeting place was more than a certain distance from any particular farm , it would be inconvenient for that farmer to get himself and his produce there and back , and to do his business in a comfortable daylight .
He would not be able to come and , instead , he would either have to go to some other nearer centre to trade and gossip with his neighbours or , failing this , not go at all .
Evidently , then , there would be a maximum distance between such places .
This distance in England , where traffic has been mainly horse traffic for many centuries , seems to have worked out , according to the gradients and so forth , at from eight to fifteen miles , and at such distances do we find the country towns , while the horseless man , the serf , and the labourer and labouring wench have marked their narrow limits in the distribution of the intervening villages .
If by chance these gathering places have arisen at points much closer than this maximum , they have come into competition , and one has finally got the better of the other , so that in England the distribution is often singularly uniform .
Agricultural districts have their towns at about eight miles , and where grazing takes the place of the plough , the town distances increase to fifteen .
[ 14 ] And so it is , entirely as a multiple of horse and foot strides , that all the villages and towns of the world 's country-side have been plotted out .
Publishing is , however , only one of the many similar trades equally profitable and equally likely to move outward to secondary centres , with the development and cheapening of transit .
It is all a question of transit .
Limitation of transit contracts the city , facilitation expands and disperses it .
All this case for diffusion so far is built up entirely on the hypothesis we attempted to establish in the first paper , that transit of persons and goods alike is to become easier , swifter , and altogether better organized than it is at present .
But I find my pen is running ahead , an imagination prone to realistic constructions is struggling to paint a picture altogether prematurely .
There is very much to be weighed and decided before we can get from our present generalization to the style of architecture these houses will show , and to the power and nature of the public taste .
We have laid down now the broad lines of road , railway , and sea transit in the coming century , and we have got this general prophecy of `` urban regions '' established , and for the present that much must suffice .
[ 17 ] Be it noted that the phrase `` available area '' is used , and various other modifying considerations altogether waived for the present .
[ 19 ] The present system of charging parcels by the pound , when goods are sold by the pound , and so getting a miserly profit in the packing , is surely one of the absurdest disregards of the obvious it is possible to imagine .
Before the eighteenth century the only property of serious importance consisted of land and buildings .
These were `` real '' estate .
Beyond these things were live-stock , serfs , and the furnishings of real estate , the surface aspect of real estate , so to speak , personal property , ships , weapons , and the Semitic invention of money .
All such property had to be actually `` held '' and administered by the owner , he was immediately in connection with it and responsible for it .
He could leave it only precariously to a steward and manager , and to convey the revenue of it to him at a distance was a difficult and costly proceeding .
To prevent a constant social disturbance by lapsing and dividing property , and in the absence of any organized agency to receive lapsed property , inheritance and preferably primogeniture were of such manifest advantage that the old social organization always tended in the direction of these institutions .
Such usury as was practised relied entirely on the land and the anticipated agricultural produce of the land .
Those who belong to this shareholding class only partially , who partially depend upon dividends and partially upon activities , occur in every rank and order of the whole social body .
The waiter one tips probably has a hundred or so in some remote company , the will of the eminent labour reformer reveals an admirably distributed series of investments , the bishop sells tea and digs coal , or at any rate gets a profit from some unknown persons tea-selling or coal-digging , to eke out the direct recompense of his own modest corn-treading .
Indeed , above the labouring class , the number of individuals in the social body whose gross income is entirely the result of their social activities is very small .
Previously in the world 's history , saving a few quite exceptional aspects , the possession and retention of property was conditional upon activities of some sort , honest or dishonest , work , force , or fraud .
But the shareholding ingredient of our new society , so far as its shareholding goes , has no need of strength or wisdom ; the countless untraceable Owner of the modern world presents in a multitudinous form the image of a Merovingian king .
The shareholder owns the world _de jure_ , by the common recognition of the rights of property ; and the incumbency of knowledge , management , and toil fall entirely to others .
He toils not , neither does he spin ; he is mechanically released from the penalty of the Fall , he reaps in a still sinful world all the practical benefits of a millennium -- without any of its moral limitations .
There are , for example , the unorganized myriads that one can cover by the phrase `` mechanics and engineers , '' if one uses it in its widest possible sense .
At present it would be almost impossible to describe such a thing as a typical engineer , to predicate any universally applicable characteristic of the engineer and mechanic .
The black-faced , oily man one figures emerging from the engine-room serves well enough , until one recalls the sanitary engineer with his additions of crockery and plumbing , the electrical engineer with his little tests and wires , the mining engineer , the railway maker , the motor builder , and the irrigation expert .
Even if we take some specific branch of all this huge mass of new employment the coming of mechanism has brought with it , we still find an undigested miscellany .
Consider the rude levy that is engaged in supplying and repairing the world 's new need of bicycles !
Wheelwrights , watchmakers , blacksmiths , music-dealers , drapers , sewing-machine repairers , smart errand boys , ironmongers , individuals from all the older aspects of engineering , have been caught up by the new development , are all now , with a more or less inadequate knowledge and training , working in the new service .
But is it likely that this will remain a rude levy ?
From all these varied people the world requires certain things , and a failure to obtain them involves , sooner or later , in this competitive creation , an individual replacement and a push towards the abyss .
The very lowest of them must understand the machine they contribute to make and repair , and not only is it a fairly complex machine in itself , but it is found in several types and patterns , and so far it has altered , and promises still to alter , steadily , by improvements in this part and that .
No limited stock-in-trade of knowledge , such as suffices for a joiner or an ostler , will serve .
They must keep on mastering new points , new aspects , they must be intelligent and adaptable , they must get a grasp of that permanent something that lies behind the changing immediate practice .
In other words , they will have to be educated rather than trained after the fashion of the old craftsman .
Just now this body of irregulars is threatened by the coming of the motors .
The motors promise new difficulties , new rewards , and new competition .
It is an ill look-out for the cycle mechanic who is not prepared to tackle the new problems that will arise .
For all this next century this particular body of mechanics will be picking up new recruits and eliminating the incompetent and the rule-of-thumb sage .
Can it fail , as the years pass , to develop certain general characters , to become so far homogeneous as to be generally conscious of the need of a scientific education , at any rate in mechanical and chemical matters , and to possess , down to its very lowest ranks and orders , a common fund of intellectual training ?
If England stood alone , I do not see why each of the new mechanical and engineering industries , so soon as it develops sufficiently to have gathered together a body of workers capable of supporting a Trade Union secretary , should not begin to stagnate in the same manner .
Only England does not stand alone , and the building trade is so far not typical , inasmuch as it possesses a national monopoly that the most elaborate system of protection can not secure any other group of trades .
One must have one 's house built where one has to live , the importation of workmen in small bodies is difficult and dear , and if one can not have the house one wishes , one must needs have the least offensive substitute ; but bicycle and motor , iron-work and furniture , engines , rails , and ships one can import .
The community , therefore , that does least to educate its mechanics and engineers out of the base and servile tradition of the old idea of industry will in the coming years of progress simply get a disproportionate share of the rejected element , the trade will go elsewhere , and the community will be left in possession of an exceptionally large contingent for the abyss .
For this body to exist implies the existence of much more than the primary and initiating nucleus of engineers and skilled mechanics .
If it is an educated class , its existence implies a class of educators , and just as far as it does get educated the schoolmasters will be skilled and educated men .
The shabby-genteel middle-class schoolmaster of the England of to-day , in -- or a little way out of -- orders , with his smattering of Greek , his Latin that leads nowhere , his fatuous mathematics , his gross ignorance of pedagogics , and his incomparable snobbishness , certainly does not represent the schoolmaster of this coming class .
Moreover , the new element will necessarily embody its collective , necessarily distinctive , and unprecedented thoughts in a literature of its own , its development means the development of a new sort of writer and of new elements in the press .
And since , if it does emerge , a revolution in the common schools of the community will be a necessary part of the process , then its emergence will involve a revolutionary change in the condition of classes that might otherwise remain as they are now -- the older craftsman , for example .
The mere fact that a man is an engineer or a doctor , for example , should imply now , and certainly will imply in the future , that he has received an education of a certain definite type ; he will have a general acquaintance with the scientific interpretation of the universe , and he will have acquired certain positive and practical habits of mind .
If the methods of thought of any individual in this central body are not practical and positive , he will tend to drift out of it to some more congenial employment .
He will almost necessarily have a strong imperative to duty quite apart from whatever theological opinions he may entertain , because if he has not such an inherent imperative , life will have very many more alluring prospects than this .
His religious conclusions , whatever they may be , will be based upon some orderly theological system that must have honestly admitted and reconciled his scientific beliefs ; the emotional and mystical elements in his religion will be subordinate or absent .
Essentially he will be a moral man , certainly so far as to exercise self-restraint and live in an ordered way .
Unless this is so , he will be unable to give his principal energies to thought and work -- that is , he will not be a good typical engineer .
If sensuality appear at all largely in this central body , therefore , -- a point we must leave open here -- it will appear without any trappings of sentiment or mysticism , frankly on Pauline lines , wine for the stomach's sake , and it is better to marry than to burn , a concession to the flesh necessary to secure efficiency .
Assuming in our typical case that pure indulgence does not appear or flares and passes , then either he will be single or more or less married .
The import of that `` more or less '' will be discussed later , for the present we may very conveniently conceive him married under the traditional laws of Christendom .
Having a mind considerably engaged , he will not have the leisure for a wife of the distracting , perplexing personality kind , and in our typical case , which will be a typically sound and successful one , we may picture him wedded to a healthy , intelligent , and loyal person , who will be her husband's companion in their common leisure , and as mother of their three or four children and manager of his household , as much of a technically capable individual as himself .
He will be a father of several children , I think , because his scientific mental basis will incline him to see the whole of life as a struggle to survive ; he will recognize that a childless , sterile life , however pleasant , is essentially failure and perversion , and he will conceive his honour involved in the possession of offspring .
Will a generation to whom marriage will be no longer necessarily associated with the birth and rearing of children , or with the immediate co-operation and sympathy of husband and wife in common proceedings , retain its present feeling for the extreme sanctity of the permanent bond ?
Will the agreeable , unemployed , childless woman , with a high conception of her personal rights , who is spending her husband's earnings or income in some pleasant discrepant manner , a type of woman there are excellent reasons for anticipating will become more frequent -- will she continue to share the honours and privileges of the wife , mother , and helper of the old dispensation ?
and in particular , will the great gulf that is now fixed by custom between her and the agreeable unmarried lady who is similarly employed remain so inexorably wide ?
Charity is in the air , and why should not charming people meet one another ?
And where is either of these ladies to find the support that will enable her to insist upon the monopoly that conventional sentiment , so far as it finds expression , concedes her ?
The danger to them both of the theory of equal liberty is evident enough .
On the other hand , in the case of the unmarried mother who may be helped to hold her own , or who may be holding her own in the world , where will the moral censor of the year 1950 find his congenial following to gather stones ?
Much as we may regret it , it does very greatly affect the realities of this matter , that with the increased migration of people from home to home amidst the large urban regions that , we have concluded , will certainly obtain in the future , even if moral reprobation and minor social inconveniences do still attach to certain sorts of status , it will probably be increasingly difficult to determine the status of people who wish to conceal it for any but criminal ends .
[ 31 ] I use the word `` segregation '' here and always as it is used by mineralogists to express the slow conveyance of diffused matter upon centres of aggregation , such a process as , for example , must have occurred in the growth of flints .
Now , this age is being constantly described as a `` Democratic '' age ; `` Democracy '' is alleged to have affected art , literature , trade and religion alike in the most remarkable ways .
It is not only tacitly present in the great bulk of contemporary thought that this `` Democracy '' is now dominant , but that it is becoming more and more overwhelmingly predominant as the years pass .
Allusions to Democracy are so abundant , deductions from its influence so confident and universal , that it is worth while to point out what a very hollow thing the word in most cases really is , a large empty object in thought , of the most vague and faded associations and the most attenuated content , and to inquire just exactly what the original implications and present realities of `` Democracy '' may be .
The inquiry will leave us with a very different conception of the nature and future of this sort of political arrangement from that generally assumed .
We have already seen in the discussion of the growth of great cities , that an analytical process may absolutely invert the expectation based on the gross results up-to-date , and I believe it will be equally possible to show cause for believing that the development of Democracy also is , after all , not the opening phase of a world-wide movement going on unbendingly in its present direction , but the first impulse of forces that will finally sweep round into a quite different path .
Flying off at a tangent is probably one of the gravest dangers and certainly the one most constantly present , in this enterprise of prophecy .
Modern Democracy first asserted itself in the ancient kingdoms of France and Great Britain ( counting the former British colonies in America as a part of the latter ) , and it is in the French and English-speaking communities that Democracy has developed itself most completely .
Upon the supposition we have made , Democracy broke out first in these States because they were leading the way in material progress , because they were the first States to develop industrialism , wholesale mechanisms , and great masses of insubordinate activity outside the recognized political scheme , and the nature and time and violence of the outbreak was determined by the nature of the superseded government , and the amount of stress between it and the new elements .
But the detachment of a great section of the new middle-class from the aristocratic order of England to form the United States of America , and the sudden rejuvenescence of France by the swift and thorough sloughing of its outworn aristocratic monarchy , the consequent wars and the Napoleonic adventure , checked and modified the parallel development that might otherwise have happened in country after country over all Europe west of the Carpathians .
The monarchies that would probably have collapsed through internal forces and given place to modern democratic states were smashed from the outside , and a process of political re-construction , that has probably missed out the complete formal Democratic phase altogether -- and which has been enormously complicated through religious , national , and dynastic traditions -- set in .
Throughout America , in England , and , after extraordinary experiments , in France , political democracy has in effect legally established itself -- most completely in the United States -- and the reflection and influence of its methods upon the methods of all the other countries in intellectual contact with it , have been so considerable as practically to make their monarchies as new in their kind , almost , as democratic republics .
In Germany , Austria , and Italy , for example , there is a press nearly as audible as in the more frankly democratic countries , and measurably akin in influence ; there are constitutionally established legislative assemblies , and there is the same unofficial development of powerful financial and industrial powers with which the ostensible Government must make terms .
In a vast amount of the public discussion of these States , the postulates of Democracy are clearly implicit .
Quite as much in reality as the democratic republics of America , are they based not on classes but upon a confusion ; they are , in their various degrees and with their various individual differences , just as truly governments of the grey .
Now , patriotism is not a thing that flourishes in the void , -- one needs a foreigner .
A national and patriotic party is an anti-foreign party ; the altar of the modern god , Democracy , will cry aloud for the stranger men .
Simply to keep in power , and out of no love of mischief , the government or the party machine will have to insist upon dangers and national differences , to keep the voter to the poll by alarms , seeking ever to taint the possible nucleus of any competing organization with the scandal of external influence .
The party press will play the watch-dog and allay all internal dissensions with its warning bay at some adjacent people , and the adjacent peoples , for reasons to be presently expanded , will be continually more sensitive to such baying .
Already one sees country yelping at country all over the modern world , not only in the matter of warlike issues , but with a note of quite furious commercial rivalry -- quite furious and , indeed , quite insane , since its ideal of trading enormously with absolutely ruined and tradeless foreigners , exporting everything and importing nothing , is obviously outside reason altogether .
The inexorable doom of these governments based on the grey , is to foster enmity between people and people .
Even their alliances are but sacrifices to intenser antagonisms .
And the phases of the democratic sequence are simple and sure .
Forced on by a relentless competition , the tone of the outcries will become fiercer and fiercer ; the occasions of excitement , the perilous moments , the ingenuities of annoyance , more and more dramatic , -- from the mere emptiness and disorder of the general mind !
Jealousies and anti-foreign enactments , tariff manipulations and commercial embitterment , destructive , foolish , exasperating obstructions that benefit no human being , will minister to this craving without completely allaying it .
Nearer , and ever nearer , the politicians of the coming times will force one another towards the verge , not because they want to go over it , not because any one wants to go over it , but because they are , by their very nature , compelled to go that way , because to go in any other direction is to break up and lose power .
And , consequently , the final development of the democratic system , so far as intrinsic forces go , will be , not the rule of the boss , nor the rule of the trust , nor the rule of the newspaper ; no rule , indeed , but international rivalry , international competition , international exasperation and hostility , and at last -- irresistible and overwhelming -- the definite establishment of the rule of that most stern and educational of all masters -- _War_ .
In shaping anticipations of the future of war there arises a certain difficulty about the point of departure .
One may either begin upon such broad issues as the preceding forecasts have opened , and having determined now something of the nature of the coming State and the force of its warlike inclination , proceed to speculate how this vast ill-organized fourfold organism will fight ; or one may set all that matter aside for a space , and having regard chiefly to the continually more potent appliances physical science offers the soldier , we may try to develop a general impression of theoretically thorough war , go from that to the nature of the State most likely to be superlatively efficient in such warfare , and so arrive at the conditions of survival under which these present governments of confusion will struggle one against the other .
The latter course will be taken here .
We will deal first of all with war conducted for its own sake , with a model army , as efficient as an imaginative training can make it , and with a model organization for warfare of the State behind it , and then the experience of the confused modern social organism as it is impelled , in an uncongenial metamorphosis , towards this imperative and finally unavoidable efficient state , will come most easily within the scope of one 's imagination .
The only really effective and final defeat such an attenuated force of marksmen could sustain , would be from the slow and circumspect advance upon it of a similar force of superior marksmen , creeping forward under cover of night or of smoke-shells and fire , digging pits during the snatches of cessation obtained in this way , and so coming nearer and nearer and getting a completer and completer mastery of the defender's ground until the approach of the defender 's reliefs , food , and fresh ammunition ceased to be possible .
Thereupon there would be nothing for it but either surrender or a bolt in the night to positions in the rear , a bolt that might be hotly followed if it were deferred too late .
It will be evident that such warfare as this inevitable precision of gun and rifle forces upon humanity , will become less and less dramatic as a whole , more and more as a whole a monstrous thrust and pressure of people against people .
No dramatic little general spouting his troops into the proper hysterics for charging , no prancing merely brave officers , no reckless gallantry or invincible stubbornness of men will suffice .
For the commander-in-chief on a picturesque horse sentimentally watching his `` boys '' march past to death or glory in battalions , there will have to be a loyal staff of men , working simply , earnestly , and subtly to keep the front tight , and at the front , every little isolated company of men will have to be a council of war , a little conspiracy under the able man its captain , as keen and individual as a football team , conspiring against the scarcely seen company of the foe over yonder .
The battalion commander will be replaced in effect by the organizer of the balloons and guns by which his few hundreds of splendid individuals will be guided and reinforced .
In the place of hundreds of thousands of more or less drunken and untrained young men marching into battle -- muddle-headed , sentimental , dangerous and futile hobbledehoys -- there will be thousands of sober men braced up to their highest possibilities , intensely doing their best ; in the place of charging battalions , shattering impacts of squadrons and wide harvest-fields of death , there will be hundreds of little rifle battles fought up to the hilt , gallant dashes here , night surprises there , the sudden sinister faint gleam of nocturnal bayonets , brilliant guesses that will drop catastrophic shell and death over hills and forests suddenly into carelessly exposed masses of men .
For eight miles on either side of the firing lines -- whose fire will probably never altogether die away while the war lasts -- men will live and eat and sleep under the imminence of unanticipated death ... .
Such will be the opening phase of the war that is speedily to come .
I imagine that in this ideal war as compared with the war of to-day , there will be a very considerable restriction of the rights of the non-combatant .
A large part of existing International Law involves a curious implication , a distinction between the belligerent government and its accredited agents in warfare and the general body of its subjects .
There is a disposition to treat the belligerent government , in spite of the democratic status of many States , as not fully representing its people , to establish a sort of world-citizenship in the common mass outside the official and military class .
Protection of the non-combatant and his property comes at last -- in theory at least -- within a measurable distance of notice boards : `` Combatants are requested to keep off the grass . ''
This disposition I ascribe to a recognition of that obsolescence and inadequacy of the formal organization of States , which has already been discussed in this book .
It was a disposition that was strongest perhaps in the earliest decades of the nineteenth century , and stronger now than , in the steady and irresistible course of strenuous and universal military preparation , it is likely to be in the future .
In our imaginary twentieth century State , organized primarily for war , this tendency to differentiate a non-combatant mass in the fighting State will certainly not be respected , the State will be organized as a whole to fight as a whole , it will have triumphantly asserted the universal duty of its citizens .
The military force will be a much ampler organization than the `` army '' of to-day , it will be not simply the fists but the body and brain of the land .
The whole apparatus , the whole staff engaged in internal communication , for example , may conceivably not be State property and a State service , but if it is not it will assuredly be as a whole organized as a volunteer force , that may instantly become a part of the machinery of defence or aggression at the outbreak of war .
[ 39 ] The men may very conceivably not have a uniform , for military uniforms are simply one aspect of this curious and transitory phase of restriction , but they will have their orders and their universal plan .
As the bells ring and the recording telephones click into every house the news that war has come , there will be no running to and fro upon the public ways , no bawling upon the moving platforms of the central urban nuclei , no crowds of silly useless able-bodied people gaping at inflammatory transparencies outside the offices of sensational papers because the egregious idiots in control of affairs have found them no better employment .
Every man will be soberly and intelligently setting about the particular thing he has to do -- even the rich shareholding sort of person , the hereditary mortgager of society , will be given something to do , and if he has learnt nothing else he will serve to tie up parcels of ammunition or pack army sausage .
Very probably the best of such people and of the speculative class will have qualified as cyclist marksmen for the front , some of them may even have devoted the leisure of peace to military studies and may be prepared with novel weapons .
Recruiting among the working classes -- or , more properly speaking , among the People of the Abyss -- will have dwindled to the vanishing point ; people who are no good for peace purposes are not likely to be any good in such a grave and complicated business as modern war .
The spontaneous traffic of the roads in peace , will fall now into two streams , one of women and children coming quietly and comfortably out of danger , the other of men and material going up to the front .
There will be no panics , no hardships , because everything will have been amply pre-arranged -- we are dealing with an ideal State .
Quietly and tremendously that State will have gripped its adversary and tightened its muscles -- that is all .
Great multitudes of balloons will be the Argus eyes of the entire military organism , stalked eyes with a telephonic nerve in each stalk , and at night they will sweep the country with search-lights and come soaring before the wind with hanging flares .
Certainly they will be steerable .
Moreover , when the wind admits , there will be freely-moving steerable balloons wagging little flags to their friends below .
And so far as the resources of the men on the ground go , the balloons will be almost invulnerable .
The mere perforation of balloons with shot does them little harm , and the possibility of hitting a balloon that is drifting about at a practically unascertainable distance and height so precisely as to blow it to pieces with a timed shell , and to do this in the little time before it is able to give simple and precise instructions as to your range and position to the unseen gunners it directs , is certainly one of the most difficult and trying undertakings for an artilleryman that one can well imagine .
I am inclined to think that the many considerations against a successful attack on balloons from the ground , will enormously stimulate enterprise and invention in the direction of dirigible aerial devices that can fight .
Few people , I fancy , who know the work of Langley , Lilienthal , Pilcher , Maxim , and Chanute , but will be inclined to believe that long before the year A.D. 2000 , and very probably before 1950 , a successful aeroplane will have soared and come home safe and sound .
Directly that is accomplished the new invention will be most assuredly applied to war .
But the duel will be the rarer thing .
In any affair of ramming there is an enormous advantage for the side that can contrive , anywhere in the field of action , to set two vessels at one .
The mere ascent of one flying-ram from one side will assuredly slip the leashes of two on the other , until the manoeuvring squadrons may be as thick as starlings in October .
They will wheel and mount , they will spread and close , there will be elaborate manoeuvres for the advantage of the wind , there will be sudden drops to the shelter of entrenched guns .
The actual impact of battle will be an affair of moments .
They will be awful moments , but not more terrible , not more exacting of manhood than the moments that will come to men when there is -- and it has not as yet happened on this earth -- equal fighting between properly manned and equipped ironclads at sea .
( And the well-bred young gentlemen of means who are privileged to officer the British Army nowadays will be no more good at this sort of thing than they are at controversial theology or electrical engineering or anything else that demands a well-exercised brain . )
The fight will never be in practice between equal sides , never be that theoretical deadlock we have sketched , but a fight between the more efficient and the less efficient , between the more inventive and the more traditional .
While the victors , disciplined and grimly intent , full of the sombre yet glorious delight of a grave thing well done , will , without shouting or confusion , be fighting like one great national body , the losers will be taking that pitiless exposure of helplessness in such a manner as their natural culture and character may determine .
War for the losing side will be an unspeakable pitiable business .
There will be first of all the coming of the war , the wave of excitement , the belligerent shouting of the unemployed inefficients , the flag-waving , the secret doubts , the eagerness for hopeful news , the impatience of the warning voice .
I seem to see , almost as if he were symbolic , the grey old general -- the general who learnt his art of war away in the vanished nineteenth century , the altogether too elderly general with his epaulettes and decorations , his uniform that has still its historical value , his spurs and his sword -- riding along on his obsolete horse , by the side of his doomed column .
Above all things he is a gentleman .
And the column looks at him lovingly with its countless boys ' faces , and the boys ' eyes are infinitely trustful , for he has won battles in the old time .
They will believe in him to the end .
They have been brought up in their schools to believe in him and his class , their mothers have mingled respect for the gentlefolk with the simple doctrines of their faith , their first lesson on entering the army was the salute .
The `` smart '' helmets His Majesty , or some such unqualified person , chose for them , lie hotly on their young brows , and over their shoulders slope their obsolete , carelessly-sighted guns .
Tramp , tramp , they march , doing what they have been told to do , incapable of doing anything they have not been told to do , trustful and pitiful , marching to wounds and disease , hunger , hardship , and death .
They know nothing of what they are going to meet , nothing of what they will have to do ; Religion and the Ratepayer and the Rights of the Parent working through the instrumentality of the Best Club in the World have kept their souls and minds , if not untainted , at least only harmlessly veneered , with the thinnest sham of training or knowledge .
Tramp , tramp , they go , boys who will never be men , rejoicing patriotically in the nation that has thus sent them forth , badly armed , badly clothed , badly led , to be killed in some avoidable quarrel by men unseen .
And beside them , an absolute stranger to them , a stranger even in habits of speech and thought , and at any rate to be shot with them fairly and squarely , marches the subaltern -- the son of the school-burking , shareholding class -- a slightly taller sort of boy , as ill-taught as they are in all that concerns the realities of life , ignorant of how to get food , how to get water , how to keep fever down and strength up , ignorant of his practical equality with the men beside him , carefully trained under a clerical headmaster to use a crib , play cricket rather nicely , look all right whatever happens , believe in his gentility , and avoid talking `` shop. ''
The major you see is a man of the world , and very pleasantly meets the grey general's eye .
He is , one may remark by the way , something of an army reformer , without offence , of course , to the Court people or the Government people .
His prospects -- if only he were not going to be shot -- are brilliant enough .
He has written quite cleverly on the question of Recruiting , and advocated as much as twopence more a day and billiard rooms under the chaplain 's control ; he has invented a military bicycle with a wheel of solid iron that can be used as a shield ; and a war correspondent and , indeed , any one who writes even the most casual and irresponsible article on military questions is a person worth his cultivating .
He is the very life and soul of army reform , as it is known to the governments of the grey -- that is to say , army reform without a single step towards a social revolution ... .
So the gentlemanly old general -- the polished drover to the shambles -- rides , and his doomed column march by , in this vision that haunts my mind .
[ 38 ] So far , pestilence has been a feature of almost every sustained war in the world , but there is really no reason whatever why it should be so .
There is no reason , indeed , why a soldier upon active service on the victorious side should go without a night 's rest or miss a meal .
If he does , there is muddle and want of foresight somewhere , and that our hypothesis excludes .
The action of the force of attraction of the great tongues is cumulative .
It goes on , as bodies fall , with a steady acceleration .
The more the great tongues prevail over the little languages the less will be the inducement to write and translate into these latter , the less the inducement to master them with any care or precision .
And so this attack upon the smaller tongues , this gravitation of those who are born to speak them , towards the great languages , is not only to be seen going on in the case of such languages as Flemish , Welsh , or Basque , but even in the case of Norwegian and of such a great and noble tongue as the Italian , I am afraid that the trend of things makes for a similar suppression .
All over Italy is the French newspaper and the French book .
French wins its way more and more there , as English , I understand , is doing in Norway , and English and German in Holland .
And in the coming years when the reading public will , in the case of the Western nations , be practically the whole functional population , when travel will be more extensive and abundant , and the inter-change of printed matter still cheaper and swifter -- and above all with the spread of the telephone -- the process of subtle , bloodless , unpremeditated annexation will conceivably progress much more rapidly even than it does at present .
The Twentieth Century will see the effectual crowding out of most of the weaker languages -- if not a positive crowding out , yet at least ( as in Flanders ) a supplementing of them by the superposition of one or other of a limited number of world-languages over the area in which each is spoken .
This will go on not only in Europe , but with varying rates of progress and local eddies and interruptions over the whole world .
Except in the special case of China and Japan , where there may be a unique development , the peoples of the world will escape from the wreckage of their too small and swamped and foundering social systems , only up the ladders of what one may call the aggregating tongues .
The final attainment of this great synthesis , like the social deliquescence and reconstruction dealt with in the earlier of these anticipations , has an air of being a process independent of any collective or conscious will in man , as being the expression of a greater Will ; it is working now , and may work out to its end vastly , and yet at times almost imperceptibly , as some huge secular movement in Nature , the raising of a continent , the crumbling of a mountain-chain , goes on to its appointed culmination .
Or one may compare the process to a net that has surrounded , and that is drawn continually closer and closer upon , a great and varied multitude of men .
We may cherish animosities , we may declare imperishable distances , we may plot and counter-plot , make war and `` fight to a finish ; '' the net tightens for all that .
And while the New Republic is thus developing its idea of itself and organizing its mind , it will also be growing out of the confused and intricate businesses and undertakings and public services of the present time , into a recognizable material body .
The synthetic process that is going on in the case of many of the larger of the businesses of the world , that formation of Trusts that bulks so large in American discussion , is of the utmost significance in this connection .
Conceivably the first impulse to form Trusts came from a mere desire to control competition and economize working expenses , but even in its very first stages this process of coalescence has passed out of the region of commercial operations into that of public affairs .
The Trust develops into the organization under men far more capable than any sort of public officials , of entire industries , of entire departments of public life , quite outside the ostensible democratic government system altogether .
The whole apparatus of communications , which we have seen to be of such primary importance in the making of the future , promises to pass , in the case of the United States at least , out of the region of scramble into the domain of deliberate control .
Even to-day the Trusts are taking over quite consciously the most vital national matters .
The American iron and steel industries have been drawn together and developed in a manner that is a necessary preliminary to the capture of the empire of the seas .
That end is declaredly within the vista of these operations , within their initial design .
These things are not the work of dividend-hunting imbeciles , but of men who regard wealth as a convention , as a means to spacious material ends .
There is an animated little paper published in Los Angeles in the interests of Mr. Wilshire , which bears upon its forefront the maxim , `` Let the Nation own the Trusts . ''
Well , under their mantle of property , the Trusts grow continually more elaborate and efficient machines of production and public service , while the formal nation chooses its bosses and buttons and reads its illustrated press .
I must confess I do not see the negro and the poor Irishman and all the emigrant sweepings of Europe , which constitute the bulk of the American Abyss , uniting to form that great Socialist party of which Mr. Wilshire dreams , and with a little demonstrating and balloting taking over the foundry and the electrical works , the engine shed and the signal box , from the capable men in charge .
But that a confluent system of Trust-owned business organisms , and of Universities and re-organized military and naval services may presently discover an essential unity of purpose , presently begin thinking a literature , and behaving like a State , is a much more possible thing ... .
[ 48 ] In a large town like Folkestone , for example , it is practically impossible to buy any book but a `` boomed '' novel unless one has ascertained the names of the author , the book , the edition , and the publisher .
There is no index in existence kept up to date that supplies these particulars .
If , for example , one wants -- as I want ( 1 ) to read all that I have not read of the work of Mr. Frank Stockton , ( 2 ) to read a book of essays by Professor Ray Lankaster the title of which I have forgotten , and ( 3 ) to buy the most convenient edition of the works of Swift , one has to continue wanting until the British Museum Library chances to get in one 's way .
The book-selling trade supplies no information at all on these points .
If the surmise of a developing New Republic -- a Republic that must ultimately become a World State of capable rational men , developing amidst the fading contours and colours of our existing nations and institutions -- be indeed no idle dream , but an attainable possibility in the future , and to that end it is that the preceding Anticipations have been mainly written , it becomes a speculation of very great interest to forecast something of the general shape and something even of certain details of that common body of opinion which the New Republic , when at last it discovers and declares itself , will possess .
Since we have supposed this New Republic will already be consciously and pretty freely controlling the general affairs of humanity before this century closes , its broad principles and opinions must necessarily shape and determine that still ampler future of which the coming hundred years is but the opening phase .
There are many processes , many aspects of things , that are now , as it were , in the domain of natural laws and outside human control , or controlled unintelligently and superstitiously , that in the future , in the days of the coming New Republic , will be definitely taken in hand as part of the general work of humanity , as indeed already , since the beginning of the nineteenth century , the control of pestilences has been taken in hand .
And in particular , there are certain broad questions much under discussion to which , thus far , I have purposely given a value disproportionately small : --
And while the emergent New Republic is deciding to provide for the swarming inferiority of the Abyss , and developing the morality and educational system of the future , in this fashion , it will be attacking that mass of irresponsible property that is so unavoidable and so threatening under present conditions .
The attack will , of course , be made along lines that the developing science of economics will trace in the days immediately before us .
A scheme of death duties and of heavy graduated taxes upon irresponsible incomes , with , perhaps , in addition , a system of terminable liability for borrowers , will probably suffice to control the growth of this creditor elephantiasis .
The detailed contrivances are for the specialist to make .
If there is such a thing as bitterness in the public acts of the New Republicans , it will probably be found in the measures that will be directed against those who are parasitic , or who attempt to be parasitic , upon the social body , either by means of gambling , by manipulating the medium of exchange , or by such interventions upon legitimate transactions as , for example , the legal trade union in Great Britain contrives in the case of house property and land .
Simply because he fails more often than he succeeds , there is still a disposition among sentimental people to regard the gambler or the speculator as rather a dashing , adventurous sort of person , and to contrast his picturesque gallantry with the sober certainties of honest men .
The men of the New Republic will be obtuse to the glamour of such romance ; they will regard the gambler simply as a mean creature who hangs about the social body in the hope of getting something for nothing , who runs risks to filch the possessions of other men , exactly as a thief does .
They will put the two on a footing , and the generous gambler , like the kindly drunkard , in the face of their effectual provision for his little weakness , will cease to complain that his worst enemy is himself .
And , in dealing with speculation , the New Republic will have the power of an assured faith and purpose , and the resources of an economic science that is as yet only in its infancy .
In such matters the New Republic will entertain no superstition of _laissez faire_ .
Money and credit are as much human contrivances as bicycles , and as liable to expansion and modification as any other sort of prevalent but imperfect machine .
[ 52 ] _Vide_ Mr. Archdall Read 's excellent and suggestive book , `` The Present Evolution of Man . ''
At supper that night , holiday talk held undisputed sway .
Mr. Pritchard spoke of `` Scotland , '' Miss Isaacs clamoured of Bettws-y-Coed , Mr. Judson displayed a proprietary interest in the Norfolk Broads .
said Hoopdriver when the question came to him .
`` Why , cycling , of course . ''
`` I am , '' said Hoopdriver as calmly as possible , pulling at the insufficient moustache .
`` I 'm going for a Cycling Tour .
Along the South Coast . ''
`` Have the machine thoroughly well oiled , '' said Briggs , `` carry one or two lemons with you , do n't tear yourself to death the first day , and sit upright .
Never lose control of the machine , and always sound the bell on every possible opportunity .
You mind those things , and nothing very much ca n't happen to you , Hoopdriver -- you take my word . ''
`` THAT ai n't the way to get off , '' said the heathkeeper .
It is undeniable that it became convulsed with the most violent emotions directly the Young Lady in Grey appeared .
It began an absolutely unprecedented Wabble -- unprecedented so far as Hoopdriver 's experience went .
It `` showed off '' -- the most decadent sinuosity .
It left a track like one of Beardsley 's feathers .
He suddenly realised , too , that his cap was loose on his head and his breath a mere remnant .
The Young Lady in Grey was also riding a bicycle .
She was dressed in a beautiful bluish-gray , and the sun behind her drew her outline in gold and left the rest in shadow .
Hoopdriver was dimly aware that she was young , rather slender , dark , and with a bright colour and bright eyes .
Strange doubts possessed him as to the nature of her nether costume .
He had heard of such things of course .
Her handles glittered ; a jet of sunlight splashed off her bell blindingly .
She was approaching the high road along an affluent from the villas of Surbiton .
fee roads converged slantingly .
She was travelling at about the same pace as Mr. Hoopdriver .
The appearances pointed to a meeting at the fork of the roads .
`` It 's my first ride , as a matter of fact .
But that 's no excuse for my ah !
`` Your finger 's bleeding , '' she said , abruptly .
He lit a cigarette , and sat smoking and meditating .
He did not even look up when vehicles passed .
It was perhaps ten minutes before he roused himself .
`` What rot it is !
What 's the good of thinking such things , '' he said .
`` I 'm only a blessed draper 's assistant . ''
( To be exact , he did not say blessed .
The service of a shop may polish a man 's exterior ways , but the 'prentices ' dormitory is an indifferent school for either manners or morals . )
He stood up and began wheeling his machine towards Esher .
It was going to be a beautiful day , and the hedges and trees and the open country were all glorious to his town-tired eyes .
But it was a little different from the elation of his start .
Then , `` Damned Fool ! ''
Yet you must not think that because Mr. Hoopdriver was a little uncomfortable , he was unhappy in the slightest degree .
In the background of his consciousness was the sense that about this time Briggs would be half-way through his window dressing , and Gosling , the apprentice , busy , with a chair turned down over the counter and his ears very red , trying to roll a piece of huckaback -- only those who have rolled pieces of huckaback know quite how detestable huckaback is to roll -- and the shop would be dusty and , perhaps , the governor about and snappy .
And here was quiet and greenery , and one mucked about as the desire took one , without a soul to see , and here was no wailing of `` Sayn , '' no folding of remnants , no voice to shout , `` Hoopdriver , forward ! ''
And once he almost ran over something wonderful , a little , low , red beast with a yellowish tail , that went rushing across the road before him .
It was the first weasel he had ever seen in his cockney life .
There were miles of this , scores of miles of this before him , pinewood and oak forest , purple , heathery moorland and grassy down , lush meadows , where shining rivers wound their lazy way , villages with square-towered , flint churches , and rambling , cheap , and hearty inns , clean , white , country towns , long downhill stretches , where one might ride at one 's ease ( overlooking a jolt or so ) , and far away , at the end of it all , -- the sea .
For a moment horrible doubts troubled Mr. Hoopdriver .
Had that handkerchief been a dream ?
Besides which he was deliquescent and scarlet , and felt so .
It must be her coquetry -- the handkerchief was indisputable .
Should he ride up to her and get off , or get off and ride up to her ?
It was as well she did n't look , because he would certainly capsize if he lifted his cap .
Perhaps that was her consideration .
Even as he hesitated he was upon her .
She must have heard his breathing .
He gripped the brake .
His right leg waved in the air , and he came down heavily and staggering , but erect .
She turned her eyes upon him with admirable surprise .
Mr. Hoopdriver tried to smile pleasantly , hold up his machine , raise his cap , and bow gracefully .
Indeed , he felt that he did as much .
He was a man singularly devoid of the minutiae of self-consciousness , and he was quite unaware of a tail of damp hair lying across his forehead , and just clearing his eyes , and of the general disorder of his coiffure .
There was an interrogative pause .
She looked at him doubtfully .
He HAD seen it !
She decided that he was not an unredeemed rough taking advantage of a mistake , but an innocent soul meaning well while seeking happiness .
`` I DID wave my handkerchief , '' she said .
`` I 'm very sorry .
I am expecting -- a friend , a gentleman , '' -- she seemed to flush pink for a minute .
`` He is riding a bicycle and dressed in -- in brown ; and at a distance , you know -- ''
`` Nothing , thank you , '' she said decisively .
And immediately , `` This IS the Ripley road ? ''
As Mr. Hoopdriver rode swaggering along the Ripley road , it came to him , with an unwarrantable sense of comfort , that he had seen the last of the Young Lady in Grey .
But the ill-concealed bladery of the machine , the present machinery of Fate , the deus ex machina , so to speak , was against him .
The bicycle , torn from this attractive young woman , grew heavier and heavier , and continually more unsteady .
It seemed a choice between stopping at Ripley or dying in the flower of his days .
He went into the Unicorn , after propping his machine outside the door , and , as he cooled down and smoked his Red Herring cigarette while the cold meat was getting ready , he saw from the window the Young Lady in Grey and the other man in brown , entering Ripley .
She glanced over her shoulder and saw Hoopdriver .
said the other man in brown , quite audibly , starting as he followed her glance .
`` Is n't it ? ''
said the Young Lady in Grey .
Then Mr. Hoopdriver perceived clearly that he was in the way , and decided to retreat .
It was just his luck of course that he should stumble at the head of the steps and vanish with indignity .
This was the third time that he 'd seen HIM , and the fourth time her .
And of course he was too big a fat-head to raise his cap to HER !
He thought of that at the foot of the Keep .
Apparently they aimed at the South Coast just as he did , He 'd get up betimes the next day and hurry off to avoid her -- them , that is .
It never occurred to Mr. Hoopdriver that Miss Beaumont and her brother might do exactly the same thing , and that evening , at least , the peculiarity of a brother calling his sister `` Miss Beaumont '' did not recur to him .
He was much too preoccupied with an analysis of his own share of these encounters .
He found it hard to be altogether satisfied about the figure he had cut , revise his memories as he would .
THE IMAGININGS OF MR. HOOPDRIVER 'S HEART
In spite of the drawn blinds and the darkness , you have just seen Mr. Hoopdriver 's face peaceful in its beauty sleep in the little , plain bedroom at the very top of the Yellow Hammer Coffee Tavern at Guildford .
That was before midnight .
As the night progressed he was disturbed by dreams .
There was some little delay in getting Mr. Hoopdriver 's breakfast , so that after all he was not free to start out of Guildford until just upon the stroke of nine .
He wheeled his machine from the High Street in some perplexity .
He did not know whether this young lady , who had seized hold of his imagination so strongly , and her unfriendly and possibly menacing brother , were ahead of him or even now breakfasting somewhere in Guildford .
In the former case he might loiter as he chose ; in the latter he must hurry , and possibly take refuge in branch roads .
All this time he was acutely aware of the existence of the Young Lady in Grey and her companion in brown , as a child in the dark is of Bogies .
Sometimes he could hear their pneumatics stealing upon him from behind , and looking round saw a long stretch of vacant road .
Once he saw far ahead of him a glittering wheel , but it proved to be a workingman riding to destruction on a very tall ordinary .
And he felt a curious , vague uneasiness about that Young Lady in Grey , for which he was altogether unable to account .
Now that he was awake he had forgotten that accentuated Miss Beaumont that had been quite clear in his dream .
But the curious dream conviction , that the girl was not really the man's sister , would not let itself be forgotten .
Why , for instance , should a man want to be alone with his sister on the top of a tower ?
At Milford his bicycle made , so to speak , an ass of itself .
A finger-post suddenly jumped out at him , vainly indicating an abrupt turn to the right , and Mr. Hoopdriver would have slowed up and read the inscription , but no !
-- the bicycle would not let him .
The road dropped a little into Milford , and the thing shied , put down its head and bolted , and Mr. Hoopdriver only thought of the brake when the fingerpost was passed .
Then to have recovered the point of intersection would have meant dismounting .
For as yet there was no road wide enough for Mr. Hoopdriver to turn in .
So he went on his way -- or to be precise , he did exactly the opposite thing .
The road to the right was the Portsmouth road , and this he was on went to Haslemere and Midhurst .
By that error it came about that he once more came upon his fellow travellers of yesterday , coming on them suddenly , without the slightest preliminary announcement and when they least expected it , under the Southwestern Railway arch .
`` It's horrible , '' said a girlish voice ; `` it 's brutal -- cowardly -- '' And stopped .
`` Smirking -- '' What he called the other man in brown need not trouble us .
`` This lady , '' said the other man in brown , explaining , `` has a gnat in her eye . ''
And now let us for a space leave Mr. Hoopdriver in the dusky Midhurst North Street , and return to the two folks beside the railway bridge between Milford and Haslemere .
She was a girl of eighteen , dark , fine featured , with bright eyes , and a rich , swift colour under her warm-tinted skin .
Her eyes were all the brighter for the tears that swam in them .
The man was thirty three or four , fair , with a longish nose overhanging his sandy flaxen moustache , pale blue eyes , and a head that struck out above and behind .
He stood with his feet wide apart , his hand on his hip , in an attitude that was equally suggestive of defiance and aggression .
They had watched Hoopdriver out of sight .
The unexpected interruption had stopped the flood of her tears .
He tugged his abundant moustache and regarded her calmly .
She stood with face averted , obstinately resolved not to speak first .
`` Your behaviour , '' he said at last , `` makes you conspicuous . ''
Possible I AM an unspeakable cad .
Who would n't be -- for you ? ''
With an impatient gesture she motioned him to go on .
`` But you took the hints , nevertheless .
And you did not mind .
It was the fun of the whole thing for you .
That I loved you , and could not speak to you .
You played with it -- ''
`` To compromise you . ''
`` How can I trust you ? ''
How far such odd substitution for the body is possible need not concern us now .
But the devil , speaking by the lips of Mr. Rudyard Kipling , hath it that in the case of one Tomlinson , the thing , so far as the soul is concerned , has already been accomplished .
Time was when men had simple souls , desires as natural as their eyes , a little reasonable philanthropy , a little reasonable philoprogenitiveness , hunger , and a taste for good living , a decent , personal vanity , a healthy , satisfying pugnacity , and so forth .
But now we are taught and disciplined for years and years , and thereafter we read and read for all the time some strenuous , nerve-destroying business permits .
Pedagogic hypnotists , pulpit and platform hypnotists , book-writing hypnotists , newspaper-writing hypnotists , are at us all .
This sugar you are eating , they tell us , is ink , and forthwith we reject it with infinite disgust .
This black draught of unrequited toil is True Happiness , and down it goes with every symptom of pleasure .
This Ibsen , they say , is dull past believing , and we yawn and stretch beyond endurance .
they interrupt , but this Ibsen is deep and delightful , and we vie with one another in an excess of entertainment .
And when we open the heads of these two young people , we find , not a straightforward motive on the surface anywhere ; we find , indeed , not a soul so much as an oversoul , a zeitgeist , a congestion of acquired ideas , a highway 's feast of fine , confused thinking .
The girl is resolute to Live Her Own Life , a phrase you may have heard before , and the man has a pretty perverted ambition to be a cynical artistic person of the very calmest description .
He is hoping for the awakening of Passion in her , among other things .
He knows Passion ought to awaken , from the text-books he has studied .
He knows she admires his genius , but he is unaware that she does not admire his head .
He is quite a distinguished art critic in London , and he met her at that celebrated lady novelist 's , her stepmother , and here you have them well embarked upon the Adventure .
Both are in the first stage of repentance , which consists , as you have probably found for yourself , in setting your teeth hard and saying ' `` I WILL go on . ''
The other man in brown stopped short in Mr. Hoopdriver 's way , staring .
Then his face assumed an expression of dangerous civility .
`` Is it any information to you , '' he said , with immense politeness , `` when I remark that you are following us ? ''
`` D'yer think I 'm to be bribed ? ''
said Mr. Hoopdriver , whose imagination was rapidly expanding the situation .
I 'd follow you now -- ''
`` Do n't you ?
`` I 'm not the leaky sort , '' said Mr. Hoopdriver , keeping the secret he did not know with immense enjoyment .
That was her name .
Perhaps he 'd tell some more .
`` It 's no good pumping .
Is that all you 're after ? ''
Bechamel respected himself for his diplomatic gifts .
He tried to catch a remark by throwing out a confidence .
`` I take it there are two people concerned in watching this affair . ''
`` Yes , '' said Bechamel .
He cleared his throat .
`` Are Mr. and Mrs. Bowlong stopping here ? ''
`` No , '' said the barmaid , a talkative person of ample dimensions .
`` There's no married couples stopping here .
But there 's a Mr. and Miss BEAUMONT . ''
She spelt it for precision .
`` Sure you 've got the name right , young man ? ''
`` Certain , '' said Mr. Hoopdriver .
By eight o'clock in the evening , in a little dining-room in the Vicuna Hotel , Bognor , the crisis had come , and Jessie , flushed and angry in the face and with her heart sinking , faced him again for her last struggle with him .
He had tricked her this time , effectually , and luck had been on his side .
She was booked as Mrs. Beaumont .
Save for her refusal to enter their room , and her eccentricity of eating with unwashed hands , she had so far kept up the appearances of things before the waiter .
But the dinner was grim enough .
Now in turn she appealed to his better nature and made extravagant statements of her plans to fool him .
`` I will appeal to the police -- ''
`` You who have never been out alone after dusk ?
Do you know what the streets of a charming little holiday resort are like -- ''
She turned round abruptly from him and stood looking out across the parade at the shining sea over which the afterglow of day fled before the rising moon .
He maintained his attitude .
The blinds were still up , for she had told the waiter not to draw them .
There was silence for some moments .
`` Can I -- have a few words -- with you , alone ? ''
said Mr. Hoopdriver , controlling his breath with difficulty .
She hesitated , and then motioned the waiter to withdraw .
`` Yes , '' said Mr. Hoopdriver .
`` Go out by the front door and round .
I will follow in one minute . ''
said Mr. Hoopdriver , and went .
`` Well , that 's Mr. Beaumont , '' said the barmaid , `` -- anyhow . ''
`` Poor chap ! ''
`` She 's a wicked woman ! ''
`` Damn her , '' said Bechamel , for all the world like a common man .
`` I'll chuck this infernal business !
They 've gone , eigh ? ''
`` Well , let 'em GO , '' said Bechamel , making a memorable saying .
`` Let 'em GO .
And I wish him luck .
And bring me some Bourbon as fast as you can , there 's a good chap .
I 'll take that , and then I 'll have another look round Bognor before I turn in . ''
`` Go on , '' said Bechamel .
`` Damn you ! ''
There is a magic quality in moonshine ; it touches all that is sweet and beautiful , and the rest of the night is hidden .
It has created the fairies , whom the sunlight kills , and fairyland rises again in our hearts at the sight of it , the voices of the filmy route , and their faint , soul-piercing melodies .
By the moonlight every man , dull clod though he be by day , tastes something of Endymion , takes something of the youth and strength of Enidymion , and sees the dear white goddess shining at him from his Lady 's eyes .
The firm substantial daylight things become ghostly and elusive , the hills beyond are a sea of unsubstantial texture , the world a visible spirit , the spiritual within us rises out of its darkness , loses something of its weight and body , and swims up towards heaven .
This road that was a mere rutted white dust , hot underfoot , blinding to the eye , is now a soft grey silence , with the glitter of a crystal grain set starlike in its silver here and there .
Overhead , riding serenely through the spacious blue , is the mother of the silence , she who has spiritualised the world , alone save for two attendant steady shining stars .
And in silence under her benign influence , under the benediction of her light , rode our two wanderers side by side through the transfigured and transfiguring night .
`` You are safe , '' said Mr. Hoopdriver , sweeping off his cap with an air and bowing courtly .
`` We have turned and turned again . ''
She caught at her breath .
She did not care to ask why .
But compared with Bechamel !
-- '' We take each other on trust , '' she said .
`` Do you want to know -- how things are with me ? ''
`` I will do anything , '' said Hoopdriver .
She came round obediently and took his machine , and for a moment they stood face to face .
`` My name , brother Chris , '' she said , `` is Jessie . ''
He looked into her eyes , and his excitement seemed arrested .
`` JESSIE , '' he repeated slowly .
The mute emotion of his face affected her strangely .
She had to speak .
`` It 's not such a very wonderful name , is it ? ''
she said , with a laugh to break the intensity .
Mr. Hoopdriver conducted the rest of that night 's journey with the same confident dignity as before , and it was chiefly by good luck and the fact that most roads about a town converge thereupon , that Chichester was at last attained .
It seemed at first as though everyone had gone to bed , but the Red Hotel still glowed yellow and warm .
It was the first time Hoopdriver bad dared the mysteries of a 'first-class ' hotel . '
But that night he was in the mood to dare anything .
So gallantly did Mr. Hoopdriver comport himself up to the very edge of the Most Wonderful Day of all .
It had begun early , you will remember , with a vigil in a little sweetstuff shop next door to the Angel at Midhurst .
But to think of all the things that had happened since then !
He caught himself in the middle of a yawn , pulled out his watch , saw the time was halfpast eleven , and marched off , with a fine sense of heroism , bedward .
`` He must marry her , '' said the man .
And yet they say the age of chivalry is dead !
But this is only an Interlude , introduced to give our wanderers time to refresh themselves by good , honest sleeping .
For the present , therefore , we will not concern ourselves with the starting of the Rescue Party , nor with Mrs. Milton 's simple but becoming grey dress , with the healthy Widgery 's Norfolk jacket and thick boots , with the slender Dangle's energetic bearing , nor with the wonderful chequerings that set off the legs of the golf-suited Phipps .
They are after us .
In a little while they will be upon us .
You must imagine as you best can the competitive raidings at Midhurst of Widgery , Dangle , and Phipps .
How Widgery was great at questions , and Dangle good at inference , and Phipps so conspicuously inferior in everything that he felt it , and sulked with Mrs. Milton most of the day , after the manner of your callow youth the whole world over .
Mrs. Milton stopped at the Angel and was very sad and charming and intelligent , and Widgery paid the bill in the afternoon of Saturday , Chichester was attained .
But by that time our fugitives -- As you shall immediately hear .
Suddenly he became silent .
Abruptly his eyebrows rose and his jaw fell .
`` I sa-a-ay ! ''
`` Make the best of it , '' and presently , when it came to hair-brushing , he had to smooth his troubled locks with his hands .
It was a poor result .
`` Sneak out and get a shave , I suppose , and buy a brush and so on .
Beard do n't show much . ''
`` Of course , '' she said .
`` I had forgotten that .
But where are we going ? ''
Mr. Hoopdriver 's mind came round to the future .
What was she going to do ?
What were they both going to do ?
His thoughts took a graver colour .
He had rescued her .
This was fine , manly rescue work he was engaged upon .
She ought to go home , in spite of that stepmother .
He must insist gravely but firmly upon that .
She was the spirited sort , of course , but still -- Wonder if she had any money ?
Wonder what the second-class fare from Havant to London is ?
Of course he would have to pay that -- it was the regular thing , he being a gentleman .
Then should he take her home ?
He began to rough in a moving sketch of the return .
The stepmother , repentant of her indescribable cruelties , would be present , -- even these rich people have their troubles , -- probably an uncle or two .
The footman would announce , Mr. -- ( bother that name ! )
Then two women weeping together , and a knightly figure in the background dressed in a handsome Norfolk jacket , still conspicuously new .
He would conceal his feeling until the very end .
Then , leaving , he would pause in the doorway in such an attitude as Mr. George Alexander might assume , and say , slowly and dwindlingly : `` Be kind to her -- BE kind to her , '' and so depart , heartbroken to the meanest intelligence .
But that was a matter for the future .
He would have to begin discussing the return soon .
There was no traffic along the road , and he came up beside her ( he had fallen behind in his musing ) .
She began to talk .
`` Mr. Denison , '' she began , and then , doubtfully , `` That is your name ?
I 'm very stupid -- ''
`` You see , I am so awkwardly situated . ''
`` Yes , '' said Mr. Hoopdriver , expectant .
`` I was wondering only this morning , '' he began , and stopped .
Mr. Hoopdriver stroked his moustache .
`` It IS so , '' he said in a meditative tone .
`` Things WILL go on , '' he said .
The faint breath of summer stirred the trees , and a bunch of dandelion puff lifted among the meadowsweet and struck and broke into a dozen separate threads against his knee .
They flew on apart , and sank , as the breeze fell , among the grass : some to germinate , some to perish .
His eye followed them until they had vanished .
`` It is good of you to say that .
Surbiton is so Conventional .
I am resolved to be Unconventional -- at any cost .
But we are so hampered .
If I could only burgeon out of all that hinders me !
I want to struggle , to take my place in the world .
I want to be my own mistress , to shape my own career .
But my stepmother objects so .
She does as she likes herself , and is strict with me to ease her conscience .
And if I go back now , go back owning myself beaten -- '' She left the rest to his imagination .
If Mr. Bechamel troubles you -- I will tell the whole world -- if need be . ''
Discovering suddenly that she was standing , he , too , rose and picked up her machine .
She took it and wheeled it into the road .
Then he took his own .
He paused , regarding it .
`` I say ! ''
`` How 'd this bike look , now , if it was enamelled grey ? ''
She looked over her shoulder at his grave face .
`` Why try and hide it in that way ? ''
As they were riding on to Havant it occurred to Mr. Hoopdriver in a transitory manner that the interview had been quite other than his expectation .
But that was the way with everything in Mr. Hoopdriver's experience .
And though his Wisdom looked grave within him , and Caution was chinking coins , and an ancient prejudice in favour of Property shook her head , something else was there too , shouting in his mind to drown all these saner considerations , the intoxicating thought of riding beside Her all to-day , all to-morrow , perhaps for other days after that .
Of talking to her familiarly , being brother of all her slender strength and freshness , of having a golden , real , and wonderful time beyond all his imaginings .
His old familiar fancyings gave place to anticipations as impalpable and fluctuating and beautiful as the sunset of a summer day .
`` I beg your pardon for cross-examining you . ''
`` South Africa , '' she said .
`` I strongly incline to South Africa . ''
`` He was a long way off from our place , '' said Mr. Hoopdriver .
`` We had a little ostrich farm , you know -- Just a few hundred of 'em , out Johannesburg way . ''
`` Did you have Blacks and Boers about you ? ''
Do you know , I 've never been out of England except to Paris and Mentone and Switzerland . ''
`` Go on , '' she said .
It was one of the luckiest shots I ever fired .
And I wasn't much over nine at the time , neither . ''
`` There 's some things you ca n't run away from , '' said Mr. Hoopdriver .
`` To run would have been Death . ''
`` There is nothing to do until we get to Chichester , '' said Dangle .
`` Nothing , '' said Widgery , and aside in her ear : `` You really ate scarcely anything , you know . ''
`` Well , '' said Phipps .
`` One fellow had got hold of a queer story of a man in bicycling clothes , who was asking the same question about this time yesterday . ''
`` How should I know ?
-- in bicycling costume , the fellow said . ''
`` Ask him yourself , '' said Phipps .
`` He 's an ostler chap in the White Hart , -- short , thick-set fellow , with a red face and a crusty manner .
Leaning up against the stable door .
Go and ask him . ''
`` No , m 'm .
More like five and twenty .
`` That will do , thank you , '' said Widgery , officiously , feeling that she would be easier under this new surprise if the man were dismissed .
The waiter turned to go , and almost collided with Dangle , who was entering the room , panting excitedly and with a pocket handkerchief held to his right eye .
`` What 's up ? ''
Mrs. Milton rose and approached Dangle .
`` Can not I do anything ? ''
He left her in a most pathetic attitude , with her hand pressed to her heart , and rushed into the Golden Anchor .
Dog cart in ten minutes .
The meat had gone now , and one saw the cooling puffiness over his eye .
`` I will conduct you back to the station , '' said Dangle ; `` hurry back here , and pursue them .
You will meet Widgery and Phipps and tell them I am in pursuit . ''
`` Certainly , '' said Widgery , suddenly becoming active .
`` How far is it , Dangle ? ''
`` If I did n't , some one else would . ''
`` You HAVE done so . ''
And , `` That 's different , '' said Dangle , at the same time .
`` It must be hushed up , '' said Dangle .
`` I often feel the force of that , '' said Widgery .
`` Those are my rules .
Of course my books -- ''
`` It 's different , altogether different , '' said Dangle .
`` A novel deals with typical cases . ''
`` That was our bicycles did that , '' said Mr. Hoopdriver simultaneously , and speaking with a certain complacent concern .
`` I hope he wo n't get hurt . ''
Now , as they passed into the room where their suppers were prepared , Mr. Hoopdriver caught a glimpse through a door ajar and floating in a reek of smoke , of three and a half faces -- for the edge of the door cut one down -- and an American cloth-covered table with several glasses and a tankard .
And he also heard a remark .
In the second before he heard that remark , Mr. Hoopdriver had been a proud and happy man , to particularize , a baronet 's heir incognito .
He had surrendered their bicycles to the odd man of the place with infinite easy dignity , and had bowingly opened the door for Jessie .
`` Who 's that , then ? ''
he imagined people saying ; and then , `` Some'n pretty well orf -- judge by the bicycles . ''
Then the imaginary spectators would fall a-talking of the fashionableness of bicycling , -- how judges And stockbrokers and actresses and , in fact , all the best people rode , and how that it was often the fancy of such great folk to shun the big hotels , the adulation of urban crowds , and seek , incognito , the cosy quaintnesses of village life .
Then , maybe , they would think of a certain nameless air of distinction about the lady who had stepped across the doorway , and about the handsome , flaxen-moustached , blue-eyed Cavalier who had followed her in , and they would look one to another .
`` Tell you what it is , '' one of the village elders would say -- just as they do in novels -- voicing the thought of all , in a low , impressive tone : `` There 's such a thin ' as entertaining barranets unawares -- not to mention no higher things -- ''
Such , I say , had been the filmy , delightful stuff in Mr. Hoopdriver's head the moment before he heard that remark .
But the remark toppled him headlong .
What the precise remark was need not concern us .
It was a casual piece of such satire as Strephon delights in .
Should you be curious , dear lady , as to its nature , you have merely to dress yourself in a really modern cycling costume , get one of the feeblest-looking of your men to escort you , and ride out , next Saturday evening , to any public house where healthy , homely people gather together .
Then you will hear quite a lot of the kind of thing Mr. Hoopdriver heard .
More , possibly , than you will desire .
`` We 've 'eard that , '' said the little man with the beard , sharply and went off into an amiable chuckle .
`` We know it by 'art , '' said the little man , elaborating the point .
`` Was it this -- gent ? ''
`` Steady on ! ''
said the young man in the white tie .
`` Steady on a minute .
If I did happen to say -- ''
`` Backing out of it , Charlie ? ''
said the young man with the gaiters .
`` Not a bit , '' said Charlie .
`` Surely we can pass a bit of a joke -- ''
`` _I_ did n't know the young lady would hear what I said , '' said Charlie .
`` Surely one can speak friendly to one 's friends .
How was I to know the door was open -- ''
Hoopdriver began to suspect that his antagonist was , if possible , more seriously alarmed at the prospect of violence than himself , and his spirits rose again .
These chaps ought to have a thorough lesson .
`` Of COURSE you knew the door was open , '' he retorted indignantly .
`` Of COURSE you thought we should hear what you said .
Do n't go telling lies about it .
It 's no good your saying things like that .
You 've had your fun , and you meant to have your fun .
And I mean to make an example of you , Sir . ''
`` Exactly , '' said Mr. Hoopdriver , driving it home with great fierceness .
`` Why do n't you shut your ugly mouth ? ''
`` Do n't sit there and be abusive , '' said the man in velveteen .
`` He's offered to hit you , and if I was him , I 'd hit you now . ''
They went into Buller 's yard through gates .
There were sheds in Buller's yard -- sheds of mystery that the moonlight could not solve -- a smell of cows , and a pump stood out clear and black , throwing a clear black shadow on the whitewashed wall .
And here it was his face was to be battered to a pulp .
He knew this was the uttermost folly , to stand up here and be pounded , but the way out of it was beyond his imagining .
Could he ever face her again ?
He patted his Norfolk jacket and took his ground with his back to the gate .
How did one square ?
Suppose one were to turn and run even now , run straight back to the inn and lock himself into his bedroom ?
They could n't make , him come out -- anyhow .
He could prosecute them for assault if they did .
How did one set about prosecuting for assault ?
He saw Charles , with his face ghastly white under the moon , squaring in front of him .
He caught a blow on the arm and gave ground .
Then he hit with his right and with the violence of despair .
It was a hit of his own devising , -- an impromptu , -- but it chanced to coincide with the regulation hook hit at the head .
He perceived with a leap of exultation that the thing his fist had met was the jawbone of Charles .
It was the sole gleam of pleasure he experienced during the fight , and it was quite momentary .
He had hardly got home upon Charles before he was struck in the chest and whirled backward .
He had the greatest difficulty in keeping his feet .
He felt that his heart was smashed flat .
`` Gord darm ! ''
said somebody , dancing toe in hand somewhere behind him .
As Mr. Hoopdriver staggered , Charles gave a loud and fear-compelling cry .
He seemed to tower over Hoopdriver in the moonlight .
Both his fists were whirling .
It was annihilation coming -- no less .
Mr. Hoopdriver ducked perhaps and certainly gave ground to the right , hit , and missed .
Charles swept round to the left , missing generously .
A blow glanced over Mr. Hoopdriver 's left ear , and the flanking movement was completed .
Another blow behind the ear .
Heaven and earth spun furiously round Mr. Hoopdriver , and then he became aware of a figure in a light suit shooting violently through an open gate into the night .
The man in gaiters sprang forward past Mr. Hoopdriver , but too late to intercept the fugitive .
There were shouts , laughter , and Mr. Hoopdriver , still solemnly squaring , realized the great and wonderful truth -- Charles had fled .
He , Hoopdriver , had fought and , by all the rules of war , had won .
`` It seems so dreadful that you should have to knock people about , '' said Jessie .
She stopped abruptly , with a puzzled expression on her face .
`` Where HAVE I seen that before ? ''
`` The chair ? ''
said Hoopdriver , flushing .
`` It 's a habit , '' said Mr. Hoopdriver , guiltily .
`` A bad habit .
You must put it down to our colonial roughness .
Out there up country -- y'know -- the ladies -- so rare -- we call 'em all Madam . ''
`` It 's a habit . ''
But I do n't think it a good one .
You do n't mind my telling you ? ''
`` Not a bit .
I 'm grateful . ''
`` I 'm blessed or afflicted with a trick of observation , '' said Jessie , looking at the breakfast table .
Mr. Hoopdriver put his hand to his moustache and then , thinking this might be another habit , checked his arm and stuck his hand into his pocket .
He felt juiced awkward , to use his private formula .
Jessie 's eye wandered to the armchair , where a piece of binding was loose , and , possibly to carry out her theory of an observant disposition , she turned and asked him for a pin .
`` In the centre of Africa -- up country , that is -- one learns to value pins , '' said Mr. Hoopdriver , after a perceptible pause .
`` There weren't over many pins in Africa .
They do n't lie about on the ground there . ''
His face was now in a fine , red glow .
Where would the draper break out next ?
He thrust his hands into his coat pockets , then took one out again , furtively removed the second pin and dropped it behind him gently .
It fell with a loud 'ping ' on the fender .
Happily she made no remark , being preoccupied with the binding of the chair .
`` Is n't it ? ''
`` Look at the cloth like that .
I saw you do it yesterday , too . ''
`` If I were a Sherlock Holmes , '' said Jessie , `` I suppose I could have told you were a colonial from little things like that .
But anyhow , I guessed it , did n't I ? ''
Why not seize the opportunity for a neat confession , and add , `` unhappily in this case you guessed wrong . ''
Then , at the psychological moment , the girl bumped the door open with her tray and brought in the coffee and scrambled eggs .
Remorse that had been accumulating in his mind for two days surged to the top of his mind .
What a shabby liar he was !
`` I thought I 'd tell you , '' said Mr. Hoopdriver .
`` I suppose it 's snobbishness and all that kind of thing , as much as anything .
I lay awake pretty near all last night thinking about myself ; thinking what a got-up imitation of a man I was , and all that . ''
`` I thought , somehow , I FELT , that the things you said did n't ring quite true . ''
She suddenly broke out in laughter , at the expression of his face .
`` Of COURSE you are honest , '' she said .
`` How could I ever doubt it ?
As if _I_ had never pretended !
I see it all now . ''
`` That was partly it , '' said Mr. Hoopdriver .
`` When he puts people off with what they do n't quite want , for instance ? ''
Mr. Hoopdriver was surprised to see it in that light .
`` You think ? ''
You are a Man .
You are free -- '' She warmed .
`` I wish I were you to have the chance of that struggle . ''
`` If I could only help you , '' she said , and left an eloquent hiatus .
He became pensive again .
`` Do n't you read any other books but novels ? ''
One gets tired after business , and you ca n't get the books .
I have been to some extension lectures , of course , 'Lizabethan Dramatists , ' it was , but it seemed a little high-flown , you know .
And I went and did wood-carving at the same place .
But it did n't seem leading nowhere , and I cut my thumb and chucked it . ''
`` Is it ? ''
she said ; but he did not seem to hear her .
`` My o ' people didn't know any better , and went and paid thirty pounds premium -- thirty pounds down to have me made THIS .
promised to teach me the trade , and he never taught me anything but to be a Hand .
It 's the way they do with draper 's apprentices .
If every swindler was locked up -- well , you 'd have nowhere to buy tape and cotton .
It 's all very well to bring up Burns and those chaps , but I 'm not that make .
Yet I 'm not such muck that I might not have been better -- with teaching .
I wonder what the chaps who sneer and laugh at such as me would be if they 'd been fooled about as I've been .
At twenty-three -- it 's a long start . ''
`` MAKE it different . ''
It 's not much good .
I 'm beginning too late . ''
`` No -- we 're separate , '' said Mr. Hoopdriver .
`` I myself am a cyclist , '' said the clergyman , descending suddenly upon Mr. Hoopdriver .
`` I can hardly call it an accident .
The wheels suddenly refused to go round .
I found myself about five miles from here with an absolutely immobile machine . ''
In the afternoon our two wanderers rode on at an easy pace towards Stoney Cross .
Conversation languished , the topic of South Africa being in abeyance .
Mr. Hoopdriver was silenced by disagreeable thoughts .
He had changed the last sovereign at Ringwood .
The fact had come upon him suddenly .
Now too late he was reflecting upon his resources .
There was twenty pounds or more in the post office savings bank in Putney , but his book was locked up in his box at the Antrobus establishment .
Else this infatuated man would certainly have surreptitiously withdrawn the entire sum in order to prolong these journeyings even for a few days .
As it was , the shadow of the end fell across his happiness .
Strangely enough , in spite of his anxiety and the morning 's collapse , he was still in a curious emotional state that was certainly not misery .
He was forgetting his imaginings and posings , forgetting himself altogether in his growing appreciation of his companion .
The most tangible trouble in his mind was the necessity of breaking the matter to her .
`` There 's a thing I got to tell you , '' he said , trying to be perfectly calm .
`` That would n't hurt YOU , '' said Mr. Hoopdriver , turning a compliment .
Here 's a tandem bicycle , '' said Mr. Hoopdriver , abruptly , and pointing with his cigarette .
The two men were both busy with their bicycle still , but now from among the trees emerged the massive bulk of a 'Marlborough Club ' tandem , ridden by a slender woman in grey and a burly man in a Norfolk jacket .
Following close upon this came lank black figure in a piebald straw hat , riding a tricycle of antiquated pattern with two large wheels in front .
The man in grey remained bowed over the bicycle , with his stomach resting on the saddle , but his companion stood up and addressed some remark to the tricycle riders .
Then it seemed as if he pointed up hill to where Mr. Hoopdriver and his companion stood side by side .
A still odder thing followed ; the lady in grey took out her handkerchief , appeared to wave it for a moment , and then at a hasty motion from her companion the white signal vanished .
`` Mr. Hoopdriver , '' said Jessie .
`` Those people -- I 'm almost sure -- ''
said Mr. Hoopdriver , reading the rest in her face , and he turned to pick up his machine at once .
Then he dropped it and assisted her to mount .
Abruptly Jessie stopped and dismounted , and the tandem riders shot panting past them downhill .
`` Brake , '' said Dangle , who was riding behind , and stood up on the pedals .
For a moment the velocity of the thing increased , and then they saw the dust fly from the brake , as it came down on the front tire .
Dangle 's right leg floundered in the air as he came off in the road .
`` Hold it ! ''
cried Phipps over his shoulder , going on downhill .
`` I ca n't get off if you do n't hold it . ''
He put on the brake until the machine stopped almost dead , and then feeling unstable began to pedal again .
Dangle shouted after him .
`` Put out your foot , man , '' said Dangle .
`` Miss Milton , I believe , '' said Dangle , panting and raising a damp cap from his wet and matted hair .
`` You will permit me to observe , '' began Mr. Hoopdriver , with a splendid drawl , seeing himself , for the first time in all this business , as a romantic villain .
As Mr. Hoopdriver struggled for equilibrium with the umbrella-stand , Dangle and Phipps , roused from their inertia by Miss Mergle 's activity , came in upon her heels , Phipps leading .
`` How dare you prevent that lady passing ? ''
Mr. Hoopdriver looked obstinate , and , to Dangle 's sense , dangerous , but he made no answer .
A waiter in full bloom appeared at the end of the passage , guardant .
`` It is men of your stamp , sir , '' said Phipps , `` who discredit manhood . ''
`` Do n't hurt him ! ''
said Mrs. Milton , with clasped hands .
`` However much wrong he has done her -- No violence ! ''
`` 'Ow many more of you ? ''
said Hoopdriver , at bay before the umbrella stand .
`` Where is she ?
What has he done with her ? ''
`` I fail to see what status Widgery has , '' says Dangle , `` thrusting himself in there . ''
`` He 's so dull and heavy , '' said Phipps .
`` My dear young lady , '' said the clergyman , `` I can only ascribe this extravagant and regrettable expedition of yours to the wildest misconceptions of your place in the world and of your duties and responsibilities .
Even now , it seems to me , your present emotion is due not so much to a real and sincere penitence for your disobedience and folly as to a positive annoyance at our most fortunate interference -- ''
`` To cherish , protect , and advise you .
And you must needs go out of it all alone into a strange world of unknown dangers- ''
`` I wanted to learn , '' said Jessie .
`` You wanted to learn .
May you never have anything to UNlearn . ''
`` It is n't fair for all of you to argue at me at once , '' submitted Jessie , irrelevantly .
`` The point is , '' said Mrs. Milton , on her defence , `` that in my books -- ''
`` It 's very unfortunate .
What I want to know is , why I can not go away for a holiday if I want to . ''
`` You have to consider the general body of opinion , too , '' said Widgery .
Jessie 's grip tightened on her handkerchief .
`` I wo n't go back , '' she said , `` to have it as I did before .
I want a room of my own , what books I need to read , to be free to go out by myself alone , Teaching -- ''
`` Then I take it the matter is practically concluded , '' said the clergyman .
`` And that you very properly submit to return to your proper home .
And now , if I may offer a suggestion , it is that we take tea .
Freed of its tannin , nothing , I think , is more refreshing and stimulating . ''
`` Will you want the whole half hour ? ''
said Widgery , at the bell .
He was n't good enough to walk in the same road with her .
Suppose they let him say good-bye to her ; what could he say ?
But they were sure not to let her talk to him alone ; her mother would be there as -- what was it ?
He 'd never once had a chance of saying what he felt ; indeed , it was only now he was beginning to realise what he felt .
Love I he would n't presume .
If only he could have one more chance .
He must have one more chance , somewhere , somehow .
Then he would pour out his soul to her eloquently .
He felt eloquently , and words would come .
He was dust under her feet ...
This figure passes through Basingstoke and Bagshot , Staines , Hampton , and Richmond .
At last , in Putney High Street , glowing with the warmth of an August sunset and with all the 'prentice boys busy shutting up shop , and the work girls going home , and the shop folks peeping abroad , and the white 'buses full of late clerks and city folk rumbling home to their dinners , we part from him .
To-morrow , the early rising , the dusting , and drudgery , begin again -- but with a difference , with wonderful memories and still more wonderful desires and ambitions replacing those discrepant dreams .
This persuasion is a very important thing in my mind .
These are statements of a certain quality , a quality that extends through a huge universe in which I find myself placed .
( a series of parallel and closely-spaced lines drawn through each horizontal line , one series ( top ) sloping to the right , the other ( bottom ) to the left )
and instantly the parallelism seems to be disturbed .
If the second figure is presented to any one without sufficient science to understand this delusion , the impression is created that these lines converge to the right and diverge to the left .
The vision is deceived in its mental factor and judges wrongly of the thing seen .
the method of my reasoning was almost always in this form : --
`` S1 , S2 , S3 , and S4 are P S1 + S2 + S3 + S4 + ... are all S All S is P . ''
I looked into the laws of thought and into the postulates upon which the syllogistic logic is based , and it slowly became clear to me that from my point of view , the point of view of one who seeks truth and reality , logic assumed a belief in the objective reality of classification of which my studies in biology and mineralogy had largely disabused me .
Logic , it seemed to me , had taken a common innate error of the mind and had emphasised it in order to develop a system of reasoning that should be exact in its processes .
I turned my attention to the examination of that .
For in common with the general run of men I had supposed that logic professed to supply a trustworthy science and method for the investigation and expression of reality .
It is true you can make your net of logical interpretation finer and finer , you can fine your classification more and more -- up to a certain limit .
But essentially you are working in limits , and as you come closer , as you look at finer and subtler things , as you leave the practical purpose for which the method exists , the element of error increases .
Every species is vague , every term goes cloudy at its edges ; and so in my way of thinking , relentless logic is only another name for a stupidity -- for a sort of intellectual pigheadedness .
If you push a philosophical or metaphysical inquiry through a series of valid syllogisms -- never committing any generally recognised fallacy -- you nevertheless leave behind you at each step a certain rubbing and marginal loss of objective truth , and you get deflections that are difficult to trace at each phase in the process .
Every species waggles about in its definition , every tool is a little loose in its handle , every scale has its individual error .
So long as you are reasoning for practical purposes about finite things of experience you can every now and then check your process and correct your adjustments .
But not when you make what are called philosophical and theological inquiries , when you turn your implement towards the final absolute truth of things .
( the letter A inside a circular boundary , together with the words Not A , all inside a bigger circular boundary . )
There is another infirmity of the mind to which my attention has been called by an able paper read this spring to the Cambridge Moral Science Club by my friend Miss Amber Reeves .
In this she has developed a suggestion of Mr. F.C.S .
The current syllogistic logic rests on the assumption that either A is B or it is not B .
The practical reality , she contends , is that nothing is permanent ; A is always becoming more or less B or ceasing to be more or less B .
But it would seem the human mind can not manage with that .
It has to hold a thing still for a moment before it can think it .
It arrests the present moment for its struggle as Joshua stopped the sun .
It can not contemplate things continuously , and so it has to resort to a series of static snapshots .
It has to kill motion in order to study it , as a naturalist kills and pins out a butterfly in order to study life .
PLANES AND DIALECTS OF THOUGHT .
Let me repeat in slightly altered terms some of the points raised in the preceding sections .
I have doubted and denied that there are identically similar objective experiences ; I consider all objective beings as individual and unique .
It is now understood that conceivably only in the subjective world , and in theory and the imagination , do we deal with identically similar units , and with absolutely commensurable quantities .
In the real world it is reasonable to suppose we deal at most with PRACTICALLY similar units and PRACTICALLY commensurable quantities .
But there is a strong bias , a sort of labour-saving bias , in the normal human mind , to ignore this , and not only to speak but to think of a thousand bricks or a thousand sheep or a thousand Chinamen as though they were all absolutely true to sample .
If it is brought before a thinker for a moment that in any special case this is not so , he slips back to the old attitude as soon as his attention is withdrawn .
This type of error has , for instance , caught many of the race of chemists , and ATOMS and IONS and so forth of the same species are tacitly assumed to be similar to one another .
That briefly is what I consider to be the case with my own mind , and I believe it is the case with everyone 's .
Most minds , it seems to me , are similar , but none are absolutely alike in character or in contents .
Of everything we need to say : this is true in relation to things in or near its plane , but not true of other things .
Of everything we have to remember : this may be truer for us than for other people .
BOOK THE SECOND -- OF BELIEFS
Now my most comprehensive belief about the external and the internal and myself is that they make one universe in which I and every part are ultimately important .
That is quite an arbitrary act of my mind .
It is quite possible to maintain that everything is a chaotic assembly , that any part might be destroyed without affecting any other part .
I do not choose to argue against that .
If you choose to say that , I am no more disposed to argue with you than if you choose to wear a mitre in Fleet Street or drink a bottle of ink , or declare the figure of Ally Sloper more dignified and beautiful than the head of Jove .
There is no Q.E.D .
that you can not do so .
You will not like to go on with it , I think , and it will not answer , but that is a different matter .
I am free and freely and responsibly making the future -- so far as I am concerned .
You others are equally free .
On that theory I find my life will work , and on a theory of mechanical predestination nothing works .
A PICTURE OF THE WORLD OF MEN .
Now I have already given a first picture of the world of fact as it shaped itself upon my mind .
Let me now give a second picture of this world in which I find myself , a picture in a rather different key and at a different level , in which I turn to a new set of aspects and bring into the foreground the other minds which are with me in the midst of this great spectacle .
Many people seem to make a selection among their motives without much enquiry , taking those classifications as just ; they seek to lead what they call pure lives or useful lives and to set aside whole sets of motives which do not accord with this determination .
Some exclude the seeking of pleasure as a permissible motive , some the love of beauty ; some insist upon one 's `` being oneself '' and prohibit or limit responses to exterior opinions .
Most of such selections strike me as wanton and hasty .
I decline to dismiss any of my motives at all in that wholesale way .
Just as I believe I am important in the scheme of things , so I believe are all my motives .
Turning one 's back on any set of them seems to me to savour of the headlong actions of stupidity .
To suppress a passion or a curiosity for the sake of suppressing a passion is to my mind just the burial of a talent that has been entrusted to one 's care .
One has , I feel , to take all these things as weapons and instruments , material in the service of the scheme ; one has to take them in the end gravely and do right among them unbiassed in favour of any set .
To take some poor appetite and fling it out is to my mind a cheap and unsatisfactory way of simplifying one 's moral problems .
One has to accept these things in oneself , I feel -- even if one knows them to be dangerous things , even if one is sure they have an evil side .
A REVIEW OF MOTIVES .
Now in this matter of physical appetites I do not know whether to describe myself as a sensualist or an ascetic .
If an ascetic is one who suppresses to a minimum all deference to these impulses , then certainly I am not an ascetic ; if a sensualist is one who gives himself to heedless gratification , then certainly I am not a sensualist .
But I find myself balanced in an intermediate position by something that I will speak of as the sense of Beauty .
This sense of Beauty is something in me which demands not simply gratification but the best and keenest of a sense or continuance of sense impressions , and which refuses coarse quantitative assuagements .
It ranges all over the senses , and just as I refuse to wholly cut off any of my motives , so do I refuse to limit its use to the plane of the eye or the ear .
I see myself in life as part of a great physical being that strains and I believe grows towards beauty , and of a great mental being that strains and I believe grows towards knowledge and power .
In this persuasion that I am a gatherer of experience , a mere tentacle that arranges thought beside thought for this being of the species , this being that grows beautiful and powerful , in this persuasion I find the ruling idea of which I stand in need , the ruling idea that reconciles and adjudicates among my warring motives .
In it I find both concentration of myself and escape from myself ; in a word , I find Salvation .
I would like in a parenthetical section to expand and render rather more concrete this idea of the species as one divaricating flow of blood , by an appeal to its arithmetical aspect .
I do not know if it has ever occurred to the reader to compute the number of his living ancestors at some definite date , at , let us say , the year one of the Christian era .
Everyone has two parents and four grandparents , most people have eight great-grandparents , and if we ignore the possibility of intermarriage we shall go on to a fresh power of two with every generation , thus : --
It may be argued that as a matter of fact humanity has until recently been segregated in pools ; that in the great civilization of China , for example , humanity has pursued its own interlacing system of inheritances without admixture from other streams of blood .
But such considerations only defer the conclusion ; they do not stave it off indefinitely .
It needs only that one philoprogenitive Chinaman should have wandered into those regions that are now Russia , about the time of Pericles , to link east and west in that matter ; one Tartar chieftain in the Steppes may have given a daughter to a Roman soldier and sent his grandsons east and west to interlace the branches of every family tree in the world .
If any race stands apart it is such an isolated group as that of the now extinct Tasmanian primitives or the Australian black .
But even here , in the remote dawn of navigation , may have come some shipwrecked Malays , or some half-breed woman kidnapped by wandering Phoenicians have carried this link of blood back to the western world .
The more one lets one's imagination play upon the incalculable drift and soak of population , the more one realizes the true value of that spreading relation with the past .
It is a pleasant fancy to imagine some ambitious hoarder of wealth , some egotistical founder of name and family , returning to find his descendants -- HIS descendants -- after the lapse of a few brief generations .
His heir and namesake may have not a thousandth part of his heredity , while under some other name , lost to all the tradition and glory of him , enfeebled and degenerate through much intermarriage , may be a multitude of people who have as much as a fiftieth or even more of his quality .
They may even be in servitude and dependence to the really alien person who is head of the family .
Our founder will go through the spreading record of offspring and find it mixed with that of people he most hated and despised .
The antagonists he wronged and overcame will have crept into his line and recaptured all they lost ; have played the cuckoo in his blood and acquisitions , and turned out his diluted strain to perish .
I may be altogether wrong in my beliefs ; I may be misled by the appearances of things .
I believe in the great and growing Being of the Species from which I rise , to which I return , and which , it may be , will ultimately even transcend the limitation of the Species and grow into the Conscious Being , the eternally conscious Being of all things .
Believing that , I can not also believe that my peculiar little thread will not undergo synthesis and vanish as a separate thing .
You see how I stand in this matter , puzzled and confused by the Christian presentation of Christ .
I know there are many will answer -- as I suppose my friend the Rev .
R.J. Campbell would answer -- that what confuses me is the overlaying of the personality of Jesus by stories and superstitions and conflicting symbols ; he will in effect ask me to disentangle the Christ I need from the accumulated material , choosing and rejecting .
Perhaps one may do that .
He does , I know , so present Him as a man inspired , and strenuously , inadequately and erringly presenting a dream of human brotherhood and the immediate Kingdom of Heaven on earth and so blundering to his failure and death .
But that will be a recovered and restored person he would give me , and not the Christ the Christians worship and declare they love , in whom they find their Salvation .
In the same manner , in varying degree , I hold all religions to be in a measure true .
Least comprehensible to me are the Indian formulae , because they seem to stand not on common experience but on those intellectual assumptions my metaphysical analysis destroys .
Transmigration of souls without a continuing memory is to my mind utter foolishness , the imagining of a race of children .
The aggression , discipline and submission of Mahommedanism makes , I think , an intellectually limited but fine and honourable religion -- for men .
Its spirit if not its formulae is abundantly present in our modern world .
Mr. Rudyard Kipling , for example , manifestly preaches a Mahommedan God , a modernised God with a taste for engineering .
I have no doubt that in devotion to a virile , almost national Deity and to the service of His Empire of stern Law and Order , efficiently upheld , men have found and will find Salvation .
Such are the essential beliefs by which I express myself .
But now comes the practical outcome of these things , and that is to discuss and show how upon this metaphysical basis and these beliefs , and in obedience to the ruling motive that arises with them , I frame principles of conduct .
Socialism for me is a common step we are all taking in the great synthesis of human purpose .
It is the organization , in regard to a great mass of common and fundamental interests that have hitherto been dispersedly served , of a collective purpose .
No , I do not want to raise people using my own position as a standard , I do not want to be one of a gang of consciously superior people , I do not want arrogantly to change the quality of other lives .
I do not want to interfere with other lives , except incidentally -- incidentally , in this way that I do want to get to an understanding with them , I do want to share and feel with them in our commerce with the collective mind .
I suppose I do not stretch language very much when I say I want to get rid of stresses and obstacles between our minds and personalities and to establish a relation that is understanding and sympathy .
I know that here I go beyond the limits many Socialists in the past , and some who are still contemporary , have set themselves .
Much Socialism to-day seems to think of itself as fighting a battle against poverty and its concomitants alone .
Now poverty is only a symptom of a profounder evil and is never to be cured by itself .
It is one aspect of divided and dispersed purposes .
If Socialism is only a conflict with poverty , Socialism is nothing .
But I hold that Socialism is and must be a battle against human stupidity and egotism and disorder , a battle fought all through the forests and jungles of the soul of man .
As we get intellectual and moral light and the realization of brotherhood , so social and economic organization will develop .
But the Socialist may attack poverty for ever , disregarding the intellectual and moral factors that necessitate it , and he will remain until the end a purely economic doctrinaire crying in the wilderness in vain .
Now I hold that his duty is to explain his discoveries and intentions until they see as he sees .
But the specialist temperament is often not a generalizing and expository temperament .
Specialists are apt to measure minds by their speciality and underrate the average intelligence .
The specialist is appalled by the real task before him , and he sets himself by tricks and misrepresentations , by benevolent scoundrelism in fact , to effect changes he desires .
Too often he fails even in that .
Where he might have found fellowship he arouses suspicion .
And even if a thing is done in this way , its essential merit is lost .
For it is better , I hold , for a man to die of his disease than to be cured unwittingly .
That is to cheat him of life and to cheat life of the contribution his consciousness might have given it .
And that duty of education , of building up the collective idea and organization of humanity , falls into various divisions depending in their importance upon individual quality .
For all there is one personal work that none may evade , and that is thinking hard , criticising strenuously and understanding as clearly as one can religion , socialism and the general principle of one 's acts .
The intellectual factor is of primary importance in my religion .
I can see no more reason why salvation should come to the intellectually incapable than to the morally incapable .
For simple souls thinking in simple processes , salvation perhaps comes easily , but there is none for the intellectual coward , for the mental sloven and sluggard , for the stupid and obdurate mind .
The Believer will think hard and continue to grow and learn , to read and seek discussion as his needs determine .
The Mind of that Civilized State we seek to make by giving ourselves into its making , is evidently the central work before us .
But while the writer , the publisher and printer , the bookseller and librarian and teacher and preacher , the investigator and experimenter , the reader and everyone who thinks , will be contributing themselves to this great organized mind and intention in the world , many sorts of specialized men will be more immediately concerned with parallel and more concrete aspects of the human synthesis .
The medical worker and the medical investigator , for example , will be building up the body of a new generation , the body of the civilized state , and he will be doing all he can , not simply as an individual , but as a citizen , to ORGANIZE his services of cure and prevention , of hygiene and selection .
A great and growing multitude of men will be working out the apparatus of the civilized state ; the organizers of transit and housing , the engineers in their incessantly increasing variety , the miners and geologists estimating the world 's resources in metals and minerals , the mechanical inventors perpetually economizing force .
The scientific agriculturist again will be studying the food supply of the world as a whole , and how it may be increased and distributed and economized .
And to the student of law comes the task of rephrasing his intricate and often quite beautiful science in relation to modern conceptions .
All these and a hundred other aspects are integral to the wide project of Constructive Socialism as it shapes itself in my faith .
When we lay down the proposition that it is one 's duty to get one's living in some way not socially disadvantageous , and as far as possible by work that is contributory to the general well-being and development , when we state that one 's surplus energies , after one 's living is gained , must be devoted to experience , self-development and constructive work , it is clear we condemn by implication many modes of life that are followed to-day .
We can not keep our hands clean in this world as it is .
There is no excuse indeed for a life of fraud or any other positive fruitless wrong-doing or for a purely parasitic non-productive life , yet all but the fortunate few who are properly paid and recognized state servants must in financial and business matters do their best amidst and through institutions tainted with injustice and flawed with unrealities .
All Socialists everywhere are like expeditionary soldiers far ahead of the main advance .
The organized state that should own and administer their possessions for the general good has not arrived to take them over ; and in the meanwhile they must act like its anticipatory agents according to their lights and make things ready for its coming .
The Believer then who is not in the public service , whose life lies among the operations of private enterprise , must work always on the supposition that the property he administers , the business in which he works , the profession he follows , is destined to be taken over and organized collectively for the commonweal and must be made ready for the taking over ; that the private outlook he secures by investment , the provision he makes for his friends and children , are temporary , wasteful , though at present unavoidable devices to be presently merged in and superseded by the broad and scientific previsions of the co-operative commonwealth .
But in many cases , since great numbers of women marry so young and so ignorantly that their thinking about realities begins only after marriage , a woman will find herself already married to a man before she realizes the significance of these things .
She may be already the mother of children .
Her husband 's ideas may not be her ideas .
He may dominate , he may prohibit , he may intervene , he may default .
He may , if he sees fit , burthen the family income with the charges of his illegitimate offspring .
I may perhaps recapitulate the points about that Order here .
In the `` Modern Utopia '' the visitor from earth remarks : --
`` many precise directions regarding his health , and rules that would aim at once at health and that constant exercise or will that makes life good .
Save in specified exceptional circumstances , the Samurai must bathe in cold water and the men shave every day ; they have the precisest directions in such matters ; the body must be in health , the skin and nerves and muscles in perfect tone , or the Samurai must go to the doctors of the order and give implicit obedience to the regimen prescribed .
They must sleep alone at least four nights in five ; and they must eat with and talk to anyone in their fellowship who cares for their conversation for an hour at least , at the nearest club-house of the Samurai , once on three chosen days in every week .
Moreover they must read aloud from the Book of the Samurai for at least five minutes every day .
Every month they must buy and read faithfully through at least one book that has been published during the past five years , and the only intervention with private choice in that matter is the prescription of a certain minimum of length for the monthly book or books .
But the full rule in these minor compulsory matters is voluminous and detailed , and it abounds with alternatives .
Its aim is rather to keep before the Samurai by a number of simple duties , as it were , the need of and some of the chief methods towards health of body and mind rather than to provide a comprehensive rule , and to ensure the maintenance of a community of feeling and interests among the Samurai through habit , intercourse and a living contemporary literature .
These minor obligations do not earmark more than an hour in the day .
Yet they serve to break down isolations of sympathy , all sorts of physical and intellectual sluggishness and the development of unsocial preoccupations of many sorts ...
This dream of the Samurai proved attractive to a much more various group of readers than the New Republican suggestion , and there have been actual attempts to realise the way of life proposed .
In most of these cases there was manifest a disposition greatly to over-accentuate organization , to make too much of the disciplinary side of the Rule and to forget the entire subordination of such things to active thought and constructive effort .
They are valuable and indeed only justifiable as a means to an end .
These attempts of a number of people of very miscellaneous origins and social traditions to come together and work like one machine made the essential wastefulness of any terrestrial realization of my Samurai very clear .
The only reason for such an Order is the economy and development of force , and under existing conditions disciplines would consume more force than they would engender .
The Order , so far from being a power , would be an isolation .
Manifestly the elements of organization and uniformity were overdone in my Utopia ; in this matter I was nearer the truth in the case of my New Republicans .
These , in contrast with the Samurai , had no formal general organization , they worked for a common end , because their minds and the suggestion of their circumstances pointed them to a common end .
Nothing was enforced upon them in the way of observance or discipline .
They were not shepherded and trained together , they came together .
It was assumed that if they wanted strongly they would see to it that they lived in the manner most conducive to their end just as in all this book I am taking it for granted that to believe truly is to want to do right .
It was not even required of them that they should sedulously propagate their constructive idea .
When one is discussing this possible formation of cults and brotherhoods , it may be well to consider a few of the conditions that rule such human re-groupings .
We live in the world as it is and not in the world as we want it to be , that is the practical rule by which we steer , and in directing our lives we must constantly consider the forces and practicabilities of the social medium in which we move .
This conveys in general terms , at least , my interpretation of the present time , and it is in accordance with this view that the world is moving forward as a whole and with much dispersed and discrepant rightness , that I do not want to go apart from the world as a whole into any smaller community , with all the implication of an exclusive possession of right which such a going apart involves .
Put to the test by my own Samurai for example by a particularly urgent and enthusiastic discipline , I found I did not in the least want to be one of that organization , that it only expressed one side of a much more complex self than its disciplines permitted .
And still less do I want to hamper the play of my thoughts and motives by going apart into the particularism of a new religion .
Such refuges are well enough when the times threaten to overwhelm one .
The point about the present age , so far as I am able to judge the world , is that it does not threaten to overwhelm ; that at the worst , by my standards , it maintains its way of thinking instead of assimilating mine .
We are led by this discussion of secession straight between the horns of a moral dilemma .
We have come to two conclusions ; to secede is a grave sin , but to lie is also a grave sin .
I think that in most cases personal isolation and disuse is the greater evil .
I think if there is no other way to constructive service except through test oaths and declarations , one must take then .
This is a particular case that stands apart from all other cases .
The man who preaches a sermon and pretends therein to any belief he does not truly hold is an abominable scoundrel , but I do not think he need trouble his soul very greatly about the barrier he stepped over to get into the pulpit , if he felt the call to preach , so long as the preaching be honest .
A Republican who takes the oath of allegiance to the King and wears his uniform is in a similar case .
These things stand apart ; they are so formal as to be scarcely more reprehensible than the falsehood of calling a correspondent `` Dear , '' or asking a tiresome lady to whom one is being kind and civil , for the pleasure of dancing with her .
We ought to do what we can to abolish these absurd barriers and petty falsehoods , but we ought not to commit a social suicide against them .
That is how I think and feel in this matter , but if a man sees the matter more gravely , if his conscience tells him relentlessly and uncompromisingly , `` this is a lie , '' then it is a lie and he must not be guilty of it .
But then I think it ill becomes him to be silently excluded .
His work is to clamour against the existence of the barrier that wastes him .
`` In religious matters apparent assent produces false unanimity .
There is no convention about these things ; if there were they would not exist .
On the contrary , the only way to get perfunctory tests and so forth abrogated , is for a sufficient number of people to refuse to take them .
It is in this case as in every other ; secession is the beginning of a new integration .
The living elements leave the dead or dying form and gradually create in virtue of their own combinations a new form more suited to present things .
There is a formative , a creative power in sincerity and also in segregation itself .
And the new form , the new species produced by variation and segregation will measure itself and its qualities with the old one .
The old one will either go to the wall , accept the new one and be renewed by it , or the new one will itself be pushed out of existence if the old one has more vitality and is better adapted to the circumstances .
This process of variation , competition and selection , also of intermarriage between equally vital and equally adapted varieties , is after all the process by which not only races exist but all human thoughts . ''
So my friend , who I think is altogether too strongly swayed by biological analogies .
But I am thinking not of the assertion of opinions primarily but of co-operation with an organization with which , save for the matter of the test , one may agree .
Secession may not involve the development of a new and better moral organization ; it may simply mean the suicide of one 's public aspect .
There may be no room or no need of a rival organization .
To secede from State employment , for example , is not to create the beginnings of a new State , however many -- short of a revolution -- may secede with you .
It is to become a disconnected private person , and throw up one 's social side .
Competition is a necessary condition of progressive life .
I do not know if so far I have made that belief sufficiently clear in these confessions .
Perhaps in my anxiety to convey my idea of a human synthesis I have not sufficiently insisted upon the part played by competition in that synthesis .
But the implications of the view that I have set forth are fairly plain .
Every individual , I have stated , is an experiment for the synthesis of the species , and upon that idea my system of conduct so far as it is a system is built .
Manifestly the individual 's function is either self-development , service and reproduction , or failure and an end .
But this metaphor of crystals is a very inadequate one , because crystals have no will in themselves ; nor do crystals , having failed to grow in some particular form , presently modify that form more or less and try again .
I see the organizing of forces , not simply law and police which are indeed paid mercenaries from the region of violence , but legislation and literature , teaching and tradition , organized religion , getting themselves and the social structure together , year after year and age after age , halting , failing , breaking up in order to try again .
And it seems to me that the amount of lawlessness and crime , the amount of waste and futility , the amount of war and war possibility and war danger in the world are just the measure of the present inadequacy of the world 's system of collective organization to the purpose before them .
It follows from this very directly that only one thing can end war on the earth and that is a subtle mental development , an idea , the development of the idea of the world commonweal in the collective mind .
The only real method of abolishing war is to perceive it , to realize it , to express it , to think it out and think about it , to make all the world understand its significance , and to clear and preserve its significant functions .
In human affairs to understand an evil is to abolish it ; it is the only way to abolish any evil that arises out of the untutored nature of man .
Which brings me back here again to my already repeated persuasion , that in expressing things , rendering things to each other , discussing our differences , clearing up the metaphysical conceptions upon which differences are discussed , and in a phrase evolving the collective mind , lies not only the cures of war and poverty but the general form of all a man 's duty and the essential work of mankind .
In our contemporary world , in our particular phase , military and naval organization loom up , colossal and unprecedent facts .
They have the effect of an overhanging disaster that grows every year more tremendous , every year in more sinister contrast with the increasing securities and tolerations of the everyday life .
It is impossible to imagine now what a great war in Europe would be like ; the change in material and method has been so profound since the last cycle of wars ended with the downfall of the Third Napoleon .
But there can be little or no doubt that it would involve a destruction of property and industrial and social disorganization of the most monstrous dimensions .
No man , I think , can mark the limits of the destruction of a great European conflict were it to occur at the present time ; and the near advent of practicable flying machines opens a whole new world of frightful possibilities .
There is a mass of real superstition upon these points , a belief in a magic purity , in magic personalities who can say : --
There is a lurking disposition to believe , even among those who lead the normal type of life , that the abstinent and chastely celibate are exceptionally healthy , energetic , immune .
The wildest claims are made .
But indeed it is true for all who can see the facts of life simply and plainly , that man is an omnivorous , versatile , various creature and can draw his strength from a hundred varieties of nourishment .
He has physiological idiosyncrasies too that are indifferent to biological classifications and moral generalities .
It is not true that his absorbent vessels begin their task as children begin the guessing game , by asking , `` Is it animal , vegetable or mineral ? ''
He responds to stimulation and recuperates after the exhaustion of his response , and his being is singularly careless whether the stimulation comes as a drug or stimulant , or as anger or music or noble appeals .
Even after we have found Salvation , we have to keep hold of Salvation ; believing , we must continue to believe .
We can not always be at a high level of noble emotion .
We have clambered on the ship of Faith and found our place and work aboard , and even while we are busied upon it , behold we are back and drowning in the sea of chaotic things .
How may he best do this ?
There is a base democracy just as there is a base aristocracy , the swaggering , aggressive disposition of the vulgar soul that admits neither of superiors nor leaders .
Its true name is insubordination .
It resents rules and refinements , delicacies , differences and organization .
It dreams that its leaders are its delegates .
It takes refuge from all superiority , all special knowledge , in a phantom ideal , the People , the sublime and wonderful People .
`` You can fool some of the people all the time , and all the people some of the time , but you ca n't fool all the people all the time , '' expresses I think quite the quintessence of this mystical faith , this faith in which men take refuge from the demand for order , discipline and conscious light .
In England it has never been of any great account , but in America the vulgar individualist's self-protective exaltation of an idealized Common Man has worked and is working infinite mischief .
One word has so far played a very little part in this book , and that is the word Justice .
So , as the recognition of this has grown , Justice has been tempered with Mercy , which indeed is no more than an attempt to equalize things by making the factors of the very defect that is condemned , its condonation .
The modern mind fluctuates uncertainly somewhere between these extremes , now harsh and now ineffectual .
THE WEAKNESS OF IMMATURITY .
POSSIBILITY OF A NEW ETIQUETTE .
So far I have ignored the immense importance of Sex in our lives and for the most part kept the discussion so generalized as to apply impartially to women and men .
But now I have reached a point when this great boundary line between two halves of the world and the intense and intimate personal problems that play across it must be faced .
THE INSTITUTION OF MARRIAGE .
Now I will not deal here with the institutional changes that are involved in that general scheme of progress called Socialism .
I have discussed the relation of Socialism to Marriage and the Family quite fully in my `` New Worlds for Old '' ( `` New Worlds for Old '' ( A. Constable and Co. , 1908 ) . )
and to that I must refer the reader .
Therein he will see how the economic freedom and independent citizenship of women , and indeed also the welfare of the whole next generation , hang on the idea of endowing motherhood , and he will find too how much of the nature of the marriage contract is outside the scope of Socialist proposals altogether .
Apart from the broad proposals of Socialism , as a matter of personal conviction quite outside the scope of Socialism altogether , I am persuaded of the need of much greater facilities of divorce than exist at present , divorce on the score of mutual consent , of faithlessness , of simple cruelty , of insanity , habitual vice or the prolonged imprisonment of either party .
And this being so I find it impossible to condemn on any ground , except that it is `` breaking ranks '' and making a confusion , those who by anticipating such wide facilities as I propose have sinned by existing standards .
How far and in what manner such breaking of ranks is to be condoned I will presently discuss .
But it is clear it is an offence of a different nature from actions one believes to be in themselves and apart from the law reprehensible things .
In all these matters I perceive a general rule is in itself a possible instrument of cruelty .
I set down what I can in the way of general principles , but it all leaves off far short of the point of application .
Every case among those we know I think we moderns must judge for ourselves .
Where there is doubt , there I hold must be charity .
And with regard to strangers , manifestly our duty is to avoid inquisitorial and uncharitable acts .
At its lowest , love is the mere sharing of , or rather the desire to share , pleasure and excitement , the excitements of conflict or lust or what not .
I think that the desire to partake , the desire to merge one's individual identity with another 's , remains a necessary element in all personal loves .
It is a way out of ourselves , a breaking down of our individual separation , just as hate is an intensification of that .
Personal love is the narrow and intense form of that breaking down , just as what I call Salvation is its widest , most extensive form .
We cast aside our reserves , our secrecies , our defences ; we open ourselves ; touches that would be intolerable from common people become a mystery of delight , acts of self-abasement and self-sacrifice are charged with symbolical pleasure .
We can not tell which of us is me , which you .
Our imprisoned egoism looks out through this window , forgets its walls , and is for those brief moments released and universal .
Love may be , and is for the most part , one-sided .
It is the going out from oneself that is love , and not the accident of its return .
It is the expedition whether it fail or succeed .
Love is a thing to a large extent in its beginnings voluntary and controllable , and at last quite involuntary .
It is so hedged about by obligations and consequences , real and artificial , that for the most part I think people are overmuch afraid of it .
And also the tradition of sentiment that suggests its forms and guides it in the world about us , is far too strongly exclusive .
It is not so much when love is glowing as when it is becoming habitual that it is jealous for itself and others .
Lovers a little exhausting their mutual interest find a fillip in an alliance against the world .
They bury their talent of understanding and sympathy to return it duly in a clean napkin .
They narrow their interest in life lest the other lover should misunderstand their amplitude as disloyalty .
It happens that of those very intimate with me I have lost only one , and that came slowly and elaborately , a long gradual separation wrought by the accumulation of years and mental decay , but many close friends and many whom I have counted upon for sympathy and fellowship have passed out of my world .
I miss such a one as Bob Stevenson , that luminous , extravagant talker , that eager fantastic mind .
I miss him whenever I write .
It is less pleasure now to write a story since he will never read it , much less give me a word of praise for it .
And I miss York Powell's friendly laughter and Henley 's exuberant welcome .
They made a warmth that has gone , those men .
I can understand why I , with my fumbling lucidities and explanations , have to finish up presently and go , expressing as I do the mood of a type and of a time ; but not those radiant presences .
And the gap these men have left , these men with whom after all I only sat now and again , or wrote to in a cheerful mood or got a letter from at odd times , gives me some measure of the thing that happens , that may happen , when the mind that is always near one 's thoughts , the person who moves to one 's movement and lights nearly all the common flow of events about one with the reminder of fellowship and meaning -- ceases .
Faith which feeds on personal love must at last prevail over it .
If Faith has any virtue it must have it here when we find ourselves bereft and isolated , facing a world from which the light has fled leaving it bleak and strange .
We live for experience and the race ; these individual interludes are just helps to that ; the warm inn in which we lovers met and refreshed was but a halt on a journey .
When we have loved to the intensest point we have done our best with each other .
To keep to that image of the inn , we must not sit overlong at our wine beside the fire .
We must go on to new experiences and new adventures .
Death comes to part us and turn us out and set us on the road again .
And since they are gone out of the world and become immortal memories in me , I feel no need to think of them as in some disembodied and incomprehensible elsewhere , changed and yet not done .
I want actual immortality for those I love as little as I desire it for myself .
That parable of the talents I have made such free use of in this book has one significant defect .
It gives but two cases , and three are possible .
There was first the man who buried his talent , and of his condemnation we are assured .
But those others all took their talents and used them courageously and came back with gain .
Was that gain inevitable ?
Does courage always ensure us victory ?
because if that is so we can all be heroes and valour is the better part of discretion .
the faith in such magic dies .
What of the possible case of the man who took his two or three talents and invested them as best he could and was deceived or heedless and lost them , interest and principal together ?
Behind everything I perceive the smile that makes all effort and discipline temporary , all the stress and pain of life endurable .
In the last resort I do not care whether I am seated on a throne or drunk or dying in a gutter .
I follow my leading .
In the ultimate I know , though I can not prove my knowledge in any way whatever , that everything is right and all things mine .
It was an excellent beginning .
After this first encounter the attributes of their parents and their own relative value in battle never rose between them , and if anything was wanted to complete the warmth of their regard it was found in a joint dislike of the eldest Quodling .
The eldest Quodling lisped , had a silly sort of straw hat and a large pink face ( all covered over with self-satisfaction ) , and he went to the National School with a green baize bag -- a contemptible thing to do .
They called him names and threw stones at him , and when he replied by threatenings ( `` Look 'ere , young Art Kipth , you better _thtoppit_ ! ''
) they were moved to attack and put him to flight .
And after that they broke the head of Ann Pornick 's doll , so that she went home weeping loudly -- a wicked and endearing proceeding .
Sid was whacked , but , as he explained , he wore a newspaper tactically adjusted during the transaction , and really it did n't hurt him at all ... .
And Mrs. Pornick put her head out of the shop door suddenly , and threatened Kipps as he passed .
`` Cavendish Academy , '' the school that had won the limited choice of Kipps ' vanished mother , was established in a battered private house in the part of Hastings remotest from the sea ; it was called an Academy for Young Gentlemen , and many of the young gentlemen had parents in `` India , '' and other unverifiable places .
Others were the sons of credulous widows , anxious , as Kipps ' mother had been , to get something a little `` superior '' to a board school education as cheaply as possible ; and others again were sent to demonstrate the dignity of their parents and guardians .
And of course there were boys from France .
They returned towards the gate .
Ann sent her hair back by an expert toss of the head .
`` You give me a start , '' she allowed .
`` How about that race ? ''
`` There 's a new wreck , '' said Sid , `` and my !
-- do n't it smell just ! ''
`` I clout her a lot , '' said Sidney modestly , and after a pause the talk reverted to more suitable topics .
Sid turned round and regarded him thoughtfully .
`` Not it ! ''
`` But ai n't sisters girls ? ''
A floating object distracted them at last from this obscure topic .
They abandoned the wreck and followed the new interest a mile along the beach , bombarding it with stones until it came to land .
They had inclined to a view that it would contain romantic mysteries , but it was simply an ill-preserved kitten -- too much even for them .
And at last they were drawn dinnerward and went home hungry and pensive side by side .
Then a great idea came to him , in a paragraph called `` Lovers ' Tokens '' that he read in a torn fragment of _Tit Bits_ .
It fell in to the measure of his courage -- a divided sixpence !
He secured his aunt 's best scissors , fished a sixpence out of his jejune tin money-box , and jabbed his finger in a varied series of attempts to get it in half .
When they met again the sixpence was still undivided .
He had not intended to mention the matter to her at that stage , but it came up spontaneously .
He endeavoured to explain the theory of broken sixpences and his unexpected failure to break one .
Old Kipps stood aside , with an oblique glance upward , and his nephew brushed clumsily by him and vanished out of sight of the street , into the vague obscurity of the little shop .
The door closed behind old Kipps with a nervous jangle of its bell , and he set himself to light the single oil lamp that illuminated his shop at nights .
It was an operation requiring care and watching , or else it flared and `` smelt . ''
Often it smelt after all .
Kipps for some reason found the dusky living-room with his aunt in it too populous for his feelings , and went upstairs .
`` That brat of Pornick 's ! ''
It seemed to him that a horrible catastrophe had occurred .
He felt he had identified himself inextricably with his uncle , and cut himself off from her for ever by saying `` Oh , no ! ''
At supper he was so visibly depressed that his aunt asked him if he wasn't feeling well .
Under this imminent threat of medicine he assumed an unnatural cheerfulness .
With paralysing unexpectedness came the end .
he said ; `` I 'm orf ! ''
Ask Ann about that . ''
she cried breathlessly , `` Artie !
I got _that_ ! ''
He remained standing unstably , his bright , flushed face looking back at her , and his hair fluffing in the wind , and he waved his hat until at last the bend of the road hid her from his eyes .
Then he turned about and sat down , and presently he began to put the half sixpence he held clenched in his hand into his trouser pocket .
He looked sideways at the driver , to judge how much he had seen .
Then everything would be perfect and right , and he would be perfectly happy .
A vast interminable place it seemed to Kipps , with unending shining counters and innumerable faultlessly dressed young men and presently Houri-like young women staring at him .
Here there was a long vista of gloves dangling from overhead rods , there ribbons and baby-linen .
A short young lady in black mittens was making out the account of a customer , and was clearly confused in her addition by Shalford 's eagle eye .
Two voices engaged in some sort of argument -- '' I can assure you , Miss Mergle , you are entirely mistaken -- entirely , in supposing I should do anything so unwomanly , '' -- sank abruptly , and they discovered two young ladies , taller and fairer than any of the other young ladies , and with black trains to their dresses , who were engaged in writing at a little table .
Whatever they told him to do , Kipps gathered he was to do .
He was also , he understood , to do whatever Carshot and Booch told him to do .
And there were also Buggins and Mr. Shalford .
And not to forget or fumble !
This admirable British merchant would glow with a particular pride of intellect when writing his London orders .
`` And then , '2 ea .
silk net as per patts herewith ' : _ea._ , eh ? ''
And Kipps , tired , hungry , and belated , set about stamping with vigour and despatch .
In return for these benefits he worked so that he commonly went to bed exhausted and footsore .
His round began at half-past six in the morning , when he would descend unwashed and shirtless , in old clothes and a scarf , and dust boxes and yawn , and take down wrappers and clean the windows until eight .
Then in half an hour he would complete his toilet and take an austere breakfast of bread and margarine and what only an Imperial Englishman would admit to be coffee , after which refreshment he ascended to the shop for the labours of the day .
Commonly these began with a mighty running to and fro with planks and boxes and goods for Carshot , the window-dresser , who , whether he worked well or ill , nagged persistently by reason of a chronic indigestion , until the window was done .
Sometimes the costume window had to be dressed , and then Kipps staggered down the whole length of the shop from the costume room with one after another of those ladylike shapes grasped firmly , but shamefully , each about her single ankle of wood .
Such days as there was no window-dressing , there was a mighty carrying and lifting of blocks and bales of goods into piles and stacks .
After this there were terrible exercises , at first almost despairfully difficult : certain sorts of goods that came in folded had to be rolled upon rollers , and for the most part refused absolutely to be rolled , at any rate by Kipps ; and certain other sorts of goods that came from the wholesalers rolled had to be measured and folded , which folding makes young apprentices wish they were dead .
All of it , too , quite avoidable trouble , you know , that is not avoided because of the cheapness of the genteeler sorts of labour and the dearness of forethought in the world .
And then consignments of new goods had to be marked off and packed into proper parcels ; and Carshot packed like conjuring tricks , and Kipps packed like a boy with tastes in some other direction -- not ascertained .
And always Carshot nagged .
The idea that fermented perpetually in the mind of Minton was to `` hit the little beggar slap in the eye '' -- the little beggar being Mr. Shalford -- '' and see how his blessed System met that . ''
The only pleasure left for the brief remainder of his holiday after that was to think he was not in the shop .
Even that was transient .
Two more days -- one more day -- half a day .
When he went back there were one or two very dismal nights indeed .
He went so far as to write home some vague intimation of his feelings about business and his prospects , quoting Minton .
But Mrs. Kipps answered him , `` Did he want the Pornicks to say he was n't good enough to be a draper ? ''
This dreadful possibility was of course conclusive in the matter .
`` No , '' he resolved they should not say he failed at that .
He derived much help from a `` manly '' sermon delivered in an enormous voice by a large , fat , sun-red clergyman , just home from a colonial bishopric he had resigned on the plea of ill-health , exhorting him that whatever his hand found to do , he was to do with all his might ; and the revision of his Catechism preparatory to his confirmation reminded him that it behooved him `` to do his duty in that state of life unto which it shall please God to call him ... . ''
It was one of the young ladies in the costume-room who first showed by her manner that he was a visible object and capable of exciting interest .
She talked to him , she encouraged him to talk to her , she lent him a book she possessed , and darned a sock for him , and said she would be his elder sister .
She allowed him to escort her to church with a great air of having induced him to go .
Then she investigated his eternal welfare , overcame a certain affectation of virile indifference to religion , and extorted a promise that he would undergo `` confirmation . ''
This excited the other young lady in the costumes , her natural rival , and she set herself with great charm and subtlety to the capture of the ripening heart of Kipps .
She took a more worldly line .
She went for a walk with him to the pier on Sunday afternoon , and explained to him how a gentleman must always walk `` outside '' a lady on a pavement , and how all gentlemen wore , or at least carried gloves , and generally the broad beginnings of the British social ideal .
Afterwards the ladies exchanged `` words , '' upon Sabbatical grounds .
In this way was the _toga virilis_ bestowed on Kipps , and he became recognised as a suitable object for that Platonic Eros whose blunted darts devastate even the very highest-class establishments .
In this way , too , did that pervading ambition of the British young man to be , if not a `` gentleman , '' at least mistakably like one , take root in his heart .
He took to these new interests with quite natural and personal zest .
He became initiated into the mysteries of `` flirting , '' and -- at a slightly later stage , and with some leading hints from Pierce , who was of a communicative disposition in these matters -- of the milder forms of `` spooning . ''
Very soon he was engaged .
Before two years were out he had been engaged six times , and was beginning to be rather a desperate fellow , so far as he could make out .
Desperate , but quite gentlemanly , be it understood , and without let or hindrance to the fact that he was , in four brief lessons , `` prepared '' by a distant-mannered and gloomy young curate , and `` confirmed '' a member of the Established Church .
It is a bright Sunday afternoon ; the scene is a secluded little seat half-way down the front of the Leas , and Kipps is four years older than when he parted from Ann .
There is a quite perceptible down upon his upper lip , and his costume is just as tremendous a `` mash '' as lies within his means .
His collar is so high that it scars his inaggressive jawbone , and his hat has a curly brim , his tie shows taste , his trousers are modestly brilliant , and his boots have light cloth uppers and button at the side .
He jabs at the gravel before him with a cheap cane , and glances sideways at Flo Bates , the young lady from the cash desk .
She is wearing a brilliant blouse and a gaily trimmed hat .
There is an air of fashion about her that might disappear under the analysis of a woman of the world , but which is quite sufficient to make Kipps very proud to be distinguished as her particular `` feller , '' and to be allowed at temperate intervals to use her Christian name .
_ That 's another story . ''
`` You 're not a bit plain -- you 're '' ( his voice jumps up to a squeak ) `` pretty .
`` Oh , get _out_ ! ''
her voice lifts also -- with pleasure .
`` I dessay I could guess . ''
He looks at it .
Giggles , slight struggle , and a slap on Kipps' coatsleeve .
A passerby appears down the path , and she hastily withdraws her hand .
I suppose some such phase of discontent is a normal thing in every adolescence .
The ripening mind seeks something upon which its will may crystallise , upon which its discursive emotions , growing more abundant with each year of life , may concentrate .
For many , though not for all , it takes a religious direction , but in those particular years the mental atmosphere of Folkestone was exceptionally free from any revivalistic disturbance that might have reached Kipps ' mental being .
Sometimes they fall in love .
I have known this uneasiness end in different cases in a vow to read one book ( not a novel ) every week , to read the Bible through in a year , to pass in the Honours division of the London Matriculation examination , to become an accomplished chemist , and never more to tell a lie .
It led Kipps finally into Technical Education as we understand it in the south of England .
`` We have to keep wives , '' said Buggins ( though as a matter of fact he did not keep even one ) , `` and how are we to do it with a lot of girls coming in to take the work out of our mouths ? ''
All these personages impressed Kipps with a sense of inferiority that in the case of Miss Walshingham became positively abysmal .
The ideas and knowledge they appeared to have , their personal capacity and freedom , opened a new world to his imagination .
These people came and went , with a sense of absolute assurance , against an overwhelming background of plaster casts , diagrams and tables , benches and a blackboard -- a background that seemed to him to be saturated with recondite knowledge and the occult and jealously guarded tips and secrets that constitute Art and the Higher Life .
They went home , he imagined , to homes where the piano was played with distinction and freedom , and books littered the tables , and foreign languages were habitually used .
They had complicated meals , no doubt -- with serviettes .
They `` knew etiquette , '' and how to avoid all the errors for which Kipps bought penny manuals , `` What to Avoid , '' `` Common Errors in Speaking , '' and the like .
He knew nothing about it all -- nothing whatever ; he was a creature of the outer darkness blinking in an unsuspected light .
There came a time when she could not open one of the class-room windows .
The man with the black beard pored over his chipping heedlessly ... .
`` 'Sno trouble , '' he gasped .
`` Dreadfully , '' said the maiden lady , and tried to look and tried not to look at the same time .
`` If you will give me your hand , '' said the freckled girl , and proceeded with Miss Walshingham 's assistance to bandage Kipps in a most businesslike way .
Yes , they actually bandaged Kipps .
They pulled up his cuffs -- happily they were not a very frayed pair -- and held his wrist , and wrapped the soft handkerchief round it , and tightened the knot together .
And Miss Walshingham 's face , the face of that almost divine Over-human , came close to the face of Kipps .
`` I 'm sure it 's a dreadful cut , '' said Miss Walshingham .
`` It is n't so much the cut at the time , it 's the poisoning afterwards , '' came the voice of the maiden lady .
`` We must make it just as tight as possible , to stop the bleeding , '' said the freckled girl .
`` I 'm sure it _must_ hurt , '' said Miss Walshingham .
`` I think they copy from each other a good deal , '' said Miss Mergle .
`` You _are_ wonderful , '' said the freckled girl to Miss Walshingham , apropos of nothing , as they went on their way home together .
`` He simply adores you . ''
`` But , my dear , what have I done ? ''
There was a little pause .
`` I hope everybody will come back . ''
Kipps lifted his hat .
She turned towards the class-room .
The freckled girl went out and stood for a moment at the head of the stairs .
When she came back she looked very hard at her friend .
The incident struck her as important -- wonderfully important .
It was unassimilable , of course , and absurd , but there it was , the thing that is so cardinal to a girl , the emotion , the subservience , the crowning triumph of her sex .
She could not help feeling that Helen took it , on the whole , a little too hardly .
The hour of the class on the following Thursday found Kipps in a state of nearly incredible despondency .
He was sitting with his eyes on the reading room clock , his chin resting on his fists and his elbows on the accumulated comic papers that were comic alas !
He paid no heed to the little man in spectacles glaring opposite to him , famishing for _Fun_ .
In this place it was he had sat night after night , each night more blissful than the last , waiting until it should be time to go to Her !
And then -- bliss !
And now the hour had come and there was no class !
There would be no class now until next October ; it might be there would never be a class so far as he was concerned again .
It 's tuppence , '' he said after a space .
He went down Dover Street in a state of profound melancholia -- at the pace and mood as it were of his own funeral procession -- and he crossed at the corner of Tontine Street heedless of all mundane things .
And there it was that Fortune came upon him , in disguise and with a loud shout , the shout of a person endowed with an unusually rich , full voice , followed immediately by a violent blow in the back .
Then he was on all fours in some mud that Fortune , in conjunction with the Folkestone corporation and in the pursuit of equally mysterious ends , had heaped together even lavishly for his reception .
`` Well -- you give me a oner in the back -- anyhow , '' said Kipps , taking stock of his damages .
As they passed the lamps he was visible as a figure with a slight anterior plumpness , progressing buoyantly on knickerbockered legs , with quite enormous calves , legs that , contrasting with Kipps ' own narrow practice , were even exuberantly turned out at the knees and toes .
A cycling cap was worn very much on one side , and from beneath it protruded carelessly straight wisps of dark red hair , and ever and again an ample nose came into momentary view round the corner .
The muscular cheeks of this person and a certain generosity of chin he possessed were blue shaven and he had no moustache .
His carriage was spacious and confident , his gestures up and down the narrow deserted back street they traversed , were irresistibly suggestive of ownership ; a suggestion of broadly gesticulating shadows were born squatting on his feet and grew and took possession of the road and reunited at last with the shadows of the infinite , as lamp after lamp was passed .
Kipps saw by the flickering light of one of them that they were in Little Fenchurch Street , and then they came round a corner sharply into a dark court and stopped at the door of a particularly ramshackle looking little house , held up between two larger ones , like a drunken man between policemen .
An interval and Kipps was dazzled by a pink shaded kerosene lamp .
`` You go in , '' said the red-haired man , `` and I 'll bring in the bike , '' and for a moment Kipps was alone in the lamp-lit room .
He took in rather vaguely the shabby ensemble of the little apartment , the round table covered with a torn , red , glass-stained cover on which the lamp stood , a mottled looking-glass over the fireplace reflecting this , a disused gas bracket , an extinct fire , a number of dusty postcards and memoranda stuck round the glass , a dusty , crowded paper rack on the mantel with a number of cabinet photographs , a table littered with papers and cigarette ash and a syphon of soda water .
Then the cyclist reappeared and Kipps saw his blue-shaved , rather animated face and bright-reddish , brown eyes for the first time .
He was a man perhaps ten years older than Kipps , but his beardless face made them in a way contemporary .
`` We 'd better let that mud dry a bit before we brush it .
Whiskey there is , good old Methusaleh , Canadian Rye , and there 's some brandy that's all right .
Which 'll you have ? ''
He laughed loudly , looked about him , hesitated and retired , leaving Kipps in possession of the room and free to make a more precise examination of its contents .
`` Sit down , old chap , '' he said , `` sit down .
I had to go out for it after all .
Was n't a solitary bottle left .
However , it 's all right now we're here .
No , do n't sit on that chair , there 's sheets of my play on that .
That 's the one -- with the broken arm .
I think this glass is clean , but anyhow wash it out with a squizz of syphon and shy it in the fireplace .
I 'll do it !
Lend it here ! ''
Kipps reduced the hither end of his cigarette to a pulp as he sat `` dessaying '' and `` quite believing '' Chitterlow in the sagest manner and admiring the easy way in which he was getting on with this very novel and entertaining personage .
He had another cigarette made for him , and then Chitterlow , assuming by insensible degrees more and more of the manner of a rich and successful playwright being interviewed by a young admirer , set himself to answer questions which sometimes Kipps asked and sometimes Chitterlow , about the particulars and methods of his career .
He undertook this self-imposed task with great earnestness and vigour , treating the matter indeed with such fulness that at times it seemed lost altogether under a thicket of parentheses , footnotes and episodes that branched and budded from its stem .
But it always emerged again , usually by way of illustration to its own degressions .
Practically it was a mass of material for the biography of a man who had been everywhere and done everything ( including the Hon .
Thomas Norgate , which was a Record ) , and in particular had acted with great distinction and profit ( he dated various anecdotes , `` when I was getting thirty , or forty or fifty , dollars a week '' ) throughout America and the entire civilised world .
When it was over Kipps , who rarely swore , was inspired to say the scene was `` damned fine '' about six times over , whereupon as if by way of recognition , Chitterlow took a simply enormous portion of the inspiring antediluvian , declaring at the same time that he had rarely met a `` finer '' intelligence than Kipps ' ( stronger there might be , _that_ he could n't say with certainty as yet , seeing how little after all they had seen of each other , but a finer _never_ ) ; that it was a shame such a gallant and discriminating intelligence should be nightly either locked up or locked out at ten -- well , ten thirty then -- and that he had half a mind to recommend old somebody or other ( apparently the editor of a London daily paper ) to put on Kipps forthwith as a dramatic critic in the place of the current incapable .
Then so far as he could subsequently remember , Kipps had `` another , '' and then it would seem that suddenly , regardless of the tragedy , he insisted that he `` reelly _must_ be getting on , '' and from that point his memory became irregular .
Certain things have remained quite clearly , and as it is a matter of common knowledge that intoxicated people forget what happens to them , it follows that he was not intoxicated .
Chitterlow came with him partly to see him home and partly for a freshener before turning in .
Kipps recalled afterwards very distinctly how in Little Fenchurch Street he discovered that he could not walk straight and also that Chitterlow 's needle and thread in his still unmended trouser leg was making an annoying little noise on the pavement behind him .
He tried to pick up the needle suddenly by surprise and somehow tripped and fell and then Chitterlow , laughing uproariously , helped him up .
`` It was n't a bicycle this time , old boy , '' said Chitterlow , and that appeared to them both at the time as being a quite extraordinarily good joke indeed .
They punched each other about on the strength of it .
`` What 's the result ? ''
`` I could go back to that place now , and they 'd be glad to have me ... .
Glad to have me , '' he repeated , and then added , `` that is to say , if they remember me -- which is n't very likely . ''
He reflected for a moment .
`` It 's that what makes tragedy Psychology really .
It 's the Greek irony -- Ibsen and -- all that .
Up to date . ''
So with infinite deviousness Chitterlow came at last to his play .
He decided he would not read it to Kipps , but tell him about it .
This was the simpler because much of it was still unwritten .
He began to explain his plot .
It was a complicated plot and all about a nobleman who had seen everything and done everything and knew practically all that Chitterlow knew about women ; that is to say , `` all about women '' and suchlike matters .
It warmed and excited Chitterlow .
Presently he stood up to act a situation -- which could not be explained .
It was an extremely vivid situation .
He replenished Kipps and proceeded with his exposition .
Kipps struggled with a difficulty in silence for a space .
Then he reiterated firmly , `` _What_ chap Kipps ? ''
`` This chap in my play -- man who kisses the girl . ''
`` Kipps , '' said Kipps , smiling a little cynically .
He explained that he was already in sufficient trouble for stopping out all night without having his name put in plays .
He was certain to be in the deuce of a row , the deuce of a row .
Why had he done it ?
Why had n't he gone at ten ?
Because one thing leads to another .
One thing , he generalized , always does lead to another ... .
Acting on Chitterlow 's advice to have a bit of a freshener before returning to the Emporium , Kipps walked some way along the Leas and back and then went down to a shop near the Harbour to get a cup of coffee .
He found that extremely reinvigorating , and he went on up the High Street to face the inevitable terrors of the office , a faint touch of pride in his depravity tempering his extreme self-abasement .
After all , it was not an unmanly headache ; he had been out all night , and he had been drinking and his physical disorder was there to witness the fact .
If it was n't for the thought of Shalford he would have been even a proud man to discover himself at last in such a condition .
But the thought of Shalford was very dreadful .
He met two of the apprentices snatching a walk before shop began .
At the sight of them he pulled his spirits together , put his hat back from his pallid brow , thrust his hands into his trouser pockets and adopted an altogether more dissipated carriage ; he met their innocent faces with a wan smile .
Just for a moment he was glad that his patch at the knee was , after all , visible and that some at least of the mud on his clothes had refused to move at Chitterlow's brushing .
What would n't they think he had been up to ?
He passed them without speaking .
He could imagine how they regarded his back .
Then he recollected Mr. Shalford ... .
The deuce of a row certainly and perhaps -- -- !
He tried to think of plausible versions of the affair .
He could explain he had been run down by rather a wild sort of fellow who was riding a bicycle , almost stunned for the moment ( even now he felt the effects of the concussion in his head ) and had been given whiskey to restore him , and `` the fact is , sir '' -- with an upward inflection of the voice , an upward inflection of the eyebrows and an air of its being the last thing one would have expected whiskey to do , the manifestation indeed of a practically unique physiological weakness -- '' it got into my _'ed_ ! ''
He emerged from the private office after an interval of ten minutes .
Afterwards Pierce came round and Kipps repeated this .
He conveyed that he had been `` fair round the town . ''
`` With a Nactor chap , I know . ''
`` Whatever you do , '' said Buggins , `` keep hold of your collars and cuffs -- shirts if you can , but collars anyhow .
And anyhow , it 's summer !
-- you wo n't want your coat ... .
You got a good umbrella ... .
`` There 's lots of shops going , '' said Buggins .
Kipps bowed over her hand .
His manners , his counter manners , were the easiest she had ever seen upon him .
She turned to her mother .
It was no good now , no good .
You could n't say a thing like that before her mother !
All was lost but politeness .
Kipps rushed for the door .
He stood at the door bowing with infinite gravity , and she smiled and nodded as she went out .
She saw nothing of the struggle within him , nothing but a satisfactory emotion .
She smiled like a satisfied goddess as the incense ascends .
The Manchester warehouse was a small cellar apart from the general basement of the building and dimly lit by a small gas flare .
He did not turn that up , but rushed for the darkest corner , where on the lowest shelf the sale window tickets were stored .
He drew out the box of these with trembling hands and upset them on the floor , and so having made himself a justifiable excuse for being on the ground , with his head well in the dark , he could let his poor bursting little heart have its way with him for a space .
`` Talk about coincidences !
And your name now ?
Wait a minute . ''
He held out a finger .
`` _Is_ it Arthur ? ''
`` Never heard his name . ''
Kipps tried to read again and abandoned the attempt .
`` What does it mean ? ''
`` I do n't understand . ''
`` _That's_ all right , '' said Chitterlow .
`` It 's all , all right , and all you have to do is write to Watson and Bean and get it -- -- ''
Kipps was trembling slightly .
`` But -- -- '' he said , and thought .
`` If you was me -- -- '' he began .
`` About that Waddy -- -- ? ''
He glanced up and saw the second apprentice disappear with amazing swiftness from behind the goods in the window .
`` Seein ' if the window was straight , Sir , '' said Kipps .
He became aware that Shalford had asked a question .
`` Yessir , nosir , rightsir .
I 'm sorting up zephyrs to-morrow , Sir , '' said Kipps .
`` Kipps , '' cried Carshot , who was shopwalking ; `` Kipps , Forward ! ''
`` Lor ' ! ''
`` Rather , '' he added , with a nervous laugh ; `` what else ? ''
`` Missin ' people , '' said Buggins , making to resume reading .
He was very much excited by a leader on Indian affairs .
`` By Jove ! ''
he said , `` it wo n't do to give these here Blacks votes . ''
`` They 're different altogether , '' said Buggins .
`` They 'ave n't the sound sense of Englishmen , and they 'ave n't the character .
There 's a sort of tricky dishonesty about 'em -- false witness and all that -- of which an Englishman has no idea .
Outside their courts of law -- it 's a pos'tive fact , Kipps -- there 's witnesses waitin ' to be 'ired .
Touch their 'ats as you go in .
Englishmen 'ave no idea , I tell you -- not ord'nary Englishmen .
It 's in their blood .
They 're too timid to be honest .
They are n't used to being free like we are , and if you gave 'em freedom they would n't make a proper use of it .
Now _we_ -- -- .
Oh , _Damn_ ! ''
For the gas had suddenly gone out and Buggins had the whole column of Society Club Chat still to read .
`` I 'd hide . ''
The old gentleman started and stared .
`` Mean to say it does n't belong to me ? ''
Kipps looked dubiously from the house to the old gentleman and back to the house .
Their conversation , he gathered , was over .
Presently he got up and went slowly across the grass to its stucco portal again .
He stood and his mouth shaped the precious word , `` Hughenden . ''
It was all _right_ !
He looked over his shoulder as if in appeal to the old gentleman , then turned and went his way .
The old gentleman was so evidently past all reason !
He hung for a moment some distance along the parade , as though some invisible string was pulling him back .
When he could no longer see the house from the pavement he went out into the road .
Then with an effort he snapped the string .
He replaced the coins with grave precaution and went his way with a sudden briskness .
It was all right -- he had it now -- he was a rich man at large .
He went up a street and round a corner and along another street , and started towards the Pavilion and changed his mind and came round back , resolved to go straight to the Emporium and tell them all .
He entered the Emporium through the Manchester department .
He flung open the door ( over whose ground glass he had so recently , in infinite apprehension , watched the nose of Chitterlow ) and discovered the second apprentice and Pierce in conversation .
Pierce was prodding his hollow tooth with a pin and talking in fragments about the distinctive characteristics of Good Style .
The housekeeper pursed her lips and shook her head ... .
When Kipps , I say , found them all standing up to toast him in that manner , there came such a feeling in his throat and face that for the life of him he scarcely knew for a moment whether he was not going to cry .
they all said , with kindly eyes .
It was very good of them , it was very good of them , and hard there was n't a stroke of luck for them all !
But the sight of upturned chins and glasses pulled him together again ... .
`` Ullo , Uncle , did n't see you , '' said Kipps .
`` Ai n't lost your situation , 'ave you ?
What 's that you got there ?
I'm blowed if it ai n't a banjo .
Spendin ' your money on banjoes !
Do n't put down your portmanty there -- anyhow .
Right in the way of everybody .
I 'm blowed if ever I saw such a boy as you 've got lately .
And , look here !
What you got a portmanty for ?
You ai n't _really_ lost your place , 'ave you ? ''
`` I 'm going about playing ! ''
said Kipps with a giggle .
`` Goin ' to black my face , Aunt , and sing on the beach .
I 'm going to 'ave a most tremenjous lark and earn any amount of money -- you see .
Twenty-six fousand pounds I 'm going to earn just as easy as nothing ! ''
`` Yes , '' said Kipps .
`` A 'ouse on the Leas .
I could have gone there .
Only I did n't .
I didn't care to .
I did n't know what to say .
I wanted to come and tell you . ''
`` Well , '' said Old Kipps , and nodded his head portentously towards his nephew , with the corners of his mouth pulled down in a portentous , discouraging way .
`` Well , you _are_ a young Gaby . ''
Still -- perhaps a hundred pounds -- --
Old Kipps felt staggered for a moment , but he shook his head and chins sagely from side to side .
As the memory of old Bean and Shalford revived , the confidence of Kipps came back to him .
That young chap what was arsting questions -- -- '' said Old Kipps , and regarded his wife with an eye of amazement .
`` There 's lots of young noblemen 'll be glad to 'ang on to you , '' said Old Kipps .
`` You mark my words .
And borry your money .
And then , good day to ye . ''
`` And you got to be precious careful of this old Bean , '' said Old Kipps .
`` We may be out of the world in Noo Romney , but I 've 'eard a bit about s'licitors , for all that .
You keep your eye on old Bean , me b'y .
He had a fancy he had just been called , that he had somehow overslept himself and missed going down for dusting .
Then he perceived it was still night and light by reason of the moonlight , and that he was no longer in the Emporium .
He wondered where he could be .
He had a curious fancy that the world had been swept and rolled up like a carpet and that he was nowhere .
It occurred to him that perhaps he was mad .
There was no answer , not even the defensive snore .
No room , no Buggins , nothing !
Thus Mr. Chester Coote , as he was on the evening when he came upon Kipps .
He was a local house agent and a most active and gentlemanly person , a conscious gentleman , equally aware of society and the serious side of life .
From amateur theatricals of a nice , refined sort to science classes , few things were able to get along without him .
He supplied a fine , full bass , a little flat and quavery perhaps , but very abundant , to the St. Stylites ' choir ... .
Why , I 'm like the chap in the song they sing , I do n't 'ardly know where I are .
`` You doing anything ? ''
`` Just called with a papah about the classes . ''
`` Because -- -- .
Would you care to come up and look at my 'ouse and 'ave a smoke and a chat .
He made indicative back jerks of the head , and was smitten with a horrible doubt whether possibly this invitation might not be some hideous breach of etiquette .
Was it , for example , the correct hour ?
`` I 'd be awfully glad if you would , '' he added .
`` Do n't know 'ardly yet .
Then again , I may not .
I got a furnished 'ouse , but I may let it . ''
They came out presently upon the end of the Leas and looked down to where the squat dark masses of the Harbour and Harbour Station , gemmed with pinpoint lights , crouched against the twilit grey of the sea .
`` If one could do _that_ , '' said Coote , and Kipps was inspired to throw his head back , cock it on one side , regard the Harbour with one eye shut and say that it would take some doing .
Then Coote said something about `` Abend , '' which Kipps judged to be in a foreign language and got over by lighting another cigarette from his by no means completed first one .
`` You 're right , _puff_ , _puff_ . ''
His imagination became active and seductive .
`` One thing leads to another .
Kipps looked with a confidential expression into Coote 's face .
`` It was bad enough when money was limited , '' he remarked .
`` But now -- -- '' He spoke with raised eyebrows , `` I got to steady down . ''
Kipps spoke of his respect for Miss Walshingham and her freckled friend .
He contrived not to look too self-conscious .
`` You know , I 'd like to talk to people like that , but I ca n't .
A chap 's afraid of giving himself away . ''
`` Of course , '' said Coote , `` of course . ''
Coote indicated a serious assent .
But Coote only nodded for him to go on .
`` This actor chap , '' he meditated , `` is a good sort of chap .
But 'e isn't what _I_ call a gentleman .
I got to 'old myself in with 'im .
'E 'd make me go it wild in no time .
'E 's pretty near the on'y chap I know .
Except the shop chaps .
They 've come round to 'ave supper once already and a bit of a sing song afterwards .
I got a banjo , you know , and I vamp a bit .
Vamping -- you know .
Have n't got far in the book -- 'Ow to Vamp -- but still I 'm getting on .
Jolly , of course , in a way , but what does it lead to ?
Besides that , there 's my Aunt and Uncle .
_They're_ very good old people -- very -- jest a bit interfering p'r'aps and thinking one isn't grown up , but Right enough .
It is n't what I _want_ .
I feel I 've got be'ind with everything .
I want to make it up again .
I want to get with educated people who know 'ow to do things -- in the regular , proper way . ''
`` I 'm glad .
I 'm tremendously glad . ''
`` I want a Friend .
That 's it -- straight . ''
`` I 'm rather a lonely dog myself .
_This_ to-night -- -- .
I 've not had anyone I 've spoken to so freely of my Work for months . ''
Coote displayed all his teeth in a kindly tremulous smile and his eyes were shiny .
`` Shake 'ands , '' said Kipps , deeply moved , and he and Coote rose and clasped with mutual emotion .
And so their compact was made .
From that moment they were Friends , intimate , confidential , high-thinking , _sotto voce_ friends .
All the rest of their talk ( and it inclined to be interminable ) was an expansion of that .
For that night Kipps wallowed in self-abandonment and Coote behaved as one who had received a great trust .
That sinister passion for pedagoguery to which the Good Intentioned are so fatally liable , that passion of infinite presumption that permits one weak human being to arrogate the direction of another weak human being 's affairs , had Coote in its grip .
He was to be a sort of lay confessor and director of Kipps , he was to help Kipps in a thousand ways , he was in fact to chaperon Kipps into the higher and better sort of English life .
He was to tell him his faults , advise him about the right thing to do -- --
While Kipps was rereading the begging letters and wishing he had the sound , clear common sense of Buggins to help him a little , the Parcels Post brought along the box from his uncle .
It was a large , insecure looking case held together by a few still loyal nails , and by what the British War Office would have recognised at once as an Army Corps of string , rags and odds and ends tied together .
Kipps unpacked it with a table knife , assisted at a critical point by the poker , and found a number of books and other objects of an antique type .
Kipps examined these objects one by one and wished he knew more about them .
Turning over the pages of the Physiology again he came upon a striking plate in which a youth of agreeable profile displayed his interior in an unstinted manner to the startled eye .
It was a new view of humanity altogether for Kipps , and it arrested his mind .
`` I seem to remember something -- -- ''
Chitterlow interrupted his discourse to ask , `` You have n't any brandy in the house , have you ?
Not to drink , you know .
But I want just an eggcupful to pull me steady .
My liver 's a bit queer ... .
It doesn't matter , if you have n't .
I 'm like that .
Yes , whiskey 'll do .
When the housemaid appeared he was standing on the hearthrug with his legs wide apart , with the bearing of a desperate fellow .
And after they had both had whiskeys -- '' You know a decent whiskey , '' Chitterlow remarked and took another `` just to drink . ''
-- Kipps produced cigarettes and the conversation flowed again .
It was assumed that they were embarked upon no more trivial enterprise than the Reform of the British Stage , and Kipps found himself classed with many opulent and even royal and noble amateurs -- the Honourable Thomas Norgate came in here -- who had interested themselves in the practical realisation of high ideals about the Drama .
Only he had a finer understanding of these things , and instead of being preyed upon by the common professional -- '' and they _are_ a lot , '' said Chitterlow ; `` I have n't toured for nothing '' -- he would have Chitterlow .
Kipps gathered few details .
It was clear he had bought the quarter of a farcical comedy -- practically a gold mine -- and it would appear it would be a good thing to buy the half .
A suggestion , or the suggestion of a suggestion , floated out that he should buy the whole play and produce it forthwith .
It seemed he was to produce the play upon a royalty system of a new sort , whatever a royalty system of any sort might be .
Then there was some doubt , after all , whether that farcical comedy was in itself sufficient to revolutionise the present lamentable state of the British Drama .
Better perhaps for such a purpose was that tragedy -- as yet unfinished -- which was to display all that Chitterlow knew about women , and which was to centre about a Russian nobleman embodying the fundamental Chitterlow personality .
Then it became clearer that Kipps was to produce several plays .
Kipps was to produce a great number of plays .
Kipps was to found a National Theatre .
They became very cheerful after the repast , and as there was now no waste to deplore , such as one experiences in the windy , open air , Chitterlow gave his voice full vent .
He fell to praising Kipps very highly and loudly .
He said he had known Kipps was the right sort , he had seen it from the first , almost before he got up out of the mud on that memorable night .
`` You can , '' he said , `` sometimes .
That was why -- -- '' he stopped , but he seemed on the verge of explaining that it was his certainty of Kipps being the right sort had led him to confer this great Fortune upon him .
He left that impression .
He threw out a number of long sentences and material for sentences of a highly philosophical and incoherent character about Coincidences .
It became evident he considered dramatic criticism in a perilously low condition ... .
About four Kipps found himself stranded , as it were , by a receding Chitterlow on a seat upon the Leas .
No doubt this was seeing life , but had he particularly wanted to see life that day ?
In a way Chitterlow had interrupted him .
The day he had designed for himself was altogether different from this .
He had been going to read through a precious little volume called `` Do n't '' that Coote had sent round for him , a book of invaluable hints , a summary of British deportment that had only the one defect of being at points a little out of date .
The Cootes live in a little house in Bouverie Square with a tangle of Virginia creeper up the verandah .
Then Coote came in and they left her and went upstairs together and had a good talk about reading and the Rules of Life .
Or rather Coote talked , and the praises of thought and reading were in his mouth ... .
`` I got a 'ouse of mine -- on the Leas . ''
`` Is n't it a Go ! ''
`` I 'ave n't nearly got to believe its reely 'appened yet .
When that Mr. Bean told me of it you could 'ave knocked me down with a feather ... .
It 's a tremenjous change for me . ''
`` If I 'm in Folkestone I shall , '' said Kipps , clearing away a little hoarseness .
`` I do n't _know_ much about music , but what I do know I like . ''
`` If you do , '' he said , `` I dessay I shall . ''
`` Oo , rather ! ''
`` If I may . ''
`` Having thus acquired possession of an idea , the little ship should not be abruptly launched into deep waters , but should be first permitted to glide gently and smoothly into the shallows , that is to say , the conversation should not be commenced by broadly and roundly stating a fact , or didactically expressing an opinion , as the subject would be thus virtually or summarily disposed of , or perhaps be met with a 'Really ' or 'Indeed , ' or some equally brief monosyllabic reply .
If an opposite opinion were held by the person to whom the remark were addressed , he might not , if a stranger , care to express it in the form of a direct contradiction , or actual dissent .
To glide imperceptibly into conversation is the object to be attained . ''
She closed the door and led the way to a little drawing-room , which impressed Kipps as being smaller and less emphatically coloured than that of the Cootes , and in which at first only a copper bowl of white poppies upon the brown tablecloth caught his particular attention .
`` Mother will be sorry she was out .
I 've told her about you , and she wants , I know , to meet you . ''
`` Children come and pick it at times , '' she remarked .
He rested on his hat and stick and looked appreciatively out of the window , and she glanced at him for one swift moment .
A suggestion that might have come from the Art of Conversing came into his head .
`` Have you a garden ? ''
They emerged through a four seasons coloured glass door to a little iron verandah that led by iron steps to a minute walled garden .
There was just room for a patch of turf and a flower-bed ; one sturdy variegated Euonymus grew in the corner .
But the early June flowers , the big narcissus , snow upon the mountains , and a fine show of yellow wallflowers shone gay .
`` It 's small , '' she said , `` but this is the day of small things . ''
There was a little interval before she smiled .
`` I try -- quite vainly -- to write stories , '' she said .
`` One must do something .
I do n't know whether I shall ever do any good -- at that -- anyhow .
It seems so hopeless .
And , of course , one must study the popular taste .
But , now my brother has gone to London , I get a lot of leisure . ''
`` They ought to satisfy me .
But they do n't .
I suppose I 'm ambitious .
And we had n't much of a springboard . ''
She glanced over his shoulder at the cramped little garden with an air of reference in her gesture .
`` You done a good deal . ''
`` How many then ? ''
`` Mr. Kipps has called on us , '' said Helen , and Mrs. Walshingham said it was very kind of him , and added that new people did n't call on them very much nowadays .
There was nothing of the scandalised surprise Kipps had seen in the shop ; she had heard , perhaps , he was a gentleman now .
In the shop he had thought her rather jaded and haughty , but he had scarcely taken her hand , which responded to his touch with a friendly pressure , before he knew how mistaken he had been .
She then told her daughter that someone called Mrs. Wace had been out , and turned to Kipps again to ask him if he had had tea .
Kipps said he had not , and Helen moved towards some mysterious interior .
`` But _I_ say , '' said Kipps ; `` do n't you on my account -- -- ! ''
`` You were one of Helen 's pupils in the wood-carving class ? ''
asked Mrs. Walshingham , regarding him with the quiet watchfulness proper to her position .
`` Oh , yes !
And how brave you were . ''
`` You be orf ! ''
She glanced up again and shook her head .
`` But -- for instance -- you do n't think of me -- as an equal like . ''
She bent down over him and softened to her wonderful smile .
`` If you do not hold me cheap , you mean ? ''
She was laughing , inundated by the sense of bountiful power , of possession and success .
He looked quite a nice little man to have .
`` Yes , '' she laughed .
`` What else could I mean ? ''
and , `` Yes . ''
She spoke , too , of her son -- almost like Helen 's twin -- alike , yet different .
She made Kipps feel quite fatherly .
`` They are so quick , so artistic , '' she said , `` so full of ideas .
Almost they frighten me .
One feels they need opportunities -- as other people need air . ''
They spread the tea under the trees before the little inn , and at a certain moment Kipps became aware that everyone in the party was simultaneously and furtively glancing at him .
There might have been a certain tension had it not been first of all for Coote and his tact , and afterwards for a number of wasps .
Coote was resolved to make this memorable day pass off well , and displayed an almost boisterous sense of fun .
Then young Walshingham began talking of the Roman remains below Lympne , intending to lead up to the Overman .
`` These old Roman chaps , '' he said , and then the wasps arrived .
They killed three in the jam alone .
Coote made a faint blowing noise , and so again they came for a time of silence .
`` Of course , '' said Coote .
Coote 's head was visible , shaking itself judiciously .
They 'll show you in the shop . ''
`` Oh , no !
Something like awe at the magnitude of his own fortune came upon him .
He felt the world was opening out like a magic flower in a transformation scene at the touch of this wand of gold .
And Helen , nestling beautiful in the red heart of the flower .
Only ten weeks ago he had been no more than the shabbiest of improvers and shamefully dismissed for dissipation , the mere soil-burned seed , as it were , of these glories .
He resolved the engagement ring should be of expressively excessive quality and appearance , in fact , the very best they had .
`` Not necessarily , '' said Coote .
`` Though , of course , it 's an attention .
`` The books says that ? ''
`` You 'll _have_ to be , '' said Coote .
`` FOR AN UNCLE OR AUNT BY MARRIAGE the period is six weeks black , with jet trimmings . ''
`` I know , '' said Mrs. Walshingham , `` I know everything , '' and helped him out most amazingly .
She deepened the impression he had already received of her sense and refinement .
She displayed an amount of tenderness that touched him .
`` A daughter , Arthur , '' she explained , `` is so much more than a son . ''
She said very kind and flattering things to Kipps , and she thanked him for his goodness to her son .
( `` That was n't anything , '' said Kipps . )
And then she expanded upon the theme of her two children .
`` Both so accomplished , '' she said , `` so clever .
I call them my Twin Jewels . ''
`` I bought you a ring to-day , '' he said , bending the book and speaking for the sake of saying something , and then he was moved to genuine speech .
`` You know , '' he said , `` I ca n't 'ardly believe it . ''
`` You 'll 'ave to 'elp me a fearful lot . ''
`` Then I will . ''
`` And you must accustom yourself to be more at your ease when you are with people , '' said Helen .
`` You 've only got to forget yourself a little and not be anxious -- -- ''
`` 'Ow the Juice is one to know ? ''
he said , putting down the hat with some emphasis .
`` We can do here a bit more , now we done here so long , '' said Mrs. Kipps .
I 'm not a turnip .
I 've started in Hammersmith , manufacturing . ''
Sid spoke offhand as though there was no such thing as pride .
`` You see , I 've 'ad a bit of luck , Sid .
Been lef ' money . ''
`` My granfaver it was , '' said Kipps , trying hard to be calm and simple .
`` 'Ardly knew I _'ad_ a granfaver .
And then -- bang !
When o ' Bean , the solicitor , told me of it , you could 'ave knocked me down -- -- ''
`` _'Ow_ much ? ''
demanded Sid , with a sharp note in his voice .
`` Twelve 'undred pound a year -- 'proximately , that is ... . ''
`` You ca n't 'ave money like that and not swell out .
You 'll soon be too big to speak to -- 'ow do they put it ?
-- a mere mechanic like me . ''
said Sid , with a sort of unwilling scepticism , `` money 'll be too much for you .
Besides -- you 're caught by a swell already . ''
`` 'Ow d'you mean ? ''
Kipps was silent for a moment with reminiscent eyes on Sid 's still troubled face .
`` The fact is , '' he said , `` we do n't get on very well together .
_I_ don't hold with service .
We 're common people , I suppose , but I do n't like it .
I do n't see why a sister of mine should wait at other people 's tables .
Not even if they got Twelve 'Undred a Year . ''
`` Only jobbed for the day . ''
`` Good-bye , o ' chap ! ''
The old people came out to say good-bye .
Old Kipps was radiant with triumph .
`` 'Pon my Sammy , Artie !
I 'm a goo' mind to come with you , '' he shouted , and then , `` I got something you might take with you ! ''
When Kipps came to reflect upon his afternoon 's work he had his first inkling of certain comprehensive incompatibilities lying about the course of true love in his particular case .
He had felt without understanding the incongruity between the announcement he had failed to make and the circle of ideas of his Aunt and Uncle .
It was this rather than the want of a specific intention that had silenced him , the perception that when he travelled from Folkestone to New Romney he travelled from an atmosphere where his engagement to Helen was sane and excellent to an atmosphere where it was only to be regarded with incredulous suspicion .
Coupled and associated with this jar was his sense of the altered behaviour of Sid Pornick , the evident shock to that ancient alliance caused by the fact of his enrichment , the touch of hostility in his `` You 'll soon be swelled too big to speak to a poor mechanic like me . ''
Kipps was unprepared for the unpleasant truth ; that the path of social advancement is and must be strewn with broken friendships .
This first protrusion of that fact caused a painful confusion in his mind .
It was speedily to protrude in a far more serious fashion in relation to the `` hands '' from the Emporium , and Chitterlow .
Chitterlow blazed upon them with unheralded oppressive brilliance the first time they were abroad together .
`` What HO ! ''
said he , at the sight of Kipps , and swept off the straw hat with so ample a clutch of his great , flat hand that it suggested to Helen 's startled mind a conjurer about to palm a half-penny .
`` Right you are , '' said Kipps .
`` And sells them ? ''
Helen looked over her shoulder to catch a view of Chitterlow's retreating aspect .
It did not compel her complete confidence .
`` I see , '' said Kipps .
He was about to say something further , but he desisted .
`` I got it much clearer now .
`` Oo I will , '' said Kipps .
He quite took to Mrs. Walshingham .
He was impressed by her conspicuous tact and refinement ; it seemed to him that the ladylike could go no further .
She was always dressed with a delicate fussiness that was never disarranged and even a sort of faded quality about her hair and face and bearing and emotions contributed to her effect .
Kipps was not a big man , and commonly he did not feel a big man , but with Mrs. Walshingham he always felt enormous and distended , as though he was a navvy who had taken some disagreeable poison which puffed him up inside his skin as a preliminary to bursting .
He felt , too , as though he had been rolled in clay and his hair dressed with gum .
And he felt that his voice was strident and his accent like somebody swinging a crowded pig 's pail in a free and careless manner .
All this increased and enforced his respect for her .
Her hand , which flitted often and again to his hand and arm , was singularly well shaped and cool .
`` Arthur , '' she called him from the very beginning .
`` But wo n't she be a bit lonely down here ? ''
So in their several ways they all contributed to enlarge and refine and exercise the intelligence of Kipps .
And behind all these other influences , and , as it were , presiding over and correcting these influences , was Kipps ' nearest friend , Coote , a sort of master of the ceremonies .
You figure his face , blowing slightly with solicitude , his slate coloured , projecting but not unkindly eye intent upon our hero .
The thing he thought was going off admirably .
He studied Kipps' character immensely .
He would discuss him with his sister , with Mrs. Walshingham , with the freckled girl , with anyone who would stand it .
`` He is an interesting character , '' he would say , `` likable -- a sort of gentleman by instinct .
He takes to all these things .
He improves every day .
He 'll soon get Sang Froid .
We took him up just in time .
He wants now -- well -- -- .
Next year , perhaps , if there is a good Extension Literature course , he might go in for it .
He wants to go in for something like that . ''
`` He 's going in for his bicycle now , '' said Mrs. Walshingham .
`` But reely , '' said the Pupil , `` not what you call being in Society ? ''
And after that the washing bill of Kipps quadrupled , and he was to be seen at times by the bandstand with his light summer overcoat unbuttoned to give a glimpse of his nice white tie .
He and Coote would be smoking the gold-tipped cigarettes young Walshingham had prescribed as _chic_ , and appreciating the music highly .
`` That 's -- puff -- a very nice bit , '' Kipps would say , or better , `` That 's nace . ''
And at the first grunts of the loyal anthem up they stood with religiously uplifted hats .
Whatever else you might call them , you could never call them disloyal .
`` 'Ello , Buggins ! ''
said Kipps , not too cordially .
`` 'Ow goes it ? ''
`` She was along of Sir William the other night , '' said Pierce , still loud and clear , `` and she asked to be remembered to you . ''
`` Been kep ' late at business ? ''
Coote turned quite pale and pretended not to hear .
His eyes sought in space for a time and with a convulsive movement he recognised a distant acquaintance and raised his hat .
One does not talk , but on the other hand one is punctilious to do .
Kipps -- in spite of the fact that the Walshinghams were more than a little lax -- Kipps , who had formerly flitted Sunday after Sunday from one Folkestone church to another , had now a sitting of his own , paid for duly at Saint Stylites .
There he was to be seen , always at the surplice evening service , and sometimes of a morning , dressed with a sober precision , and with an eye on Coote in the chancel .
No difficulties now about finding the place in his book .
He became a communicant again -- he had lapsed soon after his confirmation when the young lady in the costume-room , who was his adopted sister , left the Emporium -- and he would sometimes go around to the Vestry for Coote after the service .
One evening he was introduced to the Hon .
He was much too confused to say anything , and the noble cleric had nothing to say , but indisputably they were introduced ... .
Yet so it was to be !
`` You got your holidays ? ''
Presently they came to the bifurcation of the roads .
`` I 'll come a bit your way if I may . ''
that was it , '' said Kipps .
`` I s'pose so , '' said Ann .
Ann held out her hand .
`` I 'm awful glad to see you again , '' he said ; `` it brings back old times . ''
`` Does n't it ? ''
He would have liked to have had a long talk to her , to have gone for a walk with her or something , to have drawn nearer to her in any conceivable way , and , above all , to have had some more of the appreciation that shone in her eyes , but a vestige of Folkestone still clinging to him told him it `` would n't do . ''
`` Well , '' he said , `` I must be getting on , '' and turned away reluctantly , with a will under compulsion ... .
His Uncle was very anxious to buy him a few upright clocks as an investment for subsequent sale .
And there were also some very nice globes , one terrestrial and the other celestial , in a shop at Lydd that would look well in a drawing-room and inevitably increase in value ... .
Kipps either did or did not agree to this purchase ; he was unable to recollect .
The southwest wind perhaps helped him back , at any rate he found himself through Dymchurch without having noticed the place .
There came an odd effect as he drew near Hythe .
The hills on the left and the trees on the right seemed to draw together and close in upon him until his way was straight and narrow .
He could not turn around on that treacherous , half-tamed machine , but he knew that behind him , he knew so well , spread the wide , vast flatness of the Marsh shining under the afternoon sky .
In some way this was material to his thoughts .
And as he rode through Hythe he came upon the idea that there was a considerable amount of incompatibility between the existence of one who was practically a gentleman and of Ann .
In the neighbourhood of Seabrook he began to think he had , in some subtle way , lowered himself by walking along by the side of Ann ... .
After all , she was only a servant .
It seemed incredible now , and yet not wholly incredible , that he had cried real tears for her -- how many years was it ago ?
`` Yes , '' said Walshingham , getting into the hinder spaces of that splendid pause , `` a man must know about women .
And the only sound way of learning is the experimental method . ''
`` If you want to know about the experimental method , my boy , '' said Chitterlow , resuming ... .
He had met her in the High Street , had stopped her , and almost on the spur of the moment had boldly proposed a walk , `` for the sake of old times . ''
Her consent almost frightened Kipps .
His imagination had not carried him to that .
`` It would be a lark , '' said Kipps , and looked up the street and down .
`` It 's jolly our meeting again , anyhow , '' said Kipps .
`` Look at that ship out there .
She 's pretty close in ... . ''
He began to talk , and Chitterlow standards resuming possession of him he said he had never forgotten her .
`` T. O. C. O. E. , '' repeated Kipps very carefully .
When Kipps was clear what an anagram meant , Coote came to the second heading , the Tea .
Kipps gathered there might be from thirty to sixty people present , and that each one would have an anagram pinned on .
`` They give you a card to put your guesses on , rather like a dance programme , and then , you know , you go around and guess , '' said Coote .
`` It 's rather good fun . ''
`` It shakes everybody up together , '' said Coote .
Kipps smiled and nodded ... .
`` Your affectionate Uncle `` EDWARD GEORGE KIPPS .
`` Carry this to the station , will you ? ''
said the young man .
`` I want to ketch the nex ' train to London ... .
You 'll 'ave to look sharp -- I 'aven't very much time . ''
His train was composed of corridor carriages , and he forgot his trouble for a time in the wonders of this modern substitute for railway compartments .
He went from the non-smoking to the smoking carriage and smoked a cigarette , and strayed from his second-class carriage to a first and back .
But presently Black Care got aboard the train and came and sat beside him .
The exhilaration of escape had evaporated now , and he was presented with a terrible picture of his Aunt and Uncle arriving at his lodgings and finding him fled .
He had left a hasty message that he was called away suddenly on business , `` ver ' important business , '' and they were to be sumptuously entertained .
His immediate motive had been his passionate dread of an encounter between these excellent but unrefined old people and the Walshinghams , but now that end was secured , he could see how thwarted and exasperated they would be .
He ought to have got married and told them afterwards .
Suppose , after all , they found out the Walshingham 's address and went there !
The next place was a fried fish shop in a little side street , where there were also sausages on a gas-lit grill .
Sid came to a swift decision .
`` Come down to my little show .
I got someone I 'd like to see talking to you . ''
`` That 's all right ; _he_ wo n't mind .
He 's fond of talking .
He 'd talk to anyone , '' said Sid , reassuringly , and added a perplexing bit of Londonized Latin .
`` He does n't _pute_ anything , _non alienum_ .
`` I give Mr. Masterman _'is_ upstairs a hour ago , '' said Mrs. Sid .
`` I did n't think 'e ought to wait . ''
`` Ca n't I pass _you_ a bit ? ''
The furniture of the room did not assert itself very much above the cheerful business at the table , but Kipps was impressed with the idea that it was pretty .
There was a dresser at the end with a number of gay plates and a mug or so , a Labour Day poster , by Walter Crane , on the wall , and through the glass and over the blind of the shop door one had a glimpse of the bright coloured advertisement cards of bicycle dealers , and a shelfful of boxes labelled , The Paragon Bell , The Scarum Bell , and The Patent Omi !
`` I expect it does , '' he said presently .
`` It did at first . ''
`` Oo , _that_ !
Perhaps a week , '' said Kipps .
`` You do n't , '' said Sid .
`` No fear . ''
`` Twenty-four thousand pounds , '' said Masterman , and blew a cloud of smoke .
Does n't it worry you ? ''
Masterman readjusted his long body with an air of having accumulated all the facts he needed .
He snuggled his shoulder-blades down into the chair and raised his angular knees .
`` I doubt , '' he said , flicking cigarette ash into the atmosphere , `` if any great gain or loss of money does -- as things are at present -- make more than the slightest difference in one's happiness .
It ought to -- if money was what it ought to be , the token for given service ; one ought to get an increase in power and happiness for every pound one got .
But the plain fact is the times are out of joint , and money -- money , like everything else , is a deception and a disappointment . ''
`` I was a bit that way , '' said Kipps .
`` I got rather done over a banjo first day , '' said Kipps .
`` Leastways , my Uncle says . ''
`` No , '' said Kipps , reflectively .
I 'ave n't seen it quite like that before , but -- -- .
They 're not . ''
Kipps lit another cigarette with an air of intelligent participation .
Masterman stood up , gaunt and long , thrust his hands in his pockets and turned his back to the fireplace .
Six o'clock that day found Kipps drifting eastward along the southward margin of Rotten Row .
You figure him a small , respectably attired figure going slowly through a sometimes immensely difficult and always immense world .
At times he becomes pensive and whistles softly .
At times he looks about him .
There are a few riders in the Row , a carriage flashes by every now and then along the roadway , and among the great rhododendrons and laurels and upon the greensward there are a few groups and isolated people dressed in the style Kipps adopted to call upon the Walshinghams when first he was engaged .
Amid the complicated confusion of Kipps ' mind was a regret that he had not worn his other things ... .
`` Bit orf 'is 'ead , poor chap , '' said Kipps , and added : `` I wonder . ''
He thought intently for a space .
The world seemed a very solid and prosperous concern just here , and well out of reach of Masterman 's dying clutch .
Then , at the thought that he might run against Ann in his beautiful evening dress on the way to the band , he fluttered into a momentary dream , that jumped abruptly into a nightmare .
His thoughts came round to Helen .
She was difficult to understand at times .
He felt an extraordinary doubt whether he would get into the way of it .
He was interested for a space by a girl and groom on horseback , and then he came back to his personal preoccupations .
Thank goodness , they were going to live in London !
But that brought him around to Chitterlow .
The Chitterlows were coming to London , too .
If they did n't get money they 'd come after it ; they were n't the sort of people to be choked off easily , and if they did they 'd come to London to produce their play .
He tried to imagine some seemly social occasion invaded by Chitterlow and his rhetoric , by his torrential thunder of self-assertion , the whole company flattened thereunder like wheat under a hurricane .
Confound and hang Chitterlow !
Yet , somehow , somewhen , one would have to settle accounts with him !
And there was Sid !
Sid was Ann 's brother .
He realised with sudden horror the social indiscretion of accepting Sid's invitation to dinner .
Afterwards , when he saw the porters and waiters and the other guests catch a sight of the slippers , he was sorry he had not chosen the boots .
However , to make up for any want of style at that end , he had his crush hat under his arm .
He found a waiter regarding him and blushed deeply .
He did not look again for some time , and became confused about his knife and fork over the fish .
Presently he remarked a lady in pink to the left of him eating the fish with an entirely different implement .
The entire dinner party on his right , the party of the ladies in advanced evening dress , looked at him ... .
He felt that everyone was watching him and making fun of him , and the injustice of this angered him .
After all , they had every advantage he had n't .
And then , when they got him there doing his best , what must they do but glance and sneer and nudge one another .
He tried to catch them at it , and then took refuge in a second glass of wine .
Mutton came with peas .
He arrested the hand of the waiter .
`` No peas , '' he said .
He knew something of the difficulty and danger of eating peas .
Then , when the peas went away again he was embittered again ... .
Echoes of Masterman 's burning rhetoric began to reverberate in his mind .
Nice lot of people these were to laugh at anyone !
It was that made him so beastly uncomfortable .
How could one eat one's dinner with people about him like that ?
Nice lot they were .
He was glad he was n't one of them , anyhow .
Yes , they might look .
He resolved if they looked at him again he would ask one of the men who he was staring at .
His perturbed and angry face would have concerned anyone .
The band by an unfortunate accident was playing truculent military music .
The mental change Kipps underwent was , in its way , what psychologists call a conversion .
In a few moments all Kipps ' ideals were changed .
He who had been `` practically a gentleman , '' the sedulous pupil of Coote , the punctilious raiser of hats , was instantly a rebel , an outcast , the hater of everything `` stuck up , '' the foe of Society and the social order of to-day .
Here they were among the profits of their robbery , these people who might do anything with the world ... .
`` No , thenks , '' he said to a dish .
Kipps went back to Folkestone in time for the Anagram Tea .
But you must not imagine that the change of heart that came to him in the dining-room of the Royal Grand Hotel involved any change of attitude toward this promised social and intellectual treat .
He went back because the Royal Grand was too much for him .
Presently a fluffy , fair-haired lady came into prominent existence a few yards away .
She was talking to a respectful , low-voiced clergyman , whom she was possibly entertaining at tea .
`` No , '' she said , `` dear Lady Jane would n't like that ! ''
He saw a clerk peering at him from the office , and suddenly it occurred to him that the place might get back at him tremendously over the bill .
`` Do I _look_ as if I 'd ate two ?
At his departure Kipps , with a hot face , convulsive gestures and an embittered heart , tipped everyone who did not promptly and actively resist , including an absent-minded South African diamond merchant , who was waiting in the hall for his wife and succumbed to old habit .
He paid his cabman a four shilling piece at Charing Cross , having no smaller change , and wished he could burn him alive .
Then in a sudden reaction of economy he refused the proffered help of a porter and carried his bag quite violently to the train .
The costume Kipps wore to the Anagram Tea was designed as a compromise between the strict letter of high fashion and seaside laxity , a sort of easy , semi-state for afternoon .
Helen 's first reproof had always lingered in his mind .
He wore a frock coat , but mitigated it by a Panama hat of romantic shape with a black band , grey gloves , but for relaxation brown button boots .
The only other man besides the clergy present , a new doctor with an attractive wife , was in full afternoon dress .
Coote was not there .
Our two young people were much too amazed to give one another any formula of greeting , though they had parted warmly enough .
Each was already in a state of extreme tension to meet the demands of this great and unprecedented occasion of an Anagram Tea .
`` Lor ' ! ''
said Ann , her sole remark , and then the sense of Miss Botting 's eye ruled her straight again .
She became very pale , but she took his hat mechanically , and he was already removing his gloves .
`` Ann , '' he said in a low tone , and then `` Fency ! ''
The eldest Miss Botting knew Kipps was the sort of guest who requires nursing , and she came forward vocalising charm .
She said it was `` Awfully jolly of him to come , awfully jolly .
It was awfully difficult to get any good men ! ''
The second Miss Botting accosted them , a number of oblong pieces of paper in her hand , mysteriously inscribed .
`` Take an anagram , '' she said ; `` take an anagram , '' and boldly pinned one of these brief documents to Kipps ' lapel .
The letters were `` Cypshi , '' and Kipps from the very beginning suspected this was an anagram for Cuyps .
She also left a thing like a long dance programme , from which dangled a little pencil in his hand .
He found himself being introduced to people , and then he was in a corner with the short lady in a big bonnet , who was pelting him with gritty little bits of small talk that were gone before you could take hold of them and reply .
He ought to have told her he was engaged .
He ought to have explained things to her .
Perhaps even now he might be able to drop her a hint .
A lady with a tired smile , who was labelled conspicuously `` Wogdelenk , '' drifted towards Kipps ' interlocutor and the two fell into conversation .
Kipps found himself socially aground .
He looked about him .
Helen was talking to a curate and laughing .
Kipps was overcome by a vague desire to speak to Ann .
He was for sidling doorward .
Kipps made stockish noises , and the young lady suddenly became the nucleus of a party of excited friends who were forming a syndicate to guess , and barred his escape .
She took no further notice of him .
He found himself jammed against an occasional table and listening to the conversation of Mrs. `` Wogdelenk '' and his lady with the big bonnet .
`` You never can tell , '' said the lady labelled `` Wogdelenk ; '' `` you never can tell .
My wretches are big enough , Heaven knows , and do they work ?
Not a bit of it !
He was in a curtained archway , and Ann was before him carrying a tray supporting several small sugar bowls .
He had tried to express something of the change of heart that had happened to him .
But to broach the real state of the matter had been altogether too terrible for him .
He had sought a minor issue .
`` I don't like all this Seciety , '' he had said .
`` She looked an ordinary young woman , '' said the housemaid coldly .
He was standing with the envelope in his hand , trying to get on from that last inference , when Coote became audible without .
She 'd say something unexpected , of course .
She always did say something unexpected .
`` -- -- whether anagrams might not have offended the good domestic 's Moral Code -- you never can tell .
She _must_ go and that 's all ! ''
Kipps clattered with his knife and fork .
`` Ann , '' said Kipps , `` I want to speak to you .
I got something to say to you right away .
I 'm -- -- ''
`` But , Ann , _I'm_ -- -- ''
`` Basement after nine .
Them 's my hours .
I 'm a servant and likely to keep one .
If you 're calling here , what name please ?
But you got your friends and I got mine and you must n't go talking to _me_ . ''
`` I hope you were n't too short with him , Ann . ''
`` No shorter than he deserved , considering 'ow he be'aved , '' said Ann , with her bosom heaving .
`` I kep ' it all these years . ''
His mouth closed and his flush died away .
He looked at her .
The amulet , it seemed , had failed to work .
The conversation still hung fire .
Ann shook her head more defiantly , and became defensive .
`` I mean come right off and marry me now before anyone else can .
`` And you 'ave n't treated me properly , '' she said .
`` You 'ave n't treated me properly , Artie .
You did n't ought to 'ave -- -- ''
`` If you do n't answer me , Ann -- I 'm desprit -- if you do n't answer me now , if you do n't say you 'll come I 'll go right out now -- -- ''
He fumbled with the door latch , grumbling some inarticulate self-pity , as if he sought a handle , and then he had it open .
You imagine them fleeing through our complex and difficult social system , as it were , for life , first on foot and severally to the Folkestone Central Station ; then in a first-class carriage , with Kipps' bag as sole chaperone to Charing Cross , and then in a four-wheeler , a long , rumbling , palpitating , slow flight through the multitudinous swarming London streets to Sid .
Kipps kept peeping out of the window .
`` It 's the next corner after this , I believe , '' he would say .
For he had a sort of feeling that at Sid 's he would be immune from the hottest pursuits .
He paid the cabman in a manner adequate to the occasion and turned to his prospective brother-in-law .
`` Me and Ann , '' he said , `` we're going to marry . ''
`` After all , '' he said , `` there 's hope . ''
It was later in the day , and upon a seat in the presence of the green and gold Labyrinthodon that looms so splendidly above the lake , that the Kippses fell into talk about their future .
They had made a sufficient lunch in the palace , they had seen pictures and no end of remarkable things , and that and the amber sunlight made a mood for them , quiet and philosophical , a heaven mood .
Kipps broke a contemplative silence with an abrupt illusion to one principal preoccupation .
`` I shall offer an 'pology and I shall offer 'er brother damages .
If she likes to bring an action for Breach after that , well -- I done all I can ... .
They ca n't get much out of reading my letters in court , because I did n't write none .
I dessay a thousan ' or two 'll settle all that , anyhow .
I ai n't much worried about that .
That do n't worry me very much , Ann -- No . ''
`` I did n't neither , '' said Ann , with thoughtful eyes on the water .
`` It 's curious 'ow ever I got on to be engaged to 'er . ''
`` We 'll get a nice _little_ 'ouse out Ithe way . ''
`` It 's 'omelier than Folkestone , '' said Ann .
`` Jest a nice _little_ 'ouse , '' said Kipps .
`` There 's Hughenden , of course .
But that 's let .
Besides being miles too big .
And I would n't live in Folkestone again some'ow -- not for anything . ''
and not be able 'ardly to go into my own kitchen ? ''
`` You ought to 'ave a servant , '' said Kipps .
`` I might get a _young_ girl , '' said Ann , `` and bring 'er up in my own way . ''
`` 'Ave a trailer , '' said Kipps , `` and sit like a lady .
I 'd take you out to New Romney easy as anything jest to see the old people . ''
`` I do n't neither , reely , '' said Kipps .
`` I ca n't argue about it , but it do n't seem real like to me .
All the same Masterman 's a clever fellow , Ann . ''
`` I did n't like 'im at first , Artie , but I do now -- in a way .
You don't understand 'im all at once . ''
He glanced doubtfully at Ann , and she was looking at him even fondly .
`` _You_ do , '' said Ann .
Ann shook her head .
`` You be sensible and go on talking about Mr. Masterman , '' she said ... .
But Kipps had wandered to something else .
`` I like the way your 'air turns back just there , '' he said , with an indicative finger .
`` It was like that , I remember , when you was a girl .
I 've often thought of it -- -- ... .
'Member when we raced that time -- out be'ind the church ? ''
Then for a time they sat idly , each following out agreeable meditations .
`` I 'm deshed , '' he murmured .
He laid a hand on her arm and pointed .
Ann scrutinised the Labyrinthodon and then came around to Kipps ' face in mute interrogation .
The great green and gold Labyrinthodon took no notice of their conversation .
It gazed with its wonderful eyes over their heads into the infinite -- inflexibly calm .
It might indeed have been Coote himself there , Coote , the unassuming , cutting them dead ... .
It was a house agent in Dover who finally decided Kipps to build .
Kipps , with a certain faltering in his voice , had delivered his ultimatum , no basement , not more than eight rooms , hot and cold water upstairs , coal cellar in the house but with intervening doors to keep dust from the scullery and so forth .
`` You 'll have to build a house , '' said the house agent , sighing wearily , `` if you want all that . ''
It was rather for the sake of effective answer than with any intention at the time that Kipps mumbled , `` That 's about what I shall do -- this goes on . ''
Ann was at last awakened to the pitch of an indistinct enquiry what was the matter .
But Kipps lay awake for a long while building his house , and in the morning at breakfast he made his meaning clear .
He had smarted under the indignities of house agents long enough , and this seemed to promise revenge -- a fine revenge .
`` And , you know , we might reely make rather a nice little 'ouse out of it -- like we want . ''
At first Kipps had gathered advice , finding an initial difficulty in how to begin .
He went into a builder 's shop at Seabrook one day , and told the lady in charge that he wanted a house built ; he was breathless but quite determined , and he was prepared to give his order there and then , but she temporised with him and said her husband was out , and he left without giving his name .
Also he went and talked to a man in a cart who was pointed out to him by a workman as the builder of a new house near Saltwood , but he found him first sceptical and then overpoweringly sarcastic .
`` I suppose you build a 'ouse every 'oliday , '' he said , and turned from Kipps with every symptom of contempt .
Afterwards Carshot told alarming stories about builders , and shook Kipps ' expressed resolution a good deal , and then Pierce raised the question whether one ought to go in the first instance to a builder at all and not rather to an architect .
Pierce knew a man at Ashford whose brother was an architect , and as it is always better in these matters to get someone you know , the Kippses decided , before Pierce had gone , and Carshot 's warning had resumed their sway , to apply to him .
They did so -- rather dubiously .
It was an idea long since acquired from Sid .
Kipps endorsed this huskily and reluctantly .
Subsequently the architect wrote to say that he found in his notebook very full and explicit directions for bow windows to all rooms , for bedrooms , for water supply , lift , height of stairs and absence of twists therein , for a well-ventilated kitchen twenty feet square , with two dressers and a large box-window seat , for scullery and outhouses and offices , but nothing whatever about drawing-room , dining-room , library or study , or approximate cost , and he awaited further instructions .
He presumed there would be a breakfast-room , dining-room , drawing-room , and study for Mr. Kipps , at least that was his conception , and the young couple discussed this matter long and ardently .
`` Fency , Ann ! ''
he said , not too buoyantly , `` 'aving a little 'ouse of our own ! ''
`` It wo n't be a little 'ouse , '' said Ann , `` not with all them rooms . ''
`` We do n't want no more than six bedrooms , '' said Kipps .
`` Make this one a box-room , then , '' said the architect .
`` They 're miles too big -- all of them , '' agreed Kipps .
He spread out the most modest of the three plans and scratched his cheek .
Old Kipps always produced peculiar states of mind in his nephew , a rash assertiveness , a disposition towards display unlike his usual self .
There had been great difficulty in reconciling both these old people to the Pornick mesalliance , and at times the controversy echoed in old Kipps ' expressed thoughts .
This perhaps it was , and no ignoble vanity , that set the note of florid successfulness going in Kipps ' conversation whenever his uncle appeared .
Mrs. Kipps was , as a matter of fact , not reconciled at all , she had declined all invitations to come over on the 'bus , and was a taciturn hostess on the one occasion when the young people called at the toy shop _en route_ for Mrs. Pornick .
She displayed a tendency to sniff that was clearly due to pride rather than catarrh , and except for telling Ann she hoped she would not feel too `` stuck up '' about her marriage , confined her conversation to her nephew or the infinite .
The call was a brief one and made up chiefly of pauses , no refreshment was offered or asked for , and Ann departed with a singularly high colour .
For some reason she would not call at the toy shop when they found themselves again in New Romney .
`` Some of this is whiskey , my boy , '' said old Kipps when he tasted it , smacking critical lips .
`` I would n't do that , my boy , '' began old Kipps , but his nephew was routing in the cheffonier drawer amidst the plans .
He got them in time to check some further comment on Ann .
`` Um , '' said the old gentleman , a little impressed by the extraordinary odour and the unusual transparency of the tracing paper Kipps put into his hands .
`` Thinking of building a 'ouse , are you ? ''
`` It 's plain , of course , '' said Kipps , standing beside his uncle and looking down at this plan , which certainly did seem a little less magnificent now than it had at the first encounter .
`` There 's eleven bedrooms in that 'ouse , '' said Ann .
`` It 's a bit of a lot , ai n't it , uncle ? ''
`` It is n't what you 're used to , '' said old Kipps , `` it 's what you ought to 'ave _now_ . ''
And with that Ann dropped out of the discussion .
Kipps ' face was suddenly flushed and mulish .
He took up the curiously smelling tracings again .
`` I 'm not a-going to be looked down upon , '' he said .
`` It 's not only Uncle I 'm thinking of ! ''
`` We 'll 'ave the big 'ouse , '' said Ann , with a gulp .
`` I did n't think of that , Artie . ''
`` I say , Ann , '' remarked Kipps one day , `` we shall 'ave to call this little 'ouse by a name .
I was thinking of 'Ome Cottage .
But I dunno whether 'Ome Cottage is quite the thing like .
All these little fishermen's places are called Cottages . ''
`` I like cottage , '' said Ann .
`` It seems silly like to 'ave a name that do n't mean much . ''
`` No , '' said Mrs. Kipps with decision .
`` Thanking you kindly , but I don't have no butcher boys making game of me .
`` What the goodness 'as it got to do wiv ' 'im ? ''
`` Rain again ! ''
said Kipps , as the lash of the little drops stung the window .
It was part of the inexorable decrees of Providence that almost immediately afterwards the residuum of Kipps had to pass a very , very long and observant-looking girls ' school .
Kipps recovered consciousness again on the road between Shorncliffe Station and Cheriton , though he can not remember , indeed to this day he has never attempted to remember , how he got there .
And he was back at certain thoughts suggested by his last night 's novel reading , that linked up directly with the pariah-like emotions of these last encounters .
The novel lay at home upon the cheffonier ; it was one of society and politics -- there is no need whatever to give the title or name the author -- written with a heavy-handed thoroughness that overrode any possibility of resistance on the part of the Kipps mind .
It had crushed all his poor little edifice of ideals , his dreams of a sensible , unassuming existence , of snugness , of not caring what people said and all the rest of it , to dust ; it had reinstated , squarely and strongly again , the only proper conception of English social life .
There was a character in the book who trifled with Art , who was addicted to reading French novels , who dressed in a loose , careless way , who was a sorrow to his dignified , silvery-haired , politico-religious mother , and met the admonitions of bishops with a front of brass .
He treated a `` nice girl , '' to whom they had got him engaged , badly ; he married beneath him -- some low thing or other .
This was the end of his great fortune !
What a chance he had had !
If he had really carried out his first intentions and stuck to things , how much better everything might have been !
If he had got a tutor -- that had been in his mind originally -- a special sort of tutor to show him everything right ; a tutor for gentlemen of neglected education .
If he had read more and attended better to what Coote had said !
Coote , who had just cut him !
He let himself in with his latchkey .
He went moodily into the dining-room and got out the plans to look at them .
He had a vague hope that there would prove to be only ten bedrooms .
But he found there were still eleven .
He became aware of Ann standing over him .
`` Look 'ere , Artie ! ''
said Kipps , with his mental state developing .
`` I put sugar _once_ , '' said Ann .
`` Oo , dash it !
said Kipps , taking an extraordinarily large additional lump with fury quivering fingers , and putting his cup with a slight excess of force on the recess cupboard .
`` 'Ow was _I_ to know about y'r old visitors ? ''
cried Ann in a wail , and suddenly got up and fled from amidst their ruined tea , the tea of which `` toce , all buttery , '' was to be the crown and glory .
The Kippses spoke no more that day to one another .
The squabble about cards and buttered toast was as serious to them as the most rational of differences .
It was all rational to them .
Their sense of wrong burnt within them ; their sense of what was owing to themselves , the duty of implacability , the obstinacy of pride .
In the small hours Kipps lay awake at the nadir of unhappiness and came near groaning .
He saw life as an extraordinarily desolating muddle ; his futile house , his social discredit , his bad behaviour to Helen , his low marriage to Ann ... .
`` 'E 's gone ! ''
Ann had no vocabulary for such an occasion .
`` Oh , Lor ' ! ''
she said , and sat still .
Even his lips were white .
A gust of passion whirled across the soul of Kipps .
He flung out a knuckly fist .
`` If I 'ad 'im 'ere , '' he said , `` I 'd -- I 'd -- I 'd wring 'is neck for 'im .
I 'd -- I 'd -- -- '' His voice rose to a shout .
He thought of Gwendolen in the kitchen and fell to `` Ugh ! ''
He was immediately sorry .
`` I did n't mean to 'oller at you , Ann , '' he said , `` but I 'm all shook up .
I do n't 'ardly know what I 'm sayin ' .
`` I mean , '' he said , coming back to Ann and with an air of exasperation , `` that he 's 'bezzled and 'ooked it .
That 's what I mean , Ann . ''
`` And she told you to get someone to 'elp you ? ''
He reflected for a space .
`` It 's a smash-up , Ann .
More likely than not , Ann , 'e 's left us over'ead in debt .
We got to get out of it just 'ow we can ... .
Gwendolen returned and restored dignity .
The midday meal spread itself slowly before them .
Gwendolen , after her custom , left the door open and Kipps closed it carefully before sitting down .
`` I do n't feel as if I could swaller a moufful , '' he said .
`` I been a fool , Ann , '' he said in a gloomy monotone .
`` I been a brasted fool .
But it 's 'ard on us , all the same .
It 's 'ard . ''
`` 'Ow do you know 'e 's speckylated everything ? ''
said Ann , after a silent survey of him .
`` 'E 'as , '' said Kipps , irritably , holding firm to disaster .
`` She do n't know , of course , but you depend upon it that 's it .
She told me she knew something was on , and when she found 'im gone and a note lef ' for her she knew it was up with 'im .
'E went by the night boat .
She wrote that telegram off to me straight away . ''
`` I did n't know you meant to be out all this time . ''
`` I kep ' thinking , '' he said , trying again , `` I kep ' thinking -- after all -- I been cross to you and a fool about things -- about them cards , Ann ; but '' -- his voice shook to pieces -- '' we _'ave_ been 'appy , Ann ... some'ow ... togever . ''
Ann stared and said nothing , only went a shade whiter .
`` Oh , I _am_ glad we can stop 'ere and be comfortable a bit , '' said Ann .
`` I _am_ glad for that . ''
They mused , each with elbows on table and knuckles to lips , looking with speculative eyes at each other .
`` Very likely we 'll be 'appier than we should 'ave been with more money , '' said Kipps presently .
There is , of course , nothing on earth , and I doubt at times if there is a joy in Heaven , like starting a small haberdasher 's shop .
Imagine , for example , having a drawerful of tapes ( one whole piece most exquisitely blocked of every possible width of tape ) , or , again , an army of neat , large packages , each displaying one sample of hooks and eyes .
Think of your cottons , your drawer of coloured silks , the little , less , least of the compartments and thin packets of your needle drawer !
Poor princes and wretched gentlefolk mysteriously above retail trade , may taste only the faint unsatisfactory shadow of these delights with trays of stamps or butterflies .
I write , of course , for those to whom these things appeal ; there are clods alive who see nothing , or next to nothing , in spools of mercerised cotton and endless bands of paper-set pins .
I write for the wise , and as I write I wonder that Kipps resisted haberdashery .
Yet even starting a bookshop is at least twenty times as interesting as building your own house to your own design in unlimited space and time , or any possible thing people with indisputable social position and sound securities can possibly find to do .
Upon that I rest .
Anon he turns his attention to a box of small , round , yellow labels , declaring `` This book was bought from the Associated Booksellers ' Trading Union . ''
He licks one with deliberate care , sticks it on the paper before him and defaces it with great solemnity .
`` I can do it , Ann , '' he says , looking up brightly .
For the Associated Booksellers ' Trading Union , among other brilliant notions and inspirations , devised an ingenious system of taking back its books again in part payment for new ones within a specified period .
When it failed , all sorts of people were left with these unredeemed pledges in hand .
cried Kipps , with his heart sinking in sympathy , `` it ai n't -- -- ''
He was silent through a portentous moment while topics battled for him and finally he burst and talked of them all together .
It was like the rush of water when a dam bursts and washes out a fair-sized provincial town ; all sorts of things floated along on the swirl .
For example , he was discussing his future behaviour .
`` I 'm glad it 's come now .
I 've had my lesson .
I shall be very discreet now , trust me .
We 've learnt the value of money . ''
He discussed the possibility of a country house , of taking a Martello tower as a swimming-box ( as one might say a shooting-box ) of living in Venice because of its artistic associations and scenic possibilities , of a flat in Westminster or a house in the West End .
He also raised the question of giving up smoking and drinking , and what classes of drink were especially noxious to a man of his constitution .
But discourses on all this did not prevent a parenthetical computation of the probable profits on the supposition of a thousand nights here and in America , nor did it ignore the share Kipps was to have , nor the gladness with which Chitterlow would pay that share , nor the surprise and regret with which he had learnt , through an indirect source which awakened many associations , of the turpitude of young Walshingham , nor the distaste Chitterlow had always felt for young Walshingham and men of his type .
An excursus upon Napoleon had got into the torrent somehow and kept bobbing up and down .
The whole thing was thrown into the form of a single complex sentence , with parenthetical and subordinate clauses fitting one into the other like Chinese boxes , and from first to last it never even had an air of approaching anything in the remotest degree partaking of the nature of a full stop .
`` Every blessed rag , '' floated to them on the notes of that gorgeous voice .
The newsboy , too , had happened on luck .
Something like a faint cheer from the newsboy came down the air to terminate that transaction .
Ann and Kipps watched that receding happiness in silence , until he vanished round the bend of the road .
`` I _am_ glad , '' said Ann at last , speaking with a little sigh .
`` That 's right .
Keep a shop and the shop 'll keep you .
That 's 'ow I look at it , Ann . ''
Or he may be even more intimate .
`` I seen some things , '' he said to me once .
once I -- I _'loped_ !
I did -- reely ! ''
( Of course you will not tell Kipps that he _is_ `` Kipps , '' or that I have put him in this book .
He does not know .
And you know , one never knows how people are going to take that sort of thing .
I am an old and trusted customer now , and for many amiable reasons I should prefer that things remained exactly on their present footing . )
`` Artie , '' said Ann .
`` Imagination -- that is his master quality . ''
`` Mr. Wells never fails to see the romantic as well as mechanical implications of his imaginary changes in the fate of the world , and this is one of his most suggestive and satisfactory stories . ''
Charles Scribner 's Sons , New York
THE ISLAND OF DOCTOR MOREAU by H. G. Wells Contents INTRODUCTION I .
IN THE DINGEY OF THE `` LADY VAIN '' II .
THE MAN WHO WAS GOING NOWHERE III .
THE STRANGE FACE IV .
AT THE SCHOONER 'S RAIL V. THE MAN WHO HAD NOWHERE TO GO VI .
THE EVIL-LOOKING BOATMEN VII .
THE LOCKED DOOR VIII .
THE CRYING OF THE PUMA IX .
THE THING IN THE FOREST X .
THE CRYING OF THE MAN XI .
THE HUNTING OF THE MAN XII .
THE SAYERS OF THE LAW XIII .
DOCTOR MOREAU EXPLAINS XV .
CONCERNING THE BEAST FOLK XVI .
HOW THE BEAST FOLK TASTE BLOOD XVII .
THE FINDING OF MOREAU XIX .
MONTGOMERY 'S BANK HOLIDAY XX .
ALONE WITH THE BEAST FOLK XXI .
THE REVERSION OF THE BEAST FOLK XXII .
THE MAN ALONE INTRODUCTION .
ON February the First 1887 , the Lady Vain was lost by collision with a derelict when about the latitude 1 degree S. and longitude 107 degrees W. On January the Fifth , 1888 -- that is eleven months and four days after -- my uncle , Edward Prendick , a private gentleman , who certainly went aboard the Lady Vain at Callao , and who had been considered drowned , was picked up in latitude 5 degrees 3 ' S. and longitude 101 degrees W. in a small open boat of which the name was illegible , but which is supposed to have belonged to the missing schooner Ipecacuanha .
He gave such a strange account of himself that he was supposed demented .
Subsequently he alleged that his mind was a blank from the moment of his escape from the Lady Vain .
His case was discussed among psychologists at the time as a curious instance of the lapse of memory consequent upon physical and mental stress .
The following narrative was found among his papers by the undersigned , his nephew and heir , but unaccompanied by any definite request for publication .
The only island known to exist in the region in which my uncle was picked up is Noble 's Isle , a small volcanic islet and uninhabited .
It was visited in 1891 by H. M. S. Scorpion .
A party of sailors then landed , but found nothing living thereon except certain curious white moths , some hogs and rabbits , and some rather peculiar rats .
So that this narrative is without confirmation in its most essential particular .
With that understood , there seems no harm in putting this strange story before the public in accordance , as I believe , with my uncle 's intentions .
There is at least this much in its behalf : my uncle passed out of human knowledge about latitude 5 degrees S. and longitude 105 degrees E. , and reappeared in the same part of the ocean after a space of eleven months .
In some way he must have lived during the interval .
And it seems that a schooner called the Ipecacuanha with a drunken captain , John Davies , did start from Africa with a puma and certain other animals aboard in January , 1887 , that the vessel was well known at several ports in the South Pacific , and that it finally disappeared from those seas ( with a considerable amount of copra aboard ) , sailing to its unknown fate from Bayna in December , 1887 , a date that tallies entirely with my uncle 's story .
( The Story written by Edward Prendick . )
IN THE DINGEY OF THE `` LADY VAIN . ''
I DO not propose to add anything to what has already been written concerning the loss of the `` Lady Vain . ''
As everyone knows , she collided with a derelict when ten days out from Callao .
The longboat , with seven of the crew , was picked up eighteen days after by H. M. gunboat `` Myrtle , '' and the story of their terrible privations has become quite as well known as the far more horrible `` Medusa '' case .
But I have to add to the published story of the `` Lady Vain '' another , possibly as horrible and far stranger .
It has hitherto been supposed that the four men who were in the dingey perished , but this is incorrect .
I have the best of evidence for this assertion : I was one of the four men .
But in the first place I must state that there never were four men in the dingey , -- the number was three .
Constans , who was `` seen by the captain to jump into the gig , '' { 1 } luckily for us and unluckily for himself did not reach us .
He came down out of the tangle of ropes under the stays of the smashed bowsprit , some small rope caught his heel as he let go , and he hung for a moment head downward , and then fell and struck a block or spar floating in the water .
We pulled towards him , but he never came up .
{ 1 } Daily News , March 17 , 1887 .
I say lucky for us he did not reach us , and I might almost say luckily for himself ; for we had only a small breaker of water and some soddened ship 's biscuits with us , so sudden had been the alarm , so unprepared the ship for any disaster .
We thought the people on the launch would be better provisioned ( though it seems they were not ) , and we tried to hail them .
They could not have heard us , and the next morning when the drizzle cleared , -- which was not until past midday , -- we could see nothing of them .
We could not stand up to look about us , because of the pitching of the boat .
The two other men who had escaped so far with me were a man named Helmar , a passenger like myself , and a seaman whose name I do n't know , -- a short sturdy man , with a stammer .
We drifted famishing , and , after our water had come to an end , tormented by an intolerable thirst , for eight days altogether .
After the second day the sea subsided slowly to a glassy calm .
It is quite impossible for the ordinary reader to imagine those eight days .
He has not , luckily for himself , anything in his memory to imagine with .
After the first day we said little to one another , and lay in our places in the boat and stared at the horizon , or watched , with eyes that grew larger and more haggard every day , the misery and weakness gaining upon our companions .
The sun became pitiless .
The water ended on the fourth day , and we were already thinking strange things and saying them with our eyes ; but it was , I think , the sixth before Helmar gave voice to the thing we had all been thinking .
I remember our voices were dry and thin , so that we bent towards one another and spared our words .
I stood out against it with all my might , was rather for scuttling the boat and perishing together among the sharks that followed us ; but when Helmar said that if his proposal was accepted we should have drink , the sailor came round to him .
I would not draw lots however , and in the night the sailor whispered to Helmar again and again , and I sat in the bows with my clasp-knife in my hand , though I doubt if I had the stuff in me to fight ; and in the morning I agreed to Helmar 's proposal , and we handed halfpence to find the odd man .
The lot fell upon the sailor ; but he was the strongest of us and would not abide by it , and attacked Helmar with his hands .
They grappled together and almost stood up .
I crawled along the boat to them , intending to help Helmar by grasping the sailor 's leg ; but the sailor stumbled with the swaying of the boat , and the two fell upon the gunwale and rolled overboard together .
They sank like stones .
I remember laughing at that , and wondering why I laughed .
The laugh caught me suddenly like a thing from without .
I lay across one of the thwarts for I know not how long , thinking that if I had the strength I would drink sea-water and madden myself to die quickly .
And even as I lay there I saw , with no more interest than if it had been a picture , a sail come up towards me over the sky-line .
My mind must have been wandering , and yet I remember all that happened , quite distinctly .
I remember how my head swayed with the seas , and the horizon with the sail above it danced up and down ; but I also remember as distinctly that I had a persuasion that I was dead , and that I thought what a jest it was that they should come too late by such a little to catch me in my body .
For an endless period , as it seemed to me , I lay with my head on the thwart watching the schooner ( she was a little ship , schooner-rigged fore and aft ) come up out of the sea .
She kept tacking to and fro in a widening compass , for she was sailing dead into the wind .
It never entered my head to attempt to attract attention , and I do not remember anything distinctly after the sight of her side until I found myself in a little cabin aft .
There 's a dim half-memory of being lifted up to the gangway , and of a big round countenance covered with freckles and surrounded with red hair staring at me over the bulwarks .
I also had a disconnected impression of a dark face , with extraordinary eyes , close to mine ; but that I thought was a nightmare , until I met it again .
I fancy I recollect some stuff being poured in between my teeth ; and that is all .
THE MAN WHO WAS GOING NOWHERE .
THE cabin in which I found myself was small and rather untidy .
A youngish man with flaxen hair , a bristly straw-coloured moustache , and a dropping nether lip , was sitting and holding my wrist .
For a minute we stared at each other without speaking .
He had watery grey eyes , oddly void of expression .
Then just overhead came a sound like an iron bedstead being knocked about , and the low angry growling of some large animal .
At the same time the man spoke .
He repeated his question , -- '' How do you feel now ? ''
He was evidently satisfied with the frankness of my story , which I told in concise sentences enough , for I felt horribly weak ; and when it was finished he reverted at once to the topic of Natural History and his own biological studies .
He began to question me closely about Tottenham Court Road and Gower Street .
`` Is Caplatzi still flourishing ?
What a shop that was ! ''
He had evidently been a very ordinary medical student , and drifted incontinently to the topic of the music halls .
He told me some anecdotes .
After a day of alternate sleep and feeding I was so far recovered as to be able to get from my bunk to the scuttle , and see the green seas trying to keep pace with us .
I judged the schooner was running before the wind .
Montgomery -- that was the name of the flaxen-haired man -- came in again as I stood there , and I asked him for some clothes .
He lent me some duck things of his own , for those I had worn in the boat had been thrown overboard .
They were rather loose for me , for he was large and long in his limbs .
He told me casually that the captain was three-parts drunk in his own cabin .
As I assumed the clothes , I began asking him some questions about the destination of the ship .
He said the ship was bound to Hawaii , but that it had to land him first .
He stared at me with his nether lip dropping , and looked so wilfully stupid of a sudden that it came into my head that he desired to avoid my questions .
I had the discretion to ask no more .
In some indefinable way the black face thus flashed upon me shocked me profoundly .
It was a singularly deformed one .
The facial part projected , forming something dimly suggestive of a muzzle , and the huge half-open mouth showed as big white teeth as I had ever seen in a human mouth .
His eyes were blood-shot at the edges , with scarcely a rim of white round the hazel pupils .
There was a curious glow of excitement in his face .
`` Is this an ocean menagerie ? ''
`` I wish I 'd never set eyes on your infernal island .
What the devil -- want beasts for on an island like that ?
Then , that man of yours -- understood he was a man .
He 's a lunatic ; and he had n't no business aft .
Do you think the whole damned ship belongs to you ? ''
Well , never mind what he called Montgomery .
I saw the latter take a step forward , and interposed .
`` He 's drunk , '' said I .
The captain began some abuse even fouler than the last .
`` Shut up ! ''
I said , turning on him sharply , for I had seen danger in Montgomery 's white face .
With that I brought the downpour on myself .
THAT night land was sighted after sundown , and the schooner hove to .
Montgomery intimated that was his destination .
It was too far to see any details ; it seemed to me then simply a low-lying patch of dim blue in the uncertain blue-grey sea .
An almost vertical streak of smoke went up from it into the sky .
The captain was not on deck when it was sighted .
After he had vented his wrath on me he had staggered below , and I understand he went to sleep on the floor of his own cabin .
The mate practically assumed the command .
He was the gaunt , taciturn individual we had seen at the wheel .
Apparently he was in an evil temper with Montgomery .
He took not the slightest notice of either of us .
We dined with him in a sulky silence , after a few ineffectual efforts on my part to talk .
It struck me too that the men regarded my companion and his animals in a singularly unfriendly manner .
I found Montgomery very reticent about his purpose with these creatures , and about his destination ; and though I was sensible of a growing curiosity as to both , I did not press him .
`` I prefer to make my thanks to the accessible agent . ''
This damped my mood a little .
`` At any rate , '' I began .
We relapsed into silence .
`` There 's something in this starlight that loosens one 's tongue .
I 'm an ass , and yet somehow I would like to tell you . ''
`` Do n't , '' said I .
`` It is all the same to me .
After all , it is better to keep your secret .
There 's nothing gained but a little relief if I respect your confidence .
If I do n't -- well ? ''
I felt I had him at a disadvantage , had caught him in the mood of indiscretion ; and to tell the truth I was not curious to learn what might have driven a young medical student out of London .
I have an imagination .
I shrugged my shoulders and turned away .
Over the taffrail leant a silent black figure , watching the stars .
It was Montgomery 's strange attendant .
It looked over its shoulder quickly with my movement , then looked away again .
V. THE MAN WHO HAD NOWHERE TO GO .
He stood in my way , so that I had perforce to tap his shoulder to come on deck .
He came round with a start , and staggered back a few paces to stare at me .
It needed no expert eye to tell that the man was still drunk .
`` Ca n't have you , '' said Montgomery 's companion , concisely .
`` This ship aint for beasts and cannibals and worse than beasts , any more .
Overboard you go , Mister Shut-up .
If they ca n't have you , you goes overboard .
But , anyhow , you go -- with your friends .
I 've done with this blessed island for evermore , amen !
I 've had enough of it . ''
`` I 'll see to _you_ , presently , '' said the captain .
Then began a curious three-cornered altercation .
Alternately I appealed to one and another of the three men , -- first to the grey-haired man to let me land , and then to the drunken captain to keep me aboard .
I even bawled entreaties to the sailors .
Montgomery said never a word , only shook his head .
`` You 're going overboard , I tell you , '' was the captain 's refrain .
`` Law be damned !
I 'm king here . ''
At last I must confess my voice suddenly broke in the middle of a vigorous threat .
I felt a gust of hysterical petulance , and went aft and stared dismally at nothing .
Abruptly the cruelty of this desertion became clear to me .
I had no means of reaching the land unless I should chance to drift there .
I was still weak , you must remember , from my exposure in the boat ; I was empty and very faint , or I should have had more heart .
But as it was I suddenly began to sob and weep , as I had never done since I was a little child .
The tears ran down my face .
In a passion of despair I struck with my fists at the water in the bottom of the boat , and kicked savagely at the gunwale .
I prayed aloud for God to let me die .
It was not until I had got the water under ( for the water in the dingey had been shipped ; the boat was perfectly sound ) that I had leisure to look at the people in the launch again .
The white-haired man I found was still regarding me steadfastly , but with an expression , as I now fancied , of some perplexity .
When my eyes met his , he looked down at the staghound that sat between his knees .
He was a powerfully-built man , as I have said , with a fine forehead and rather heavy features ; but his eyes had that odd drooping of the skin above the lids which often comes with advancing years , and the fall of his heavy mouth at the corners gave him an expression of pugnacious resolution .
He talked to Montgomery in a tone too low for me to hear .
I told him I had spent some years at the Royal College of Science , and had done some researches in biology under Huxley .
He raised his eyebrows slightly at that .
Through the window I saw one of those unaccountable men in white , lugging a packing-case along the beach .
Presently the window-frame hid him .
Then I heard a key inserted and turned in the lock behind me .
After a little while I heard through the locked door the noise of the staghounds , that had now been brought up from the beach .
They were not barking , but sniffing and growling in a curious fashion .
I could hear the rapid patter of their feet , and Montgomery 's voice soothing them .
Was this the same Moreau ?
He had published some very astonishing facts in connection with the transfusion of blood , and in addition was known to be doing valuable work on morbid growths .
Then suddenly his career was closed .
He had to leave England .
A journalist obtained access to his laboratory in the capacity of laboratory-assistant , with the deliberate intention of making sensational exposures ; and by the help of a shocking accident ( if it was an accident ) , his gruesome pamphlet became notorious .
On the day of its publication a wretched dog , flayed and otherwise mutilated , escaped from Moreau 's house .
It was in the silly season , and a prominent editor , a cousin of the temporary laboratory-assistant , appealed to the conscience of the nation .
It was not the first time that conscience has turned against the methods of research .
The doctor was simply howled out of the country .
It may be that he deserved to be ; but I still think that the tepid support of his fellow-investigators and his desertion by the great body of scientific workers was a shameful thing .
Yet some of his experiments , by the journalist 's account , were wantonly cruel .
He might perhaps have purchased his social peace by abandoning his investigations ; but he apparently preferred the latter , as most men would who have once fallen under the overmastering spell of research .
He was unmarried , and had indeed nothing but his own interest to consider .
THE CRYING OF THE PUMA .
By this time Montgomery had recovered from the surprise of my question .
`` I always thought , '' he said deliberately , with a certain accentuation of his flavouring of lisp , `` that there _was_ something the matter with his ears , from the way he covered them .
What were they like ? ''
A sharp , hoarse cry of animal pain came from the enclosure behind us .
Its depth and volume testified to the puma .
I saw Montgomery wince .
Montgomery had stopped eating while I told him this .
`` I ca n't see it . ''
He resumed his meal .
`` I had no idea of it , '' he said , and masticated .
`` The crew of the schooner must have felt it the same .
Made a dead set at the poor devil .
You saw the captain ? ''
`` Excellent fellows , are n't they ? ''
said he , absentmindedly , knitting his brows as the animal yelled out sharply .
From this I was aroused , after I know not how long , by a rustling amidst the greenery on the other side of the stream .
For a moment I could see nothing but the waving summits of the ferns and reeds .
Then suddenly upon the bank of the stream appeared Something -- at first I could not distinguish what it was .
It bowed its round head to the water , and began to drink .
Then I saw it was a man , going on all-fours like a beast .
He was clothed in bluish cloth , and was of a copper-coloured hue , with black hair .
It seemed that grotesque ugliness was an invariable character of these islanders .
I could hear the suck of the water at his lips as he drank .
I stood overcome by this amazing realisation and then the most horrible questionings came rushing into my mind .
They began leaping in the air , first one and then the other , whooping and grunting .
Then one slipped , and for a moment was on all-fours , -- to recover , indeed , forthwith .
But that transitory gleam of the true animalism of these monsters was enough .
For a time I hurried on hopelessly perplexed , and pursued by that stealthy approach .
Whatever it was , the Thing either lacked the courage to attack me , or it was waiting to take me at some disadvantage .
I kept studiously to the open .
At times I would turn and listen ; and presently I had half persuaded myself that my pursuer had abandoned the chase , or was a mere creation of my disordered imagination .
Then I heard the sound of the sea .
I quickened my footsteps almost into a run , and immediately there was a stumble in my rear .
`` Where have you been ? ''
said he , holding me at arm 's length , so that the light from the door fell on my face .
`` We have both been so busy that we forgot you until about half an hour ago . ''
He led me into the room and sat me down in the deck chair .
For awhile I was blinded by the light .
`` We did not think you would start to explore this island of ours without telling us , '' he said ; and then , `` I was afraid -- But -- what -- Hullo ! ''
He locked the door and turned to me again .
He asked me no questions , but gave me some more brandy and water and pressed me to eat .
I was in a state of collapse .
He said something vague about his forgetting to warn me , and asked me briefly when I left the house and what I had seen .
I stood up in front of him .
`` What was that thing that came after me ? ''
I felt a gust of intense irritation , which passed as quickly as it came .
I flung myself into the chair again , and pressed my hands on my forehead .
The puma began once more .
Afterwards I discovered that he forgot to re-lock it .
Then I recalled the expression of his face the previous night , and with that the memory of all I had experienced reconstructed itself before me .
Even as that fear came back to me came a cry from within ; but this time it was not the cry of a puma .
I put down the mouthful that hesitated upon my lips , and listened .
Silence , save for the whisper of the morning breeze .
I began to think my ears had deceived me .
After a long pause I resumed my meal , but with my ears still vigilant .
Presently I heard something else , very faint and low .
I sat as if frozen in my attitude .
Though it was faint and low , it moved me more profoundly than all that I had hitherto heard of the abominations behind the wall .
There was no mistake this time in the quality of the dim , broken sounds ; no doubt at all of their source .
For it was groaning , broken by sobs and gasps of anguish .
It was no brute this time ; it was a human being in torment !
As I realised this I rose , and in three steps had crossed the room , seized the handle of the door into the yard , and flung it open before me .
THE HUNTING OF THE MAN .
I did not grasp his meaning then ; afterwards I was to find that a great proportion of these Beast People had malformed hands , lacking sometimes even three digits .
But guessing this was in some way a greeting , I did the same thing by way of reply .
He grinned with immense satisfaction .
Then his swift roving glance went round again ; he made a swift movement -- and vanished .
The fern fronds he had stood between came swishing together ,
As the first shock of the change of light passed , I saw about me more distinctly .
The little sloth-like creature was standing and staring at me .
My conductor had vanished .
The place was a narrow passage between high walls of lava , a crack in the knotted rock , and on either side interwoven heaps of sea-mat , palm-fans , and reeds leaning against the rock formed rough and impenetrably dark dens .
The winding way up the ravine between these was scarcely three yards wide , and was disfigured by lumps of decaying fruit-pulp and other refuse , which accounted for the disagreeable stench of the place .
`` It is a man , '' gabbled my conductor , `` a man , a man , a five-man , like me . ''
And so from the prohibition of these acts of folly , on to the prohibition of what I thought then were the maddest , most impossible , and most indecent things one could well imagine .
A kind of rhythmic fervour fell on all of us ; we gabbled and swayed faster and faster , repeating this amazing Law .
Superficially the contagion of these brutes was upon me , but deep down within me the laughter and disgust struggled together .
We ran through a long list of prohibitions , and then the chant swung round to a new formula .
And so on for another long series , mostly quite incomprehensible gibberish to me about _Him_ , whoever he might be .
I could have fancied it was a dream , but never before have I heard chanting in a dream .
`` Eat roots and herbs ; it is His will , '' said the Ape-man .
`` None escape , '' said the Beast Folk , glancing furtively at one another .
`` None escape , '' said the grey creature in the corner .
`` None escape , '' said a dappled brute standing in the doorway .
`` Punishment is sharp and sure .
Therefore learn the Law .
Say the words . ''
For a moment I stood horror-struck .
I turned and saw the passage behind me blocked by another heavy brute , with a huge grey face and twinkling little eyes , advancing towards me .
I looked round and saw to the right of me and a half-dozen yards in front of me a narrow gap in the wall of rock through which a ray of light slanted into the shadows .
I TURNED again and went on down towards the sea .
I found the hot stream broadened out to a shallow , weedy sand , in which an abundance of crabs and long-bodied , many-legged creatures started from my footfall .
I walked to the very edge of the salt water , and then I felt I was safe .
I turned and stared , arms akimbo , at the thick green behind me , into which the steamy ravine cut like a smoking gash .
But , as I say , I was too full of excitement and ( a true saying , though those who have never known danger may doubt it ) too desperate to die .
`` What are you doing , man ? ''
`` What am I doing ?
I am going to drown myself , '' said I .
`` A pretty story , '' said I .
`` They talk , build houses .
It 's likely I 'll come ashore . ''
It seemed just possible .
Then I remembered something again .
`` But I saw , '' said I , `` in the enclosure -- ''
`` Ca n't do that , '' said Montgomery , with an explanatory nod over his shoulder .
`` AND now , Prendick , I will explain , '' said Doctor Moreau , so soon as we had eaten and drunk .
`` I must confess that you are the most dictatorial guest I ever entertained .
I warn you that this is the last I shall do to oblige you .
The next thing you threaten to commit suicide about , I shan't do , -- even at some personal inconvenience . ''
`` You forget all that a skilled vivisector can do with living things , '' said Moreau .
`` For my own part , I 'm puzzled why the things I have done here have not been done before .
Small efforts , of course , have been made , -- amputation , tongue-cutting , excisions .
Of course you know a squint may be induced or cured by surgery ?
Then in the case of excisions you have all kinds of secondary changes , pigmentary disturbances , modifications of the passions , alterations in the secretion of fatty tissue .
I have no doubt you have heard of these things ? ''
`` All in good time , '' said he , waving his hand at me ; `` I am only beginning .
Those are trivial cases of alteration .
Surgery can do better things than that .
There is building up as well as breaking down and changing .
You have heard , perhaps , of a common surgical operation resorted to in cases where the nose has been destroyed : a flap of skin is cut from the forehead , turned down on the nose , and heals in the new position .
This is a kind of grafting in a new position of part of an animal upon itself .
Grafting of freshly obtained material from another animal is also possible , -- the case of teeth , for example .
The grafting of skin and bone is done to facilitate healing : the surgeon places in the middle of the wound pieces of skin snipped from another animal , or fragments of bone from a victim freshly killed .
Hunter 's cock-spur -- possibly you have heard of that -- flourished on the bull 's neck ; and the rhinoceros rats of the Algerian zouaves are also to be thought of , -- monsters manufactured by transferring a slip from the tail of an ordinary rat to its snout , and allowing it to heal in that position . ''
`` Monsters manufactured ! ''
`` Then you mean to tell me -- ''
He confessed that he had chosen that form by chance .
`` I might just as well have worked to form sheep into llamas and llamas into sheep .
I suppose there is something in the human form that appeals to the artistic turn of mind more powerfully than any animal shape can .
But I 've not confined myself to man-making .
Once or twice -- '' He was silent , for a minute perhaps .
How they have slipped by !
And here I have wasted a day saving your life , and am now wasting an hour explaining myself ! ''
`` Then I am a religious man , Prendick , as every sane man must be .
It may be , I fancy , that I have seen more of the ways of this world's Maker than you , -- for I have sought his laws , in _my_ way , all my life , while you , I understand , have been collecting butterflies .
And I tell you , pleasure and pain have nothing to do with heaven or hell .
Pleasure and pain -- bah !
What is your theologian 's ecstasy but Mahomet 's houri in the dark ?
This store which men and women set on pleasure and pain , Prendick , is the mark of the beast upon them , -- the mark of the beast from which they came !
Pain , pain and pleasure , they are for us only so long as we wriggle in the dust .
`` To this day I have never troubled about the ethics of the matter , '' he continued .
`` The study of Nature makes a man at last as remorseless as Nature .
I have gone on , not heeding anything but the question I was pursuing ; and the material has -- dripped into the huts yonder .
It is nearly eleven years since we came here , I and Montgomery and six Kanakas .
I remember the green stillness of the island and the empty ocean about us , as though it was yesterday .
The place seemed waiting for me .
`` Keep them , '' he said , and snatched at a yawn .
He stood up , stared at me for a moment , and smiled .
`` You have had two eventful days , '' said he .
`` I should advise some sleep .
I 'm glad it 's all clear .
He thought me over for a moment , then went out by the inner door .
CONCERNING THE BEAST FOLK .
And here perhaps I may give a few general facts about the island and the Beast People .
The island , which was of irregular outline and lay low upon the wide sea , had a total area , I suppose , of seven or eight square miles .
{ 2 } It was volcanic in origin , and was now fringed on three sides by coral reefs ; some fumaroles to the northward , and a hot spring , were the only vestiges of the forces that had long since originated it .
Now and then a faint quiver of earthquake would be sensible , and sometimes the ascent of the spire of smoke would be rendered tumultuous by gusts of steam ; but that was all .
The population of the island , Montgomery informed me , now numbered rather more than sixty of these strange creations of Moreau 's art , not counting the smaller monstrosities which lived in the undergrowth and were without human form .
Altogether he had made nearly a hundred and twenty ; but many had died , and others -- like the writhing Footless Thing of which he had told me -- had come by violent ends .
In answer to my question , Montgomery said that they actually bore offspring , but that these generally died .
When they lived , Moreau took them and stamped the human form upon them .
There was no evidence of the inheritance of their acquired human characteristics .
The females were less numerous than the males , and liable to much furtive persecution in spite of the monogamy the Law enjoined .
HOW THE BEAST FOLK TASTE BLOOD .
After I had breakfasted with Montgomery , he took me across the island to see the fumarole and the source of the hot spring into whose scalding waters I had blundered on the previous day .
Both of us carried whips and loaded revolvers .
While going through a leafy jungle on our road thither , we heard a rabbit squealing .
We stopped and listened , but we heard no more ; and presently we went on our way , and the incident dropped out of our minds .
Montgomery called my attention to certain little pink animals with long hind-legs , that went leaping through the undergrowth .
He told me they were creatures made of the offspring of the Beast People , that Moreau had invented .
He had fancied they might serve for meat , but a rabbit-like habit of devouring their young had defeated this intention .
I had already encountered some of these creatures , -- once during my moonlight flight from the Leopard-man , and once during my pursuit by Moreau on the previous day .
By chance , one hopping to avoid us leapt into the hole caused by the uprooting of a wind-blown tree ; before it could extricate itself we managed to catch it .
It spat like a cat , scratched and kicked vigorously with its hind-legs , and made an attempt to bite ; but its teeth were too feeble to inflict more than a painless pinch .
It seemed to me rather a pretty little creature ; and as Montgomery stated that it never destroyed the turf by burrowing , and was very cleanly in its habits , I should imagine it might prove a convenient substitute for the common rabbit in gentlemen 's parks .
`` Sucking his drink ? ''
`` 'Not to suck your drink ; that is the Law . '
Much the brutes care for the Law , eh ?
when Moreau 's not about ! ''
He took out his revolver , examined the cartridges in it and replaced it .
Then he began to pull at his dropping lip .
Presently he woke up and came towards me .
`` You see , '' he said , almost in a whisper , `` they are all supposed to have a fixed idea against eating anything that runs on land .
If some brute has by any accident tasted blood -- ''
First to arrive was the Satyr , strangely unreal for all that he cast a shadow and tossed the dust with his hoofs .
After him from the brake came a monstrous lout , a thing of horse and rhinoceros , chewing a straw as it came ; then appeared the Swine-woman and two Wolf-women ; then the Fox-bear witch , with her red eyes in her peaked red face , and then others , -- all hurrying eagerly .
As they came forward they began to cringe towards Moreau and chant , quite regardless of one another , fragments of the latter half of the litany of the Law , -- '' His is the Hand that wounds ; His is the Hand that heals , '' and so forth .
As soon as they had approached within a distance of perhaps thirty yards they halted , and bowing on knees and elbows began flinging the white dust upon their heads .
`` I do not see the Leopard-man , '' said I .
`` Where is the Sayer of the Law ? ''
said Moreau , and the hairy-grey monster bowed his face in the dust .
`` Who breaks the Law -- '' said Moreau , taking his eyes off his victim , and turning towards us ( it seemed to me there was a touch of exultation in his voice ) .
That is all I can tell definitely .
I saw the Leopard-man strike Moreau , and then everything spun about me until I was running headlong .
M'ling was ahead , close in pursuit of the fugitive .
Behind , their tongues already lolling out , ran the Wolf-women in great leaping strides .
The Swine folk followed , squealing with excitement , and the two Bull-men in their swathings of white .
Then came Moreau in a cluster of the Beast People , his wide-brimmed straw hat blown off , his revolver in hand , and his lank white hair streaming out .
The Hyena-swine ran beside me , keeping pace with me and glancing furtively at me out of his feline eyes , and the others came pattering and shouting behind us .
It may seem a strange contradiction in me , -- I can not explain the fact , -- but now , seeing the creature there in a perfectly animal attitude , with the light gleaming in its eyes and its imperfectly human face distorted with terror , I realised again the fact of its humanity .
In another moment other of its pursuers would see it , and it would be overpowered and captured , to experience once more the horrible tortures of the enclosure .
Abruptly I slipped out my revolver , aimed between its terror-struck eyes , and fired .
As I did so , the Hyena-swine saw the Thing , and flung itself upon it with an eager cry , thrusting thirsty teeth into its neck .
All about me the green masses of the thicket were swaying and cracking as the Beast People came rushing together .
One face and then another appeared .
In another moment he had beaten off the Hyena-swine with the handle of his whip , and he and Montgomery were keeping away the excited carnivorous Beast People , and particularly M'ling , from the still quivering body .
The hairy-grey Thing came sniffing at the corpse under my arm .
The other animals , in their animal ardour , jostled me to get a nearer view .
Had Moreau had any intelligible object , I could have sympathised at least a little with him .
I am not so squeamish about pain as that .
I could have forgiven him a little even , had his motive been only hate .
But he was so irresponsible , so utterly careless !
His curiosity , his mad , aimless investigations , drove him on ; and the Things were thrown out to live a year or so , to struggle and blunder and suffer , and at last to die painfully .
They were wretched in themselves ; the old animal hate moved them to trouble one another ; the Law held them back from a brief hot struggle and a decisive end to their natural animosities .
The morning was as still as death .
Not a whisper of wind was stirring ; the sea was like polished glass , the sky empty , the beach desolate .
In my half-excited , half-feverish state , this stillness of things oppressed me .
I tried to whistle , and the tune died away .
I swore again , -- the second time that morning .
Then I went to the corner of the enclosure and stared inland at the green bush that had swallowed up Moreau and Montgomery .
When would they return , and how ?
Then far away up the beach a little grey Beast Man appeared , ran down to the water 's edge and began splashing about .
I strolled back to the doorway , then to the corner again , and so began pacing to and fro like a sentinel upon duty .
Once I was arrested by the distant voice of Montgomery bawling , `` Coo-ee -- Moreau ! ''
My arm became less painful , but very hot .
I got feverish and thirsty .
My shadow grew shorter .
I watched the distant figure until it went away again .
Would Moreau and Montgomery never return ?
Three sea-birds began fighting for some stranded treasure .
`` What does it all mean ? ''
He shook his head , and turned once more to the brandy .
WHEN I saw Montgomery swallow a third dose of brandy , I took it upon myself to interfere .
He was already more than half fuddled .
I told him that some serious thing must have happened to Moreau by this time , or he would have returned before this , and that it behoved us to ascertain what that catastrophe was .
Montgomery raised some feeble objections , and at last agreed .
We had some food , and then all three of us started .
It is possibly due to the tension of my mind , at the time , but even now that start into the hot stillness of the tropical afternoon is a singularly vivid impression .
M'ling went first , his shoulder hunched , his strange black head moving with quick starts as he peered first on this side of the way and then on that .
He was unarmed ; his axe he had dropped when he encountered the Swine-man .
Teeth were _his_ weapons , when it came to fighting .
Montgomery followed with stumbling footsteps , his hands in his pockets , his face downcast ; he was in a state of muddled sullenness with me on account of the brandy .
My left arm was in a sling ( it was lucky it was my left ) , and I carried my revolver in my right .
Soon we traced a narrow path through the wild luxuriance of the island , going northwestward ; and presently M'ling stopped , and became rigid with watchfulness .
Montgomery almost staggered into him , and then stopped too .
Then , listening intently , we heard coming through the trees the sound of voices and footsteps approaching us .
`` He is not dead ; he is not dead , '' jabbered another .
The Monkey-man looked guiltily at the hairy-grey Thing .
`` He is dead , '' said this monster .
`` They saw . ''
`` Is there a Law ? ''
repeated the man in white .
`` Is there a Law , thou Other with the Whip ? ''
I looked at them squarely .
`` The Thing that bled , and ran screaming and sobbing , -- that is dead too , '' said the grey Thing , still regarding me .
`` See , '' said I , pointing to the dead brute , `` is the Law not alive ?
This came of breaking the Law . ''
`` What 's the good of getting away ?
I 'm an outcast .
Where am _I_ to join on ?
It 's all very well for _you_ , Prendick .
We ca n't leave him here to have his bones picked .
As it is -- And besides , what will become of the decent part of the Beast Folk ? ''
`` Well , '' said I , `` that will do to-morrow .
I 've been thinking we might make the brushwood into a pyre and burn his body -- and those other things .
Then what will happen with the Beast Folk ? ''
He talked thus inconclusively until at last I felt my temper going .
I went to the doorway .
They were already indistinct in the mist of the moonlight before Montgomery halted .
I saw him administer a dose of the raw brandy to M'ling , and saw the five figures melt into one vague patch .
Behind me lay the yard , vividly black-and-white in the moonlight , and the pile of wood and faggots on which Moreau and his mutilated victims lay , one over another .
They seemed to be gripping one another in one last revengeful grapple .
His wounds gaped , black as night , and the blood that had dripped lay in black patches upon the sand .
Then I saw , without understanding , the cause of my phantom , -- a ruddy glow that came and danced and went upon the wall opposite .
I misinterpreted this , fancied it was a reflection of my flickering lamp , and turned again to the stores in the shed .
I went on rummaging among them , as well as a one-armed man could , finding this convenient thing and that , and putting them aside for to-morrow 's launch .
My movements were slow , and the time passed quickly .
Insensibly the daylight crept upon me .
I knew at once what had happened .
I remembered the crash I had heard .
When I had rushed out to Montgomery 's assistance , I had overturned the lamp .
A sudden convulsion of rage shook me .
I was almost moved to batter his foolish head in , as he lay there helpless at my feet .
Then suddenly his hand moved , so feebly , so pitifully , that my wrath vanished .
He groaned , and opened his eyes for a minute .
I knelt down beside him and raised his head .
He opened his eyes again , staring silently at the dawn , and then they met mine .
I FACED these people , facing my fate in them , single-handed now , -- literally single-handed , for I had a broken arm .
In my pocket was a revolver with two empty chambers .
Among the chips scattered about the beach lay the two axes that had been used to chop up the boats .
The tide was creeping in behind me .
There was nothing for it but courage .
I looked squarely into the faces of the advancing monsters .
They avoided my eyes , and their quivering nostrils investigated the bodies that lay beyond me on the beach .
I took half-a-dozen steps , picked up the blood-stained whip that lay beneath the body of the Wolf-man , and cracked it .
They stopped and stared at me .
said I , with a break in my voice ; and they came back , hurrying and fearful , to the margin of the water , leaving long wakes of black in the silver .
At the water 's edge they stopped , turning and glaring into the sea as though they presently expected Montgomery to arise therefrom and exact vengeance .
They took care not to approach the place where they had thrown Montgomery into the water , but instead , carried the four dead Beast People slantingly along the beach for perhaps a hundred yards before they waded out and cast them away .
I began turning over in my mind the reason of Montgomery 's despair .
`` They will change , '' he said ; `` they are sure to change . ''
And Moreau , what was it that Moreau had said ?
`` The stubborn beast-flesh grows day by day back again . ''
Then I came round to the Hyena-swine .
I felt sure that if I did not kill that brute , he would kill me .
The Sayer of the Law was dead : worse luck .
They knew now that we of the Whips could be killed even as they themselves were killed .
Were they peering at me already out of the green masses of ferns and palms over yonder , watching until I came within their spring ?
Were they plotting against me ?
What was the Hyena-swine telling them ?
My imagination was running away with me into a morass of unsubstantial fears .
`` May I not come near you ? ''
IN this way I became one among the Beast People in the Island of Doctor Moreau .
When I awoke , it was dark about me .
My arm ached in its bandages .
I sat up , wondering at first where I might be .
I heard coarse voices talking outside .
Then I saw that my barricade had gone , and that the opening of the hut stood clear .
My revolver was still in my hand .
`` Who is that ? ''
I said in a hoarse whisper , the revolver still pointed .
`` I -- Master . ''
`` Are you the one I met on the beach ? ''
I felt in the darkness , and patted the Dog-man 's head .
`` It is well , '' I said again .
`` He is dead , he is dead !
the Master is dead ! ''
said the voice of the Ape-man to the right of me .
`` The House of Pain -- there is no House of Pain ! ''
`` He is not dead , '' said I , in a loud voice .
`` Even now he watches us ! ''
In the retrospect it is strange to remember how soon I fell in with these monsters ' ways , and gained my confidence again .
I had my quarrels with them of course , and could show some of their teeth-marks still ; but they soon gained a wholesome respect for my trick of throwing stones and for the bite of my hatchet .
And my Saint-Bernard-man 's loyalty was of infinite service to me .
I found their simple scale of honour was based mainly on the capacity for inflicting trenchant wounds .
Indeed , I may say -- without vanity , I hope -- that I held something like pre-eminence among them .
One or two , whom in a rare access of high spirits I had scarred rather badly , bore me a grudge ; but it vented itself chiefly behind my back , and at a safe distance from my missiles , in grimaces .
Except in the doubtful instance of Miss Mamie Nelson , Mr. Direck 's habit was good fortune .
Pleasant things came to him .
Such was his position as the salaried secretary of this society of thoughtful Massachusetts business men to which allusion has been made .
Its purpose was to bring itself expeditiously into touch with the best thought of the age .
Mr. Britling did not look at all as Mr. Direck had expected him to look .
He had expected an Englishman in a country costume of golfing tweeds , like the Englishman in country costume one sees in American illustrated stories .
Drooping out of the country costume of golfing tweeds he had expected to see the mildly unhappy face , pensive even to its drooping moustache , with which Mr. Britling 's publisher had for some faulty and unfortunate reason familiarised the American public .
Instead of this , Mr. Britling was in a miscellaneous costume , and mildness was the last quality one could attribute to him .
His moustache , his hair , his eyebrows bristled ; his flaming freckled face seemed about to bristle too .
His little hazel eyes came out with a `` ping '' and looked at Mr. Direck .
Mr. Britling was one of a large but still remarkable class of people who seem at the mere approach of photography to change their hair , their clothes , their moral natures .
No photographer had ever caught a hint of his essential Britlingness and bristlingness .
Only the camera could ever induce Mr. Britling to brush his hair , and for the camera alone did he reserve that expression of submissive martyrdom Mr. Direck knew .
And Mr. Direck was altogether unprepared for a certain casualness of costume that sometimes overtook Mr. Britling .
He was wearing now a very old blue flannel blazer , no hat , and a pair of knickerbockers , not tweed breeches but tweed knickerbockers of a remarkable bagginess , and made of one of those virtuous socialistic homespun tweeds that drag out into woolly knots and strings wherever there is attrition .
His stockings were worsted and wrinkled , and on his feet were those extraordinary slippers of bright-coloured bast-like interwoven material one buys in the north of France .
These were purple with a touch of green .
He had , in fact , thought of the necessity of meeting Mr. Direck at the station at the very last moment , and had come away from his study in the clothes that had happened to him when he got up .
His face wore the amiable expression of a wire-haired terrier disposed to be friendly , and it struck Mr. Direck that for a man of his real intellectual distinction Mr. Britling was unusually short .
`` Absolutely , '' said Mr. Direck .
`` I says to 'im , 'there 's one thing you 'ave n't tried , ' I says , '' the station-master continued , raising his voice by a Herculean feat still higher .
`` You know you 'ave n't 'urt that mud-guard , sir , not the slightest bit that matters , '' shouted the station-master .
`` I 've been a looking at it -- er .
It 's my fence that 's suffered most .
And that 's only strained the post a lil ' bit .
Shall I put your bag in behind , sir ? ''
Mr. Direck assented , and then , after a momentary hesitation , rewarded the station-master 's services .
Mr. Direck perceived that his host was trying to turn the car into a very beautiful gateway , with gate-houses on either side .
Then it was manifest that Mr. Britling had abandoned this idea , and then they came to a stop a dozen yards or so along the main road .
`` Missed it , '' said Mr. Britling , and took his hands off the steering wheel and blew stormily , and then whistled some bars of a fretful air , and became still .
Mr. Britling looked over his right shoulder and considered problems of curvature and distance .
`` I think , '' he said , `` I will go round outside the park .
It will take us a little longer , but it will be simpler than backing and manoeuvring here now ... .
These electric starters are remarkably convenient things .
Otherwise now I should have to get down and wind up the engine . ''
`` You see , she wo n't budge for the reverse ... .
She 's -- embedded ... .
Do you mind getting out and turning the wheel back ?
Then if I reverse , perhaps we 'll get a move on ... . ''
`` If you 'd just grip the spokes .
Yes , so ... .
One , Two , Three !
Well , let 's just sit here until somebody comes along to help us .
Somebody will come all right .
Wo n't you get up again ? ''
Mr. Britling stood up , and putting both hands to the sides of his mouth , shouted `` Yi-ah !
After shouting again , several times , it became manifest that he had attracted the attention of two willing but deliberate labouring men .
They emerged slowly , first as attentive heads , from the landscape .
With their assistance the car was restored to the road again .
Mr. Direck assisted manfully , and noted the respect that was given to Mr. Britling and the shillings that fell to the men , with an intelligent detachment .
They touched their hats , they called Mr. Britling `` Sir . ''
They examined the car distantly but kindly .
`` Ai n't 'urt 'e , not a bit 'e ai n't , not really , '' said one encouragingly .
And indeed except for a slight crumpling of the mud-guard and the detachment of the wire of one of the headlights the automobile was uninjured .
Mr. Britling resumed his seat ; Mr. Direck gravely and in silence got up beside him .
They started with the usual convulsion , as though something had pricked the vehicle unexpectedly and shamefully behind .
And from this point Mr. Britling , driving with meticulous care , got home without further mishap , excepting only that he scraped off some of the metal edge of his footboard against the gate-post of his very agreeable garden .
`` Tell me some , '' said Mr. Direck , smiling still more amiably .
He reflected with joyful eyes , Buster clean forgotten .
`` Every week , '' he said , `` she kicks some one . ''
`` Maud 's a treat , '' said the youthful Britling , relapsing into his native tongue .
`` Coloured gentleman ! ''
She gave a swift glance down the table as though she expected to see something purple with yellow spots .
`` Oh , that is one of Mr. Lawrence Carmine 's young men ! ''
she explained even more confidentially and with an air of discussing the silver bowl of roses before him .
`` He 's a great authority on Indian literature , he belongs to a society for making things pleasant for Indian students in London , and he has them down . ''
`` Very probably , '' said Mr. Britling , `` you 'd find something about them in the parish registers .
Lots of our registers go back three hundred years or more .
I 'll drive you over in my lil ' old car . ''
`` That 's my name for the lil ' car .
I 'm dying to take her for something like a decent run .
I 've only had her out four times altogether , and I've not got her up yet to forty miles .
Which I 'm told she ought to do easily .
We 'll consider that settled . ''
But Mr. Britling supplied no further information about Miss Corner .
`` You were so good as to ask me , Mr. Britling , a little while ago , what my first impression of England was .
Well , Mr. Britling , my first impression of England that seems to me to matter in the least is this : that it looks and feels more like the traditional Old England than any one could possibly have believed , and that in reality it is less like the traditional Old England than any one would ever possibly have imagined . ''
He was carried on even further .
He made a tremendous literary epigram .
`` I thought , '' he said , `` when I looked out of the train this morning that I had come to the England of Washington Irving .
I find it is not even the England of Mrs. Humphry Ward . ''
Mr. Direck found little reason to revise his dictum in the subsequent experiences of the afternoon .
Indeed the afternoon and the next day were steadily consistent in confirming what a very good dictum it had been .
The scenery was the traditional scenery of England , and all the people seemed quicker , more irresponsible , more chaotic , than any one could have anticipated , and entirely inexplicable by any recognised code of English relationships ... .
There was some amiable sparring between the worthy man and Mr. Britling about bringing Mr. Direck to church on Sunday morning .
`` He 's terribly Lax , '' said Mr. Dimple to Mr. Direck , smiling radiantly .
But then nowadays Everybody _is_ so Lax .
And he 's very Good to my Coal Club ; I do n't know what we should do without him .
So I just admonish him .
And if he does n't go to church , well , anyhow he does n't go anywhere else .
He may be a poor churchman , but anyhow he 's not a dissenter ... . ''
Mr. Britling had a moment of exposition as they approached the entrance .
cried Lady Frensham , and seemed to wipe away delusions with a rapid gesture of her hands .
`` Tell people how serious it is . ''
She was a large and dignified person with a kind of figure-head nobility of carriage , but Mr. Direck was suddenly reminded of a girl cousin of his who had been expelled from college for some particularly elaborate and aimless rioting ... .
Lady Frensham had a woman 's elusiveness .
`` Your Redmondites would welcome them with open arms . ''
`` They make it look worse than mere newspaper talk and speeches , '' Mr. Britling pressed .
`` Carson , it seems , was lunching with the German Emperor last autumn .
A fine fuss you 'd make if Redmond did that .
All this gun-running , too , is German gun-running . ''
`` Well , is n't it so ?
Here 's all this Ulster gun-running -- you heard how she talked of it ?
Is n't it enough to drive the south into open revolt ?
`` Is there very much , do you think , in the suggestion that some of this Ulster trouble is a German intrigue ?
You and Mr. Philbert were saying things -- ''
`` It makes me -- expressionless with anger , '' said Mr. Britling after a pause , reverting to his main annoyance .
`` They wo n't consider any compromise .
It 's sheer love of quarrelling ... .
Those people there think that nothing can possibly happen .
They are like children in a nursery playing at rebellion .
Until there is death at their feet they will never realise they are playing with loaded guns ... . ''
`` It 's a dry old book anyhow . ''
`` And how do you like living in an English household ? ''
said Mr. Direck , getting to business at once .
`` It 's interesting to an American to see this English establishment , and it must be still more interesting to a German . ''
`` I find it very different from Pomerania , '' said Herr Heinrich .
`` In some respects it is more agreeable , in others less so .
It is a pleasant life but it is not a serious life .
`` You go about among the people ? ''
`` No , I do not do that .
But I ask Mr. Carmine and Mrs. Britling and the boys many questions .
And sometimes I talk to the gardener . ''
`` Utopias came with cities , '' he said , considering the question .
`` And the first cities , as distinguished from courts and autocratic capitals , came with ships .
India and China belong to an earlier age .
Ships , trade , disorder , strange relationships , unofficial literature , criticism -- and then this idea of some novel remaking of society ... . ''
His remarks had the effect of floating off from some busy mill of thought within him .
Hitherto Mr. Direck had been inclined to think this silent observant youth , with his hands in his pockets and his shoulders a little humped , as probably shy and adolescently ineffective .
But the head was manifestly quite busy ... .
Before this question could be dealt with at all adequately , the two small boys became active in the garden beating in everybody to `` dress-up '' before supper .
The secretary , Teddy , came in a fatherly way to look after Mr. Direck and see to his draperies .
`` What 'll I come as ? ''
The company was assembling in the panelled hall , and made a brilliant show in the light of the acetylene candles against the dark background .
Mr. Britling in a black velvet cloak and black silk tights was a deeper shade among the shadows ; the high lights were Miss Corner and her sister , in glittering garments of peacock green and silver that gave a snake-like quality to their lithe bodies .
They were talking to the German tutor , who had become a sort of cotton Cossack , a spectacled Cossack in buff and bright green .
Mrs. Britling was dignified and beautiful in a purple djibbah , and her stepson had become a handsome still figure of black and crimson .
Teddy had contrived something elaborate and effective in the Egyptian style , with a fish-basket and a cuirass of that thin matting one finds behind washstands ; the small boys were brigands , with immensely baggy breeches and cummerbunds in which they had stuck a selection of paper-knives and toy pistols and similar weapons .
Mr. Carmine and his young man had come provided with real Indian costumes ; the feeling of the company was that Mr. Carmine was a mullah .
The aunt-like lady with the noble nose stood out amidst these levities in a black silk costume with a gold chain .
She refused , it seemed , to make herself absurd , though she encouraged the others to extravagance by nods and enigmatical smiles .
Nevertheless she had put pink ribbons in her cap .
A family of father , golden-haired mother , and two young daughters , sympathetically attired , had just arrived , and were discarding their outer wrappings with the assistance of host and hostess .
`` You dance ? ''
said Miss Cecily Corner .
Just for an instant Mr. Direck felt that this young man was a trifle superfluous ... .
It seemed unreasonable that any one should n't be in love with her ... .
Mr. Direck , too , understood now that he could , and they went off holding hands rather after the fashion of two skaters .
He liked it , and he had another attempt with one of the visitor daughters , who danced rather more formally , and then Teddy took the pianola and Mr. Direck was astonished by the spectacle of an eminent British thinker in a whirl of black velvet and extremely active black legs engaged in a kind of Apache dance in pursuit of the visitor wife .
In which Mr. Lawrence Carmine suddenly mingled .
And then there was a waltz , and Herr Heinrich bowed to and took the visitor wife round three times , and returned her very punctually and exactly to the point whence he had taken her , and the Indian young gentleman ( who must not be called `` coloured '' ) waltzed very well with Cecily .
Mr. Direck tried to take a tolerant European view of this brown and white combination .
But he secured her as soon as possible from this Asiatic entanglement , and danced with her again , and then he danced with her again .
`` Come and look at the moonlight , '' cried Mrs. Britling .
And presently Mr. Direck found himself strolling through the rose garden with Cecily .
She had the sweetest moonlight face , her white shining robe made her a thing of moonlight altogether .
If Mr. Direck had not been in love with her before he was now altogether in love .
Mamie Nelson , whose freakish unkindness had been rankling like a poisoned thorn in his heart all the way from Massachusetts , suddenly became Ancient History .
`` Come back to dance ! ''
cried Cecily , like one from whom a spell has just been broken .
And Mr. Direck , snatching at a vanishing scrap of everything he had not said , remarked , `` I shall never forget this evening . ''
one dance more ! ''
Of course , Mr. Britling 's circle must be a very `` Advanced '' circle ... .
that she puts in a great deal too much of her time upon housework and minding her sister 's baby . ''
`` She 's a very interesting and charming young lady indeed , '' said Mr. Direck .
`` With a sort of Western college freedom of mind -- and something about her that is n't American at all . ''
`` He 's always asking questions .
And you tell him any old thing and he goes and writes it down in his room upstairs , and afterwards asks you another like it in order to perplex himself by the variety of your answers .
He regards the whole world with a methodical distrust .
He wants to document it and pin it down .
He suspects it only too justly of disorderly impulses , and a capacity for self-contradiction .
He is the most extraordinary contrast to Teddy , whose confidence in the universe amounts almost to effrontery .
Teddy carries our national laxness to a foolhardy extent .
He is capable of leaving his watch in the middle of Claverings Park and expecting to find it a month later -- being carefully taken care of by a squirrel , I suppose -- when he happens to want it .
He's rather like a squirrel himself -- without the habit of hoarding .
He is incapable of asking a question about anything ; he would be quite sure it was all right anyhow .
He would feel that asking questions betrayed a want of confidence -- was a sort of incivility .
But my German , if you notice , -- his normal expression is one of grave solicitude .
He is like a conscientious ticket-collector among his impressions .
And did you notice how beautifully my pianola rolls are all numbered and catalogued ?
He set to work and did it as soon as he got here , just as a good cat when you bring it into the house sets to work and catches mice .
Previously the pianola music was chaos .
You took what God sent you .
`` I am frightened at times at all I do n't know about in that boy 's mind .
I know nothing of his religiosities .
He 's my son and he must have religiosities .
I know nothing of his ideas or of his knowledge about sex and all that side of life .
I do not know of the things he finds beautiful .
I can guess at times ; that 's all ; when he betrays himself ... .
You see , you do n't know really what love is until you have children .
One does n't love women .
Indeed you do n't !
One gives and gets ; it 's a trade .
One may have tremendous excitements and expectations and overwhelming desires .
That 's all very well in its way .
But the love of children is an exquisite tenderness : it rends the heart .
It 's a thing of God .
And I lie awake at nights and stretch out my hands in the darkness to this lad -- who will never know -- until his sons come in their time ... . ''
`` That 's very true , '' said Mr. Direck , to whom it seemed the time was ripe to say something .
`` This is the problem of America perhaps even more than of England .
Though I have not had the parental experience you have undergone ... .
I can see very clearly that a son is a very serious proposition . ''
Had n't he , she asked , had the privilege of loving her ?
She took herself at the value they had set upon her .
Well -- somehow -- that was n't right ... .
Had she even loved Booth Wilmington ?
Or had she just snatched at him ?
Was n't he , Direck , as good a man as Booth Wilmington anyhow ?
That was the word -- _merciful_ !
`` Have to do my fourteen miles before lunch , '' he said .
`` You have n't seen Manning about , have you ? ''
`` Manning , '' said Mr. Britling , `` is probably hiding up in my rose garden . ''
`` It 's the army side of the efficiency stunt , '' said Manning .
`` If there is such a thing as decadence , '' said Mr. Britling .
`` But suppose this Balkan trouble becomes acute , '' said Manning .
Now just at that moment there was a loud report ... .
He left her to suppose him uncommonly hot stuff at baseball .
So Miss Corner went off to get two sticks and a ball and came back to instruct Mr. Direck .
She said he had a good eye .
The two small boys scenting play in the air got sticks and joined them .
The overnight visitor 's wife appeared from the house in abbreviated skirts , and wearing formidable shin-guards .
With her abundant fair hair , which was already breaking loose , so to speak , to join the fray , she looked like a short stout dismounted Valkyr .
Her gaze was clear and firm .
Mr. Direck became aware of a tall , drooping man with long hair and long digressive legs in still longer white flannel trousers , and a face that was somehow familiar .
He was talking with affectionate intimacy to Manning , and suddenly Mr. Direck remembered that it was in Manning's weekly paper , _The Sectarian_ , in which a bitter caricaturist enlivened a biting text , that he had become familiar with the features of Manning 's companion .
It was Raeburn , Raeburn the insidious , Raeburn the completest product of the party system ... .
Well , that was the English way .
`` Come for the pick up ! ''
cried the youngest Britling , seizing upon Mr. Direck 's elbow .
It appeared that Mr. Britling and the overnight dinner guest -- Mr. Direck never learnt his name -- were picking up .
His captain presently confirmed this appointment .
The sides took their places for the game , and a kind of order became apparent to Mr. Direck .
In the centre stood Mr. Britling and the opposing captain , and the ball lay between them .
They were preparing to `` bully off '' and start the game .
In a line with each of them were four other forwards .
They all looked spirited and intent young people , and Mr. Direck wished he had had more exercise to justify his own alert appearance .
Behind each centre forward hovered one of the Britling boys .
Then on each side came a vaguer row of three backs , persons of gentler disposition or maturer years .
They included Mr. Raeburn , who was considered to have great natural abilities for hockey but little experience .
Mr. Raeburn was behind Mr. Direck .
Mrs. Britling was the centre back .
Then in a corner of Mr. Direck 's side was a small girl of six or seven , and in the half-circle about the goal a lady in a motoring dust coat and a very short little man whom Mr. Direck had not previously remarked .
Mr. Lawrence Carmine , stripped to the braces , which were richly ornamented with Oriental embroidery , kept goal for our team .
he said , and prepared to smite it .
Running hard to the help of Mr. Raeburn was the youngest Britling boy , a beautiful contrast .
It was like a puff ball supporting and assisting a conger eel .
In front of Mr. Direck the little stout man was being alert .
Teddy was supporting the attack near the middle of the field , crying `` Centre ! ''
while Mr. Britling , very round and resolute , was bouncing straight towards the threatened goal .
But Mrs. Teddy , running as swiftly as her sister , was between Teddy and the ball .
the little short man 's stick had clashed with Cecily 's .
Confused things happened with sticks and feet , and the little short man appeared to be trying to cut down Cecily as one cuts down a tree , she tried to pass the ball to her centre forward -- too late , and then Mrs. Teddy had intercepted it , and was flickering back towards Mr. Britling 's goal in a rush in which Mr. Direck perceived it was his duty to join .
But now the easy-fitting discipline of the Dower House style of hockey became apparent .
Mr. Direck had last observed the tall young Indian gentleman , full of vitality and anxious for destruction , far away in the distance on the opposing right wing .
But now , regardless of the more formal methods of the game , this young man had resolved , without further delay and at any cost , to hit the ball hard , and he was travelling like some Asiatic typhoon with an extreme velocity across the remonstrances of Mr. Britling and the general order of his side .
Mr. Direck became aware of him just before his impact .
There was a sort of collision from which Mr. Direck emerged with a feeling that one side of his face was permanently flattened , but still gallantly resolved to hit the comparatively lethargic ball .
He and the staggered but resolute Indian clashed sticks again .
And Mr. Direck had the best of it .
Years of experience could n't have produced a better pass to the captain ... .
The ball executed some rapid movements to and fro across the field .
Our side was pressing hard .
There was a violent convergence of miscellaneous backs and suchlike irregulars upon the threatened goal .
Mr. Britling's dozen was rapidly losing its disciplined order .
One of the sidecar ladies and the gallant Indian had shifted their activities to the defensive back , and with them was a spectacled gentleman waving his stick , high above all recognised rules .
Mr. Direck 's captain and both Britling boys hurried to join the fray .
Mr. Britling , who seemed to Mr. Direck to be for a captain rather too demagogic , also ran back to rally his forces by loud cries .
`` Pass outwardly ! ''
was the burthen of his contribution .
Mr. Manning , as goal-keeper , went to recover the ball , but one of the Britling boys politely anticipated him .
Perhaps these apprehensions affected his game .
At any rate he did nothing that pleased him in the second half , Cecily danced all over him and round and about him , and in the course of ten minutes her side had won the two remaining goals with a score of Five-One ; and five goals is `` game '' by the standards of Matching 's Easy .
The ball missed the legs of the lady with the noble nose by a kind of miracle , hit and glanced off the wheel of the perambulator , and went spinning into a border of antirrhinums .
`` I thought , '' said the aunt , indicating the goal posts by a facial movement , `` that those two sticks would be a sort of protection ... .
_Did_ they then ? ''
`` We 'll play some more after tea , '' said Cecily .
`` It will be cooler then . ''
`` You 're going to play very well , '' she said .
`` It 's like another world , '' said Mr. Britling , over his paper .
`` Assassination as a political method .
Can you imagine anything of the sort happening nowadays west of the Adriatic ?
Imagine some one assassinating the American Vice-President , and the bombs being at once ascribed to the arsenal at Toronto !
... We take our politics more sadly in the West ... .
Wo n't you have another egg , Direck ? ''
`` There is only one way to master such a thing as driving an automobile , '' said Mr. Britling outside his front door , as he took his place in the driver 's seat , `` and that is to resolve that from the first you will take no risks .
Be slow if you like .
Stop and think when you are in doubt .
But do nothing rashly , permit no mistakes . ''
`` You will laugh at me , '' said Mr. Britling ; `` but I 'm resolved to have no blunders this time . ''
Mr. Britling said they were in the ditch -- said it with quite unnecessary violence ... .
`` Do n't move for a bit , '' said the motor cyclist .
`` Your arm and side are rather hurt , I think ... . ''
If any one had told him he was going to be stunned for five or six minutes , cut about the brow and face and have a bone in his wrist put out , and that as a consequence he would find himself pleased and exhilarated , he would have treated the prophecy with ridicule ; but here he was lying stiffly on his back with his wrist bandaged to his side and smiling into the darkness even more brightly than he had smiled at the Essex landscape two days before .
The fact is pain hurts or irritates , but in itself it does not make a healthily constituted man miserable .
The expectation of pain , the certainty of injury may make one hopeless enough , the reality rouses our resistance .
Nobody wants a broken bone or a delicate wrist , but very few people are very much depressed by getting one .
People can be much more depressed by smoking a hundred cigarettes in three days or losing one per cent .
`` After all , '' he said , `` it 's true .
Why , I loved her before ever I set eyes on Mamie .
I loved her before I was put into pants .
That old portrait , there it was pointing my destiny ... .
It 's affinity ... .
It 's natural selection ... .
Anything might have been there in front of him .
And indeed now , out of the dreamland to which he could not escape something had come , something that screamed sharply ... .
But this was not fair !
He had hurt no child !
He had merely pitched out Mr. Direck and broken his arm ... .
He lay staring in despair -- as an involuntary God might stare at many a thing in this amazing universe -- staring at the little victim his imagination had called into being only to destroy ... .
Why are children ever crushed ?
You see , if Mrs. Harrowdean had left Mrs. Britling alone everything would have been quite tolerable .
He considered Mrs. Harrowdean a charming human being , and altogether better than he deserved .
Ever so much better .
She was all initiative and response and that sort of thing .
And she was so discreet .
She had her own reputation to think about , and one or two of her predecessors -- God rest the ashes of those fires !
-- had not been so discreet .
Yet one could not have this sort of thing going on behind Edith 's back .
All sorts of things one might have going on behind Edith 's back , but not this writing and saying of perfectly beastly things about Edith .
Nothing could alter the fact that Edith was his honour ... .
He began to recapitulate items in the catalogue of his escapades , and the details of his automobile misadventures mixed themselves up with the story of his heart steering .
For example there was that tremendous Siddons affair .
He had been taking the corner of a girlish friendship and he had taken it altogether too far .
What a frightful mess that had been !
When once one is off the road anything may happen , from a crumpled mud-guard to the car on the top of you .
And there was his forty miles an hour spurt with the great and gifted Delphine Marquise -- for whom he was to have written a play and been a perfect Annunzio .
Until Willersley appeared -- very like the motor-cyclist -- buzzing in the opposite direction .
And then had ensued angers , humiliations ... .
Had every man this sort of crowded catalogue ?
Was every forty-five-year-old memory a dark tunnel receding from the star of youth ?
It is surely a pity that life can not end at thirty .
It comes to one clean and in perfect order ... .
Mr. Britling sat up in his bed and beat at the bedclothes with his fists .
He uttered uncompleted vows , `` From this hour forth ... from this hour forth ... . ''
He must do something , he felt .
At any rate he had his experiences .
He could explain away .
Perhaps he might help to extricate , if things had got to that pitch .
It was in the doubly refracting nature of Mr. Britling 's mind that while he was deploring his inefficiency in regard to his son , he was also deploring the ineffectiveness of all his generation of parents .
Quite insensibly his mind passed over to the generalised point of view .
What was he doing now ?
Mr. Direck could not distinguish any definite sound .
A look of resignation came into Mr. Britling 's eyes .
`` That may happen .
But I think it improbable . ''
`` I suppose now , '' said Mr. Direck after a pause , `` that there is n't any strong party in Germany that wants a war .
That young Crown Prince , for example . ''
`` I used to be an alarmist about Germany , '' said Mr. Britling , `` but I have come to feel more and more confidence in the sound common sense of the mass of the German population , and in the Emperor too if it comes to that .
He is -- if Herr Heinrich will permit me to agree with his own German comic papers -- sometimes a little theatrical , sometimes a little egotistical , but in his operatic , boldly coloured way he means peace .
I am convinced he means peace ... . ''
It seemed as though Mr. Direck would be unable to write any letters until his wrist had mended .
Teddy tried him with a typewriter , but Mr. Direck was very awkward with his left hand , and then Mr. Britling suddenly remembered a little peculiarity he had which it was possible that Mr. Direck might share unconsciously , and that was his gift of looking-glass writing with his left hand .
Mr. Britling had found out quite by chance in his schoolboy days that while his right hand had been laboriously learning to write , his left hand , all unsuspected , had been picking up the same lesson , and that by taking a pencil in his left hand and writing from right to left , without watching what he was writing , and then examining the scrawl in a mirror , he could reproduce his own handwriting in exact reverse .
About three people out of five have this often quite unsuspected ability .
He demonstrated his gift , and then Miss Cecily Corner , who had dropped in in a casual sort of way to ask about Mr. Direck , tried it , and then Mr. Direck tried it .
And they could all do it .
And then Teddy brought a sheet of copying carbon , and so Mr. Direck , by using the carbon reversed under his paper , was restored to the world of correspondence again .
The squirrel , Mr. Direck gathered , had been bought by Mrs. Britling for the boys some month or so ago ; it had been christened `` Bill '' and adored and then neglected , until Herr Heinrich took it over .
It had filled a place in his ample heart that the none too demonstrative affection of the Britling household had left empty .
He abandoned his pursuit of philology almost entirely for the cherishing and adoration of this busy , nimble little creature .
He carried it off to his own room , where it ran loose and took the greatest liberties with him and his apartment .
It was an extraordinarily bold and savage little beast even for a squirrel , but Herr Heinrich had set his heart and his very large and patient will upon the establishment of sentimental relations .
He believed that ultimately Bill would let himself be stroked , that he would make Bill love him and understand him , and that his would be the only hand that Bill would ever suffer to touch him .
In the meanwhile even the untamed Bill was wonderful to watch .
One could watch him forever .
His front paws were like hands , like a musician 's hands , very long and narrow .
`` He would be a musician if he could only make his fingers go apart , because when I play my violin he listens .
He is attentive . ''
The entire household became interested in Herr Heinrich 's attacks upon Bill 's affection .
They watched his fingers with particular interest because it was upon those that Bill vented his failures to respond to the stroking advances .
`` To-day I have stroked him once and he has bitten me three times , '' Herr Heinrich reported .
`` Soon I will stroke him three times and he shall not bite me at all ... .
Also yesterday he climbed up me and sat on my shoulder , and suddenly bit my ear .
It was not hard he bit , but sudden .
Assisted by the two small boys , Herr Heinrich presently got a huge bough of oak and brought it into his room , converting the entire apartment into the likeness of an aviary .
`` For this , '' said Herr Heinrich , looking grave and diplomatic through his glasses , `` Billy will be very grateful .
And it will give him confidence with me .
It will make him feel we are in the forest together . ''
`` If it amuses him , '' said Mr. Britling .
For some moments there was a lively struggle before Billy was gripped .
He chattered furiously and bit Mr. Britling twice .
Then Mr. Britling was out in the passage with the wriggling lump of warm fur in his hand , and paddling along in the darkness to the door of Herr Heinrich .
He opened it softly .
`` Billy , '' said Mr. Britling by way of explanation , dropped his capture on the carpet , and shut the door on the touching reunion .
Mr. Britling had no mercy in his mind for the treason of obstinate egotism and for persistence in a mistaken course .
His own temperamental weaknesses lay in such different directions .
He was always ready to leave one trail for another ; he was always open to conviction , trusting to the essentials of his character for an ultimate consistency .
He hated Carson in those days as a Scotch terrier might hate a bloodhound , as something at once more effective and impressive , and exasperatingly , infinitely less intelligent .
Edith 's home was more prosperous than Mary 's ; she brought her own money to it ; the bringing up of her children was a far more efficient business than Mary 's instinctive proceedings .
Hugh had very nearly died in his first year of life ; some summer infection had snatched at him ; that had tied him to his father 's heart by a knot of fear ; but no infection had ever come near Edith 's own nursery .
And it was Hugh that Mr. Britling had seen , small and green-faced and pitiful under an anaesthetic for some necessary small operation to his adenoids .
His younger children had never stabbed to Mr. Britling 's heart with any such pitifulness ; they were not so thin-skinned as their elder brother , not so assailable by the little animosities of dust and germ .
And out of such things as this evolved a shapeless cloud of championship for Hugh .
Jealousies and suspicions are latent in every human relationship .
We go about the affairs of life pretending magnificently that they are not so , pretending to the generosities we desire .
And in all step-relationships jealousy and suspicion are not merely latent , they stir .
But he brought his successes more readily than he brought his troubles .
So far as he himself was concerned he was disposed to take a humorous view of the things that went wrong and did n't come off with him , but as a `` Tremendous Set-Down for the Proud Parent '' they resisted humorous treatment ... .
Now the trouble that he had been hesitating to bring before his father was concerned with that very grave interest of the young , his Object in Life .
It had nothing to do with those erotic disturbances that had distressed his father 's imagination .
Whatever was going on below the surface of Hugh 's smiling or thoughtful presence in that respect had still to come to the surface and find expression .
But he was bothered very much by divergent strands in his own intellectual composition .
Two sets of interests pulled at him , one -- it will seem a dry interest to many readers , but for Hugh it glittered and fascinated -- was crystallography and molecular physics ; the other was caricature .
Both aptitudes sprang no doubt from the same exceptional sensitiveness to form .
As a schoolboy he exercised both very happily , but now he was getting to the age of specialisation , and he was fluctuating very much between science and art .
After a spell of scientific study he would come upon a fatigue period and find nothing in life but absurdities and a lark that one could represent very amusingly ; after a bout of funny drawings his mind went back to his light and crystals and films like a Magdalen repenting in a church .
After his public school he had refused Cambridge and gone to University College , London , to work under the great and inspiring Professor Cardinal ; simultaneously Cardinal had been arranging to go to Cambridge , and Hugh had scarcely embarked upon his London work when Cardinal was succeeded by the dull , conscientious and depressing Pelkingham , at whose touch crystals became as puddings , bubble films like cotton sheets , transparency vanished from the world , and X rays dwarfed and died .
And Hugh degenerated immediately into a scoffing trifler who wished to give up science for art .
They walked across her absurd little park to the summer-house with the view on the afternoon of his arrival , and they discussed the Irish pamphlet which was now nearly finished .
There was a reservation in her voice that made him wait .
`` There was your letter in the _Nation_ the other day , '' she said .
`` Why _do_ you get drawn into arguments ?
I wanted to rush into the _Nation_ and pick you up and wipe the anger off you , and carry you out of it all -- into some quiet beautiful place . ''
Was he indeed burying a marvellous gift under the dust of current affairs ?
When at last in the warm evening light they strolled back from the summer-house to dinner he had definitely promised her that he would take up and finish `` The Silent Places. ''
... And think over the Irish pamphlet again before he published it ... .
On the twenty-first of July Gladys came back repaired and looking none the worse for her misadventure .
Next day he drove her very carefully over to Pyecrafts , hoping to drug his uneasiness with the pretence of a grand passion and the praises of `` The Silent Places , '' that beautiful work of art that was so free from any taint of application , and alas !
he found Mrs. Harrowdean in an evil mood .
He had been away from her for ten days -- ten whole days .
No doubt Edith had manoeuvred to keep him .
How was he , poor simple soul !
to tell that she had n't ?
That was the prelude to a stormy afternoon .
And having delivered himself of this judgment Mr. Britling , a little surprised at the rapid vigour of his anger , once he had let it loose , came suddenly to an end of his words , made a renunciatory gesture with his arms , and as if struck with the idea , rushed out of her room and out of the house to where Gladys stood waiting .
He got into her and started her up , and after some trouble with the gear due to the violence of his emotion , he turned her round and departed with her -- crushing the corner of a small bed of snapdragon as he turned -- and dove her with a sulky sedulousness back to the Dower House and newspapers and correspondence and irritations , and that gnawing and irrational sense of a hollow and aimless quality in the world that he had hoped Mrs. Harrowdean would assuage .
And the further he went from Mrs. Harrowdean the harsher and unjuster it seemed to him that he had been to her .
I like talking to you and I do n't like talking to you .
And I see now it is because you keep on talking of my Personality and your Personality .
That makes me uncomfortable .
It 's like having some one following me about with a limelight .
And in a sort of way I do like it .
I like it and I 'm flattered by it , and then I go off and dislike it , dislike the effect of it .
I find myself trying to be what you have told me I am -- sort of acting myself .
I want to glance at looking-glasses to see if I am keeping it up .
It 's just exactly what Mr. Britling says in his book about American women .
They act themselves , he says ; they get a kind of story and explanation about themselves and they are always trying to make it perfectly plain and clear to every one .
Well , when you do that you ca n't think nicely of other things . ''
`` I do n't even know for myself , '' she said .
After which exchanges they went along the lane , into the road by the park fencing , and so to the little gate that lets one into the park , without another word .
`` Of course I wo n't pretend there have n't been others , '' Mr. Direck suddenly resumed .
But I can assure you I 've never felt the depth and height or anything like the sort of Quiet Clear Conviction ... .
And now I 'm just telling you these things , Miss Corner , I do n't know whether it will interest you if I tell you that you 're really and truly the very first love I ever had as well as my last .
I 've had sent over -- I got it only yesterday -- this lil ' photograph of a miniature portrait of one of my ancestor 's relations -- a Corner just as you are .
It 's here ... . ''
`` Could n't you perhaps say something of the same kind -- such as I 've been trying to say ? ''
said Mr. Direck presently , with a note of earnest helpfulness .
`` I 'd be very glad if you could . ''
`` But that is n't _real_ happening , '' said Cecily .
There came a hiatus in their talk .
`` You do n't think I 'm just a slow American sort of portent ? ''
She tried to meet his eyes with a pleasant frankness , and perhaps she was franker than she meant to be .
Mr. Direck stood up too .
And , after the fashion of our still too adolescent world , Mr. Britling and Mrs. Harrowdean proceeded to negotiate these extremely unromantic matters in the phrases of that simple , honest and youthful passionateness which is still the only language available , and at times Mr. Britling came very near persuading himself that he had something of the passionate love for her that he had once had for his Mary , and that the possible loss of her had nothing to do with the convenience of Pyecrafts or any discretion in the world .
Though indeed the only thing in the whole plexus of emotional possibility that still kept anything of its youthful freshness in his mind was the very strong objection indeed he felt to handing her over to anybody else in the world .
And in addition he had just a touch of fatherly feeling that a younger man would not have had , and it made him feel very anxious to prevent her making a fool of herself by marrying a man out of spite .
He felt that since an obstinate lover is apt to be an exacting husband , in the end the heavy predominance of Oliver might wring much sincerer tears from her than she had ever shed for himself .
But that generosity was but the bright edge to a mainly possessive jealousy .
She was astonished to get no reply for two days .
She got no reply for two days because remarkable things were happening to the telegraph wires of England just then , and her message , in the hands of a boy scout on a bicycle , reached Mr. Britling 's house only on Monday afternoon .
He was then at Claverings discussing the invasion of Belgium that made Britain 's participation in the war inevitable , and he did not open the little red-brown envelope until about half-past six .
He failed to mark the date and hours upon it , but he perceived that it was essentially a challenge .
He was expected , he saw , to go over at once with his renovated Gladys and end this unfortunate clash forever in one striking and passionate scene .
His mind was now so full of the war that he found this the most colourless and unattractive of obligations .
But he felt bound by the mysterious code of honour of the illicit love affair to play his part .
He postponed his departure until after supper -- there was no reason why he should be afraid of motoring by moonlight if he went carefully -- because Hugh came in with Cissie demanding a game of hockey .
Hockey offered a nervous refreshment , a scampering forgetfulness of the tremendous disaster of this war he had always believed impossible , that nothing else could do , and he was very glad indeed of the irruption ... .
On Saturday Sir Edward Carson was still in the central limelight , Russia had intervened and demanded more time for Serbia , and the _Daily Chronicle_ declared the day a critical one for Europe .
Dublin with bayonet charges and bullets thrust Serbia into a corner on Monday .
No shots had yet been fired in the East , and the mischief in Ireland that Germany had counted on was well ahead .
Sir Edward Grey was said to be working hard for peace .
`` I have deferred my service until I have done my thesis , '' said Herr Heinrich .
`` Now all that will be -- Piff !
And my thesis three-quarters finished . ''
`` I have to go , '' he said .
`` I must go right up to London to-day .
To an address in Bloomsbury .
Then they will tell me how to go to Germany .
I must pack and I must get the taxi-cab from the junction and I must go .
Why are there no trains on the branch line on Sundays for me to go by it ? ''
`` Then why go ? ''
`` Stay here with us .
We all like you .
Stay here and do not answer your mobilisation summons . ''
`` All this morning , '' said Herr Heinrich , expanding in the warmth of sympathy , `` I have been trying to pack and I have been unable to pack .
My mind is too greatly disordered .
I have been told not to bring much luggage .
Mrs. Britling , please . ''
`` If I could leave much of my luggage , my clothes , some of them , and particularly my violin , it would be much more to my convenience .
I do not care to be mobilised with my violin .
There may be much crowding .
Then I would but just take my rucksack ... . ''
`` If you will leave your things packed up . ''
The voices , gruff and shrill , sounded raggedly together .
The dog-rose hedge cut off the sight of the little face .
Then the pink head bobbed up again .
He was standing up and waving the panama hat .
Careless of sunstroke ... .
`` Oh , they wo n't put a youngster like that in the fighting line , '' said Mr. Britling .
`` He 's had no training yet .
And he has to wear glasses .
How can he shoot ?
They 'll make a clerk of him . ''
It was more than touching ; in its minute , absurd way it was symbolical and prophetic , it was the miniature of one small life uprooted .
The door stood wide open , as he had left it open , careless of all the little jealousies and privacies of occupation and ownership .
Even the windows were wide open as though he had needed air ; he who had always so sedulously shut his windows since first he came to England .
Across the empty fireplace stretched the great bough of oak he had brought in for Billy , but now its twigs and leaves had wilted , and many had broken off and fallen on the floor .
Billy 's cage stood empty upon a little table in the corner of the room .
Instead of packing , the young man had evidently paced up and down in a state of emotional elaboration ; the bed was disordered as though he had several times flung himself upon it , and his books had been thrown about the room despairfully .
He had made some little commencements of packing in a borrowed cardboard box .
The violin lay as if it lay in state upon the chest of drawers , the drawers were all partially open , and in the middle of the floor sprawled a pitiful shirt of blue , dropped there , the most flattened and broken-hearted of garments .
The fireplace contained an unsuccessful pencil sketch of a girl 's face , torn across ... .
`` Have you any news ? ''
`` They are in Luxemburg , '' said Manning .
`` That can only mean that they are coming through Belgium . ''
`` Then I was wrong , '' said Mr. Britling , `` and the world is altogether mad .
And so there is nothing else for us to do but win ... .
Why could they not leave Belgium alone ? ''
`` It 's been in all their plans for the last twenty years , '' said Manning .
`` I think , '' said old Lady Meade , `` that this is the suicide of Germany .
They can not possibly fight against Russia and France and ourselves .
Why have they ever begun it ? ''
`` This is n't the sort of war , '' he said , `` that is settled by counting guns and rifles .
Something that has oppressed us all has become intolerable and has to be ended .
And it will be ended .
I do n't know what soldiers and politicians think of our prospects , but I do know what ordinary reasonable men think of the business .
I know that all we millions of reasonable civilised onlookers are prepared to spend our last shillings and give all our lives now , rather than see Germany unbeaten .
I know that the same thing is felt in America , and that given half a chance , given just one extra shake of that foolish mailed fist in the face of America , and America also will be in this war by our side .
Italy will come in .
She is bound to come in .
France will fight like one man .
I'm quite prepared to believe that the Germans have countless rifles and guns ; have got the most perfect maps , spies , plans you can imagine .
I'm quite prepared to hear that they have got a thousand tremendous surprises in equipment up their sleeves .
I 'm quite prepared for sweeping victories for them and appalling disasters for us .
Those are the first things .
What I do know is that the Germans understand nothing of the spirit of man ; that they do not dream for a moment of the devil of resentment this war will arouse .
Did n't we all trust them not to let off their guns ?
Was n't that the essence of our liberal and pacific faith ?
And here they are in the heart of Europe letting off their guns ? ''
`` I forgot if he said London .
But I suppose a London more or less hardly matters .
They do n't think we shall dare come in , but if we do they will Zeppelin the fleet and walk through our army -- if you can call it an army . ''
`` Of course the efficiency of their preparations is almost incredible , '' said another of Lady Meade 's party .
`` The world , '' he said , startling Mrs. Britling with his sudden speech , `` will be intolerable to live in , it will be unendurable for a decent human being , unless we win this war .
His brain was so busy with such stuff that for a time he stared at Mrs. Harrowdean 's belated telegram without grasping the meaning of a word of it .
He realised slowly that it was incumbent upon him to go over to her , but he postponed his departure very readily in order to play hockey .
Besides which it would be a full moon , and he felt that summer moonlight was far better than sunset and dinner time for the declarations he was expected to make .
And then he went on phrase-making again about Germany until he had actually bullied off at hockey .
Teddy looked at him questioningly .
And at one place there was a great bolting of rabbits across the road , almost under his wheels ... .
And then , perhaps fifty yards farther along , and this time almost indignantly : `` She ought to have married him long ago ... . ''
He put his automobile in the garage , and then went round under the black shadow of his cedars to the front door .
He had no key , and for a long time he failed to rouse his wife by flinging pebbles and gravel at her half-open window .
But at last he heard her stirring and called out to her .
At breakfast there was no talk of anything but war .
Hugh was as excited as a cat in thundery weather , and the small boys wanted information about flags .
The Russian and the Serbian flag were in dispute , and the flag page of Webster 's Dictionary had to be consulted .
Newspapers and letters were both abnormally late , and Mr. Britling , tiring of supplying trivial information to his offspring , smoked cigarettes in the garden .
He had an idea of intercepting the postman .
His eyes and ears informed him of the approach of Mrs. Faber 's automobile .
It was an old , resolute-looking machine painted red , and driven by a trusted gardener ; there was no mistaking it .
`` I wo n't come in , '' cried Mrs. Faber , `` but I thought I 'd tell you .
I've been getting food . ''
`` It 's Famine ! ''
she said , turning to Mr. Britling .
`` I 've laid hands on all I can .
I 've got the children to consider . ''
`` What have you got ? ''
said Mr. Britling with an inquiring movement towards the automobile .
`` Cerebos salt , '' she said .
`` One gets carried away a little .
I just got hold of it and carried it out to the car .
I thought we might have to salt things later . ''
But look at all my flour !
That 's what will go first ... . ''
`` Moratorium , '' reflected Mr. Britling ; `` Moratorium .
What nonsense you talk !
It 's something that delays , of course .
Nothing to do with death .
Just a temporary stoppage of payments ... .
Of course there 's bound to be a tremendous change in values ... . ''
Even if the bank did reopen Mr. Britling was aware that his current balance was low ; at the utmost it amounted to twenty or thirty pounds .
He had been expecting cheques from his English and American publishers , and the usual _Times_ cheque .
Suppose these payments were intercepted !
`` Those who join a panic make a panic .
After all , there is just as much food in the world as there was last month .
And short of burning it the only way of getting rid of it is to eat it .
And the harvests are good .
Why begin a scramble at a groaning board ? ''
`` We sha n't .
And anyhow , you must n't begin hoarding , even if it means hardship . ''
`` But the bank will open again presently , '' she said .
`` And people about here trust us . ''
`` The scale has altered .
It does not matter now in the least if we are ruined .
It does not matter in the least if we have to live upon potatoes and run into debt for our rent .
These now are the most incidental of things .
A week ago they would have been of the first importance .
Here we are face to face with the greatest catastrophe and the greatest opportunity in history .
We have to plunge through catastrophe to opportunity .
There is nothing to be done now in the whole world except to get the best out of this tremendous fusing up of all the settled things of life . ''
He had got what he wanted .
He left her standing upon the lawn and hurried back to his desk ... .
`` I wish I could see it like that , '' said Mr. Carmine .
`` To the first conquest of all , '' said Teddy ... .
`` War makes men bitter and narrow , '' said Mr. Carmine .
Mr. Britling was in a phase of imaginative release .
Such a release was one of the first effects of the war upon many educated minds .
Things that had seemed solid forever were visibly in flux ; things that had seemed stone were alive .
Every boundary , every government , was seen for the provisional thing it was .
He talked of his World Congress meeting year by year , until it ceased to be a speculation and became a mere intelligent anticipation ; he talked of the `` manifest necessity '' of a Supreme Court for the world .
He beheld that vision at the Hague , but Mr. Carmine preferred Delhi or Samarkand or Alexandria or Nankin .
`` Let us get away from the delusion of Europe anyhow , '' said Mr. Carmine ... .
After lunch Mr. Britling and Mr. Carmine went on talking .
Nothing else was possible .
They repeated things they had already said .
They went into things more thoroughly .
They sat still for a time , and then suddenly broke out with some new consideration ... .
It had been their custom to play skat with Herr Heinrich , who had shown them the game very explicitly and thoroughly .
But there was no longer any Herr Heinrich -- and somehow German games were already out of fashion .
The two philosophers admitted that they had already considered skat to be complicated without subtlety , and that its chief delight for them had been the pink earnestness of Herr Heinrich , his inability to grasp their complete but tacit comprehension of its innocent strategy , and his invariable ill-success to bring off the coups that flashed before his imagination .
`` None of these things they are saying about the war , '' she said , `` really matter in the slightest degree .
It is all about a spoilt carpet and nothing else in the world -- a madman and a spoilt carpet .
If people had paid the slightest attention to common sense none of this war would have happened .
The thing was perfectly well known .
He was a delicate child , difficult to rear and given to screaming fits .
Consequently he was never crossed , allowed to do everything .
Nobody but his grandmother had the slightest influence with him .
And she prevented him spoiling this carpet as completely as he wished to do .
The story is perfectly well known .
It was at Windsor -- at the age of eight .
After that he had but one thought : war with England ... .
And this disposition kept coming to the surface throughout the afternoon , now in a casual allusion , now in some deliberate jest .
The small boys had discovered the goose step , and it filled their little souls with amazement and delight .
That human beings should consent to those ridiculous paces seemed to them almost incredibly funny .
They tried it themselves , and then set out upon a goose-step propaganda .
Letty and Cissie had come up to the Dower House for tea and news , and they were enrolled with Teddy and Hugh .
The six of them , chuckling and swaying , marched , in vast scissor strides across the lawn .
`` Left , '' cried Hugh .
`` Keep stiffer , '' said the youngest Britling .
There was no invitation from the government and no organisation for any general participation in war .
People talked unrestrictedly ; every one seemed to be talking ; they waved flags and displayed much vague willingness to do something .
Any opportunity of service was taken very eagerly .
Lord Kitchener was understood to have demanded five hundred thousand men ; the War Office arrangements for recruiting , arrangements conceived on a scale altogether too small , were speedily overwhelmed by a rush of willing young men .
The flow had to be checked by raising the physical standard far above the national average , and recruiting died down to manageable proportions .
There was a quite genuine belief that the war might easily be too exclusively considered ; that for the great mass of people it was a disturbing and distracting rather than a vital interest .
The phase `` Business as Usual '' ran about the world , and the papers abounded in articles in which going on as though there was no war at all was demonstrated to be the truest form of patriotism .
`` Leave things to Kitchener '' was another watchword with a strong appeal to the national quality .
`` Business as usual during Alterations to the Map of Europe '' was the advertisement of one cheerful barber , widely quoted ... .
Hugh was at home all through August .
He had thrown up his rooms in London with his artistic ambitions , and his father was making all the necessary arrangements for him to follow Cardinal to Cambridge .
Meanwhile Hugh was taking up his scientific work where he had laid it down .
He gave a reluctant couple of hours in the afternoon to the mysteries of Little-go Greek , and for the rest of his time he was either working at mathematics and mathematical physics or experimenting in a little upstairs room that had been carved out of the general space of the barn .
It was only at the very end of August that it dawned upon him or Mr. Britling that the war might have more than a spectacular and sympathetic appeal for him .
Hitherto contemporary history had happened without his personal intervention .
He did not see why it should not continue to happen with the same detachment .
The last elections -- and a general election is really the only point at which the life of the reasonable Englishman becomes in any way public -- had happened four years ago , when he was thirteen .
`` I came to Europe in a perfectly friendly spirit -- and I must say I am surprised .
Practically I have been thrown out , neck and crop .
All my luggage is lost .
Away at some one-horse junction near the Dutch frontier that I ca n't even learn the name of .
There 's joy in some German home , I guess , over my shirts ; they were real good shirts .
This tweed suit I have is all the wardrobe I 've got in the world .
All my money -- good American notes -- well , they laughed at them .
And when I produced English gold they suspected me of being English and put me under arrest ... .
I can assure you that the English are most unpopular in Germany at the present time , thoroughly unpopular ... .
Considering that they are getting exactly what they were asking for , these Germans are really remarkably annoyed ... .
Well , I had to get the American consul to advance me money , and I 've done more waiting about and irregular fasting and travelling on an empty stomach and viewing the world , so far as it was permitted , from railway sidings -- for usually they made us pull the blinds down when anything important was on the track -- than any cow that ever came to Chicago ... .
I was handed as freight -- low grade freight ... .
It doesn't bear recalling . ''
Mr. Direck assumed as grave and gloomy an expression as the facial habits of years would permit .
Mr. Britling thought there were a few little obstacles .
Mr. Britling said they would soon be disillusioned .
`` Grown-up people , ordinary intelligent experienced people , taking war seriously , talking of punishing England ; it 's a revelation .
A sort of solemn enthusiasm .
High and low ... .
`` Every man would turn out and take a shot at them , '' said Letty .
He roused himself to describe his experiences at some length , and the extraordinary disturbance of his mind .
He related more particularly his attempts to see the sights of Cologne during the stir of mobilisation .
After a time his narrative flow lost force , and there was a general feeling that he ought to be left alone with Cissie .
Teddy had a letter that must be posted ; Letty took the infant to crawl on the mossy stones under the pear tree .
Mr. Direck leant against the window-sill and became silent for some moments after the door had closed on Letty .
`` But how ? ''
But Cissie was n't to be got back so easily .
The war was already beckoning to them in the cottage , and drawing them down from the auditorium into the arena .
Mr. Direck 's expression was that of a man who is suddenly shown strange lights upon the world .
He stood in the sunshine reading the _Observer_ which the gardener 's boy had just brought from the May Tree .
He had spread it open on a garden table under the blue cedar , and father and son were both reading it , each as much as the other would let him .
There was fresh news from France , a story of further German advances , fighting at Senlis -- '' But that is quite close to Paris ! ''
-- and the appearance of German forces at Nogent-sur-Seine .
`` Sur Seine ! ''
`` But where can that be ?
South of the Marne ?
Or below Paris perhaps ? ''
Hugh opened the map of northern France .
`` Here it is , '' he said .
He paused before the last distasteful conclusion .
`` Practically , '' he admitted , taking his dose , `` they have got Paris .
It is almost surrounded now . ''
He paused despairfully and stared at the map .
`` Then we can get on with our work again . ''
Mr. Britling was a flame of exalted voluntaryism , of patriotic devotion , that day .
Such lapses from knowledge to faith are perhaps necessary that human heroism may be possible ... .
His impression of the streets through which he passed was an impression of great unrest .
There were noticeably fewer omnibuses and less road traffic generally , but there was a quite unusual number of drifting pedestrians .
The current on the pavements was irritatingly sluggish .
There were more people standing about , and fewer going upon their business .
This was particularly the case with the women he saw .
Many of them seemed to have drifted in from the suburbs and outskirts of London in a state of vague expectation , unable to stay in their homes .
Everywhere there were the flags of the Allies ; in shop windows , over doors , on the bonnets of automobiles , on people 's breasts , and there was a great quantity of recruiting posters on the hoardings and in windows : `` Your King and Country Need You '' was the chief text , and they still called for `` A Hundred Thousand Men '' although the demand of Lord Kitchener had risen to half a million .
There were also placards calling for men on nearly all the taxicabs .
The big windows of the offices of the Norddeutscher Lloyd in Cockspur Street were boarded up , and plastered thickly with recruiting appeals .
Mr. Britling suddenly understood the significance of Wilkins and his dummy gun .
The sharp-featured man nodded , and then became explicit .
Zinc was necessary for cartridges ; it had to be refined zinc and very pure , or the shooting went wrong .
Well , we had let the refining business drift away from England to Belgium and Germany .
There were just one or two British firms still left ... .
Unless we bucked up tremendously we should get caught short of cartridges ... .
At any rate of cartridges so made as to ensure good shooting .
`` And there you are ! ''
said the sharp-featured man .
But the sharp-featured man did not at that time represent any considerable section of public thought .
`` I suppose after all we can get rifles from America , '' said the lawyer .
`` And as for zinc , if the shortage is known the shortage will be provided for ... . ''
A momentary vision danced before Mr. Britling 's eyes of red flannel petticoats being torn up in a rapid improvisation of soldiers to resist a sudden invasion .
Passing washerwomen suddenly requisitioned .
But one must not let oneself be laughed out of good intentions because of ridiculous accessories .
The idea at any rate was the sound one ... .
`` It will all glitter again in a little time , '' he told himself .
`` Of course , '' said Mr. Britling , `` these things are not going to be done without a conflict .
We are n't going to take hold of our country which we have neglected so long without a lot of internal friction .
But in England we can make these readjustments without revolution .
It is our strength ... .
He did most of the table talk , and all that mattered .
Teddy was an assenting voice , Hugh was silent and apparently a little inattentive , Mrs. Britling was thinking of the courses and the servants and the boys , and giving her husband only half an ear , Captain Carmine said little and seemed to be troubled by some disagreeable preoccupation .
Now and then he would endorse or supplement the things Mr. Britling was saying .
Thrice he remarked : `` People still do not begin to understand .
The man had been guarding a tunnel , and he had been knocked down by one train when crossing the line behind another .
So it was that the bomb of Sarajevo killed its first victim in Essex .
Captain Carmine had found the body .
He had found the body in a cloudy moonlight ; he had almost fallen over it ; and his sensations and emotions had been eminently disagreeable .
He had had to drag the body -- it was very dreadfully mangled -- off the permanent way , the damaged , almost severed head had twisted about very horribly in the uncertain light , and afterwards he had found his sleeves saturated with blood .
He had not noted this at the time , and when he had discovered it he had been sick .
He had thought the whole thing more horrible and hateful than any nightmare , but he had succeeded in behaving with a sufficient practicality to set an example to his men .
Since this had happened he had not had an hour of dreamless sleep .
`` What does Letty think ? ''
said Mr. Britling after a pause .
This was right , of course -- the only right thing -- and yet he was surprised .
There was a little pause .
Both father and son had rehearsed this scene in their minds several times , and now they found that they had no use for a number of sentences that had been most effective in these rehearsals .
Mr. Britling scratched his cheek with the end of his pen .
`` I 'm glad you want to go , Hugh , '' he said .
A slight hesitation appeared in Hugh 's eyes .
`` I suppose not , '' he said .
`` So it 's really just helping at the furthest end of the shove , '' Hugh endorsed , but still with that touch of reservation in his manner ... .
When he had gone , the craving for a personal share in the nation's physical exertions became overpowering in Mr. Britling .
He wanted , he felt , to `` get his skin into it . ''
He had decided that the volunteer movement was a hopeless one .
The War Office , after a stout resistance to any volunteer movement at all , decided to recognise it in such a manner as to make it ridiculous .
The volunteers were to have no officers and no uniforms that could be remotely mistaken for those of the regulars , so that in the event of an invasion the Germans would be able to tell what they had to deal with miles away .
Wilkins found his conception of a whole nation , all enrolled , all listed and badged according to capacity , his dream of every one falling into place in one great voluntary national effort , treated as the childish dreaming of that most ignorant of all human types , a `` novelist . ''
_Punch_ was delicately funny about him ; he was represented as wearing a preposterous cocked hat of his own design , designing cocked hats for every one .
Wilkins was told to `` shut up '' in a multitude of anonymous letters , and publicly and privately to `` leave things to Kitchener . ''
To bellow in loud clear tones `` leave things to Kitchener , '' and to depart for the theatre or the river or an automobile tour , was felt very generally at that time to be the proper conduct for a patriot .
There was a very general persuasion that to become a volunteer when one ought to be just modestly doing nothing at all , was in some obscure way a form of disloyalty ... .
Mr. Manning , to whom he was delivering this discourse , switched him on to a new track by asking what he meant by `` Neo-European . ''
But the conflict of manners and customs that followed the invasion of the English villages by French and Belgian refugees did not always present the immigrants as Catholics and the hosts as `` Neo-European . ''
In the case of Mr. Dimple it was the other way round .
He met Mr. Britling in Claverings park and told him his troubles ... .
The Christmas of 1914 found England , whose landscape had hitherto been almost as peaceful and soldierless as Massachusetts , already far gone along the path of transformation into a country full of soldiers and munition makers and military supplies .
The soldiers came first , on the well-known and greatly admired British principle of `` first catch your hare '' and then build your kitchen .
Always before , Christmas had been a time of much gaiety and dressing up and prancing and two-stepping at the Dower House , but this year everything was too uncertain to allow of any gathering of guests .
Hugh got leave for the day after Christmas , but Teddy was tied ; and Cissie and Letty went off with the small boy to take lodgings near him .
The Van der Pants had hoped to see an English Christmas at Matching 's Easy , but within three weeks of Christmas Day Mr. Van der Pant found a job that he could do in Nottingham , and carried off his family .
The two small boys cheered their hearts with paper decorations , but the Christmas Tree was condemned as too German , and it was discovered that Santa Claus had suddenly become Old Father Christmas again .
The small boys discovered that the price of lead soldiers had risen , and were unable to buy electric torches , on which they had set their hearts .
There was to have been a Christmas party at Claverings , but at the last moment Lady Homartyn had to hurry off to an orphan nephew who had been seriously wounded near Ypres , and the light of Claverings was darkened .
He could think continuously day by day of nothing else .
His mind was as caught as a galley slave , as unable to escape from tugging at this oar .
All his universe was a magnetic field which oriented everything , whether he would have it so or not , to this one polar question .
They came hating and threatening the lands they outraged .
They sought occasion to do frightful deeds ... .
When they could not be frightful in the houses they occupied , then to the best of their ability they were destructive and filthy .
The facts took Mr. Britling by the throat ... .
The first thing that really pierced Mr. Britling with the conviction that there was something essentially different in the English and the German attitude towards the war was the sight of a bale of German comic papers in the study of a friend in London .
They were filled with caricatures of the Allies and more particularly of the English , and they displayed a force and quality of passion -- an incredible force and quality of passion .
Their amazing hate and their amazing filthiness alike overwhelmed Mr. Britling .
There was no appearance of national pride or national dignity , but a bellowing patriotism and a limitless desire to hurt and humiliate .
They were red in the face and they spat .
He sat with these violent sheets in his hands -- _ashamed_ .
He read on to the end .
`` It 's colossal .
What is to happen to the world if these people prevail ? ''
`` That is n't at all my idea . ''
`` I hope our little Heinrich has n't got seriously damaged ... .
He may be wounded ... . ''
Afterwards there had been a periodic sending of postcards and greetings , which indeed only the war had ended .
Each month the war grew bitterer and more cruel .
Early in 1915 the Germans began their submarine war , and for a time Mr. Britling 's concern was chiefly for the sailors and passengers of the ships destroyed .
He noted with horror the increasing indisposition of the German submarines to give any notice to their victims ; he did not understand the grim reasons that were turning every submarine attack into a desperate challenge of death .
For the Germans under the seas had pitted themselves against a sea power far more resourceful , more steadfast and skilful , sterner and more silent , than their own .
It was not for many months that Mr. Britling learnt the realities of the submarine blockade .
Submarine after submarine went out of the German harbours into the North Sea , never to return .
No prisoners were reported , no boasting was published by the British fishers of men ; U boat after U boat vanished into a chilling mystery ... .
Only later did Mr. Britling begin to hear whispers and form ideas of the noiseless , suffocating grip that sought through the waters for its prey .
`` All _our_ men are n't angels , '' said a cheerful young captain back from the front .
`` If you had heard a little group of our East London boys talking of what they meant to do when they got into Germany , you 'd feel anxious ... . ''
`` Life had a wrangling birth .
On the head of every one of us rests the ancestral curse of fifty million murders . ''
It was during these prowling nights in the first winter of the war that Mr. Britling planned a new writing that was to go whole abysses beneath the facile superficiality of `` And Now War Ends . ''
It was to be called the `` Anatomy of Hate . ''
It was to deal very faithfully with the function of hate as a corrective to inefficiency .
So long as men were slack , men must be fierce .
This conviction pressed upon him ... .
Her voice weakened , but it was evident she wanted to say something more .
After that she was silent for some minutes , and took no notice of his whispers .
Then she recollected what had been in her mind .
She put out a hand that sought for Mr. Britling 's sleeve .
There came a little tug at his sleeve .
`` I think that is enough , '' said the nurse , who had stood forgotten at his elbow .
And then after an interval , very distinctly , `` The Duke of Wellington .
My ancestor -- in reality ... .
Publish and be damned . ''
All the while that Mr. Britling had been indulging in these imaginative slaughterings and spending the tears and hate that had gathered in his heart , his reason had been sitting apart and above the storm , like the sun waiting above thunder , like a wise nurse watching and patient above the wild passions of a child .
And all the time his reason had been maintaining silently and firmly , without shouting , without speech , that the men who had made this hour were indeed not devils , were no more devils than Mr. Britling was a devil , but sinful men of like nature with himself , hard , stupid , caught in the same web of circumstance .
`` Kill them in your passion if you will , '' said reason , `` but understand .
This thing was done neither by devils nor fools , but by a conspiracy of foolish motives , by the weak acquiescences of the clever , by a crime that was no man 's crime but the natural necessary outcome of the ineffectiveness , the blind motives and muddleheadedness of all mankind . ''
`` Hate which passes into creative power ; gentleness which is indolence and the herald of euthanasia ... .
`` Even that vile airship was a ship of fools !
He whispered the words .
No unfamiliar words could have had the same effect of comfort and conviction .
Hugh 's letters were becoming a very important influence upon Mr. Britling 's thought .
Hugh had always been something of a letter-writer , and now what was perhaps an inherited desire to set things down was manifest .
He had been accustomed to decorate his letters from school with absurd little sketches -- sometimes his letters had been all sketches -- and now he broke from drawing to writing and back to drawing in a way that pleased his father mightily .
The father loved this queer trick of caricature ; he did not possess it himself , and so it seemed to him the most wonderful of all Hugh 's little equipment of gifts .
Mr. Britling used to carry these letters about until their edges got grimy ; he would show them to any one he felt capable of appreciating their youthful freshness ; he would quote them as final and conclusive evidence to establish this or that .
He did not dream how many thousands of mothers and fathers were treasuring such documents .
He thought other sons were dull young men by comparison with Hugh .
The young man returned to these criticisms in a later letter .
`` Our officers are beastly good chaps , nearly all of them .
That 's where the perplexity of the whole thing comes in .
If only they were n't such good chaps !
If only they were like the Prussian officers to their men , then we 'd just take on a revolution as well as the war , and make everything tidy at once .
But they are decent , they are charming ... .
Only they do not think hard , and they do not understand that doing a job properly means doing it as directly and thought-outly as you possibly can .
They wo n't worry about things .
If their tempers were worse perhaps their work might be better .
They wo n't use maps or timetables or books of reference .
When we move to a new place they pick up what they can about it by hearsay ; not one of our lot has the gumption to possess a contoured map or a Michelin guide .
They have hearsay minds .
They are fussy and petty and wasteful -- and , in the way of getting things done , pretentious .
By their code they 're paragons of honour .
Courage -- they're all right about that ; no end of it ; honesty , truthfulness , and so on -- high .
They have a kind of horsey standard of smartness and pluck , too , that is n't bad , and they have a fine horror of whiskers and being unbuttoned .
But the mistake they make is to class thinking with whiskers , as a sort of fussy sidegrowth .
Instead of classing it with unbuttonedupness .
`` And the extraordinary thing is it makes me begin to get regular fond of Ortheris .
And one day in early June while those figs were still only a hope , Teddy appeared at the Dower House with Letty , to say good-bye before going to the front .
He was going out in a draft to fill up various gaps and losses ; he did not know where .
Essex was doing well but bloodily over there .
Mrs. Britling had tea set out upon the lawn under the blue cedar , and Mr. Britling found himself at a loss for appropriate sayings , and talked in his confusion almost as though Teddy 's departure was of no significance at all .
He was still haunted by that odd sense of responsibility for Teddy .
Teddy was not nearly so animated as he had been in his pre-khaki days ; there was a quiet exaltation in his manner rather than a lively excitement .
He knew now what he was in for .
He knew now that war was not a lark , that for him it was to be the gravest experience he had ever had or was likely to have .
There were no more jokes about Letty 's pension , and a general avoidance of the topics of high explosives and asphyxiating gas ... .
Teddy replied with a wave of the hand .
`` It is n't in proportion , '' Mr. Britling admitted .
He had a feeling -- every now and again in the last few years he had had the same feeling -- as though he was only just beginning to discover Hugh .
This perpetual rediscovery of one 's children is the experience of every observant parent .
He had always considered Hugh as a youth , and now a man stood over him and talked , as one man to another .
And this man , this very new man , mint new and clean and clear , filled Mr. Britling with surprise and admiration .
He felt himself as a cowardly brute , fat , wheezy , out of training , sheltering behind this dear one branch of Mary 's life .
The war became a nightmare vision ... .
In the morning Mr. Britling 's face was white from his overnight brain storm , and Hugh 's was fresh from wholesome sleep .
They walked about the lawn , and Mr. Britling talked hopefully of the general outlook until it was time for them to start to the station ... .
`` Good luck , Hugh ! ''
For some days Mr. Britling could think of nothing but Hugh , and always with a dull pain at his heart .
He felt as he had felt long ago while he had waited downstairs and Hugh upstairs had been under the knife of a surgeon .
But this time the operation went on and still went on .
At the worst his boy had but one chance in five of death or serious injury , but for a time he could think of nothing but that one chance .
He felt it pressing upon his mind , pressing him down ... .
And they went on to talk newspaper just as if the world was where it had always been .
`` I confess I 'm taking to the game .
I wish at times I had gone into the O.T.C .
with Teddy , and got a better hold of it .
I was too high-browed about this war business .
I dream now of getting a commission ... .
`` There 's a kind of hardening not only of the body but of the mind through all this life out here .
One is living on a different level .
You know -- just before I came away -- you talked of Dower-House-land -- and outside .
Our men here are kind enough still to little things -- kittens or birds or flowers .
Behind the front , for example , everywhere there are Tommy gardens .
Some are quite bright little patches .
But it 's just nonsense to suppose we are tender to the wounded up here -- and , putting it plainly , there is n't a scrap of pity left for the enemy .
Not a trace of such feeling .
They were tender about the wounded in the early days -- men tell me -- and reverent about the dead .
It 's all gone now .
There have been atrocities , gas , unforgettable things .
Our people are inclined now to laugh at a man who gets hit , and to be annoyed at a man with a troublesome wound .
The other day , they say , there was a big dead German outside the Essex trenches .
He became a nuisance , and he was dragged in and taken behind the line and buried .
After he was buried , a kindly soul was putting a board over him with 'Somebody 's Fritz ' on it , when a shell burst close by .
It blew the man with the board a dozen yards and wounded him , and it restored Fritz to the open air .
He was lifted clean out .
He flew head over heels like a windmill .
This was regarded as a tremendous joke against the men who had been at the pains of burying him .
For a time nobody else would touch Fritz , who was now some yards behind his original grave .
Then as he got worse and worse he was buried again by some devoted sanitarians , and this time the inscription was 'Somebody's Fritz .
And as luck would have it , he was spun up again .
The trench howled with laughter and cries of 'Good old Fritz ! '
'This is n't the Resurrection , Fritz . '
`` War is an exciting game -- that I never wanted to play .
It excites once in a couple of months .
And the rest of it is dirt and muddle and boredom , and smashed houses and spoilt roads and muddy scenery and boredom , and the lumbering along of supplies and the lumbering back of the wounded and weary -- and boredom , and continual vague guessing of how it will end and boredom and boredom and boredom , and thinking of the work you were going to do and the travel you were going to have , and the waste of life and the waste of days and boredom , and splintered poplars and stink , everywhere stink and dirt and boredom ... .
And all because these accursed Prussians were too stupid to understand what a boredom they were getting ready when they pranced and stuck their chests out and earnt the praises of Mr. Thomas Carlyle ... .
_Gott strafe Deutschland_ ... .
So send me some books , books of dreams , books about China and the willow-pattern plate and the golden age and fairyland .
And send them soon and address them very carefully ... . ''
`` But the word is 'missing . '
In the hall there was lying a letter from Hugh that had come by the second post .
It was a relief even to see it ... .
`` Tell the bruddykinses I 'm glad they 're going to Brinsmead school .
Later on , I suppose , they will go on to Statesminster .
I suppose that you do n't care to send them so far in these troubled times ... .
`` And now about those trenches -- as I promised .
The great thing to grasp is that they are narrow .
They are a sort of negative wall .
They are more like giant cracks in the ground than anything else ... .
But perhaps I had better begin by telling how we got there .
We started about one in the morning ladened up with everything you can possibly imagine on a soldier , and in addition I had a kettle -- filled with water -- most of the chaps had bundles of firewood , and some had extra bread .
We marched out of our quarters along the road for a mile or more , and then we took the fields , and presently came to a crest and dropped into a sort of maze of zigzag trenches going up to the front trench .
These trenches , you know , are much deeper than one 's height ; you do n't see anything .
It 's like walking along a mud-walled passage .
You just trudge along them in single file .
Every now and then some one stumbles into a soakaway for rainwater or swears at a soft place , or somebody blunders into the man in front of him .
This seems to go on for hours and hours .
It certainly went on for an hour ; so I suppose we did two or three miles of it .
At one place we crossed a dip in the ground and a ditch , and the trench was built up with sandbags up to the ditch and there was a plank .
Overhead there were stars , and now and then a sort of blaze thing they send up lit up the edges of the trench and gave one a glimpse of a treetop or a factory roof far away .
Then for a time it was more difficult to go on because you were blinded .
Suddenly just when you were believing that this sort of trudge was going on forever , we were in the support trenches behind the firing line , and found the men we were relieving ready to come back .
`` Nothing happened to us .
We got back all right .
It was silly to have left that parapet only one bag thick .
There 's the truth , and all of my first time in the trenches .
`` Anyhow the little machine cocked itself up on end .
Then down it came like dropping a knife ... .
Four days later this suspicion was confirmed by the arrival of another letter from Hugh in which he told of his second spell in the trenches .
This time things had been much more lively .
They had been heavily shelled and there had been a German attack .
And this time he was writing to his father , and wrote more freely .
He had scribbled in pencil .
`` Our guns behind felt for the German guns .
It was the damnest racket .
Like giant lunatics smashing about amidst colossal pots and pans .
They fired different sorts of shells ; stink shells as well as Jack Johnsons , and though we did n't get much of that at our corner there was a sting of chlorine in the air all through the afternoon .
Most of the stink shells fell short .
We had n't masks , but we rigged up a sort of protection with our handkerchiefs .
And it did n't amount to very much .
It was rather like the chemistry room after Heinrich and the kids had been mixing things .
Most of the time I was busy helping with the men who had got hurt .
Suddenly there came a lull .
Then some one said the Germans were coming , and I had a glimpse of them .
`` Life is very primitive here -- which does n't mean that one is getting down to anything fundamental , but only going back to something immediate and simple .
It 's fetching and carrying and getting water and getting food and going up to the firing line and coming back .
One goes on for weeks , and then one day one finds oneself crying out , 'What is all this for ?
When is it to end ? '
I seemed to have something ahead of me before this war began , education , science , work , discoveries ; all sorts of things ; but it is hard to feel that there is anything ahead of us here ... .
If he had overcome every other difficulty in the way to an heroic pose there was still Hugh 's unconquerable lucidity of outlook .
War _was_ a madness ... .
There surely is the worst doubt of all for a man whose son is facing death .
Were we indeed standing against tyranny for freedom ?
`` And scores of thousands have n't ! ''
`` They are the men I 'm thinking of .
_ '' cried Mr. Britling .
Raeburn , after reflection , decided to answer .
`` As far as it is stupid , yes .
There 's a lot of blame coming ; there 's bound to be a day of reckoning , and I suppose we 've all got an instinctive disposition to find a scapegoat for our common sins .
The Tory press is pretty rotten , and there 's a strong element of mere personal spite -- in the Churchill attacks for example .
Our 'old families' seem to have got vulgar-spirited imperceptibly -- in a generation or so .
They quarrel and shirk and lay blame exactly as bad servants do -- and things are still far too much in their hands .
Things are getting muffed , there can be no doubt about that -- not fatally , but still rather seriously .
And the government -- it was human before the war , and we've added no archangels .
There 's mutual suspicion .
You never know what newspaper office Lloyd George wo n't be in touch with next .
He 's honest and patriotic and energetic , but he 's mortally afraid of old women and class intrigues .
He does n't know where to get his backing .
He 's got all a labour member 's terror of the dagger at his back .
There's a lack of nerve , too , in getting rid of prominent officers -- who have friends . ''
`` I 'd stop his _Daily Mail_ , '' said Raeburn .
`` I 'd leave _The Times_ , but I 'd stop the _Daily Mail_ on the score of its placards alone .
It translates him into the shrieks and yells of underlings .
The plain fact is that Northcliffe is scared out of his wits by German efficiency -- and in war time when a man is scared out of his wits , whether he is honest or not , you put his head in a bag or hold a pistol to it to calm him ... .
What is the good of all this clamouring for a change of government ?
We have n't a change of government .
It 's like telling a tramp to get a change of linen .
Our men , all our public men , are second-rate men , with the habits of advocates .
There is nothing masterful in their minds .
How can you expect the system to produce anything else ?
But they are doing as well as they can , and there is no way of putting in any one else now , and there you are . ''
`` My boy in Flanders , '' said Mr. Britling , `` says about the same thing .
He says our officers have never learnt to count beyond ten , and that they are scared at the sight of a map ... . ''
`` There 'll be just the devil to pay , '' said Raeburn .
No one seemed able to see more than that .
A silence fell on the little party .
He stopped , and there was a little interval of silence .
Captain Carmine tossed the fag end of his cigar very neatly into a tub of hydrangeas .
`` Three thousand years ago in China , '' he said , `` there were men as sad as we are , for the same cause . ''
`` You ca n't imagine how things narrow down when one is close up against them .
One does not know what is happening even within a few miles of us , until we get the newspapers .
Then , with a little reading between the lines and some bold guessing , we fit our little bit of experience with a general shape .
Of course I 've wondered at times about Teddy .
But oddly enough I 've never thought of him very much as being out here .
It's queer , I know , but I have n't .
I ca n't imagine why ... .
`` But , anyhow , your son is sound and well -- if sorrowful and angry .
We were relieved that night .
And there are rumours that very soon we are to have a holiday and a refit .
We lost rather heavily .
We have been praised .
But all along , Essex has done well .
I ca n't reckon to get back yet , but there are such things as leave for eight-and-forty hours or so in England ... .
And Cecily made things much more difficult .
She was pitiless with him .
She kept him aloof .
`` How can I let you make love to me , '' she said , `` when our English men are all going to the war , when Teddy is a prisoner and Hugh is in the trenches .
If I were a man -- ! ''
In the quiet of his London hotel he thought it all out .
He sat at a writing-table making notes of a perfectly lucid statement of the reasonable , balanced liberal American opinion .
An instinct of caution determined him to test it first on Mr. Britling .
Mr. Direck made obvious inquiries .
Like many Britons Mr. Britling had that touch of patriotic feeling towards America which takes the form of impatient criticism .
No one in Britain ever calls an American a foreigner .
To see faults in Germany or Spain is to tap boundless fountains of charity ; but the faults of America rankle in an English mind almost as much as the faults of England .
Mr. Britling could explain away the faults of England readily enough ; our Hanoverian monarchy , our Established Church and its deadening effect on education , our imperial obligations and the strain they made upon our supplies of administrative talent were all very serviceable for that purpose .
But there in America was the old race , without Crown or Church or international embarrassment , and it was still falling short of splendid .
His speech to Mr. Direck had the rancour of a family quarrel .
Let me only give a few sentences that were to stick in Mr. Direck 's memory .
He got up and stood irresolute .
He knew he was being preposterously unfair to America , and outrageously uncivil to a trusting guest ; he knew he had no business now to end the talk in this violent fashion .
But it was an enormous relief .
And to mend matters -- _No !
_ He was glad he 'd said these things ... .
Mr. Direck heard him cross the hall and slam the door of the little parlour ... .
He stopped at the stile in the lane , and sat thinking deeply .
`` Only one thing will convince her , '' he said .
That was all the card would hold .
He would not look towards her , but for a time all his senses were alert to hear whether she followed him .
Safe in the summer-house he could glance back .
`` I ca n't _reach_ you ! ''
`` I ca n't reach you .
I would do anything ... .
You with your heart half broken ... . ''
His heart was so sore and wounded that he could not endure that another human being should go wretched .
He sat down in his chair and drew her upon his knees , and said everything he could think of to console her and reassure her and make her feel that she was of value to him .
He spoke of every pleasant aspect of their lives , of every aspect , except that he never named that dear pale youth who waited now ... .
He could wait a little longer ... .
Very softly he went towards the passage door , and still more softly felt his way across the landing and down the staircase .
Once or twice he paused to listen .
`` Presently we shall see his name in a list of prisoners , '' she said .
`` He is a wounded prisoner in Germany . ''
`` I do n't know that .
Must it wait for that ?
I thought the Germans were so systematic that it did n't matter . ''
She took the parcel back to the cottage .
Cissie and she had been sitting in silence before the fire .
She had been knitting -- she knitted very badly -- and Cissie had been pretending to read , and had been watching her furtively .
Cissie eyed the slow , toilsome growth of the slack woolwork for a time , and the touch of angry effort in every stroke of the knitting needles .
Then she was stirred to remonstrance .
Letty met her with a pitiless stare .
`` He is a prisoner , '' she said .
`` Is n't that enough ?
Why do you jab at me by saying that ?
Is n't that enough despicable trickery for God even to play on Teddy -- our Teddy ?
To the very last moment he shall not be dead .
Until the war is over .
Until six months after the war ... .
She sat very still brooding on that idea for a time , and then stood up .
Cissie lay awake that night thinking about her sister as if she had never thought about her before .
Would people presently begin to murder the makers of the Great War ?
What a strange thing it would be in history if so there came a punishment and end to the folly of kings !
`` Where are you going ? ''
Hitherto she had had an angry sense of being deprived of Teddy -- almost as though he were keeping away from her .
Now , there was no more Teddy to be deprived of ... .
He stared back at her , until his plump pink face was all consternation .
He was extraordinarily distressed .
It was as if a thousand unspoken things had been said between them .
`` Oh , Teddy , Teddy , '' she cried through her streaming tears .
`` How could you leave me ?
How can I bear it ? ''
Never a tear had she shed since the news first came , and now she could weep , she could weep her grief out .
She abandoned herself unreservedly to this blessed relief ... .
He hesitated as if he would go on , and then he knelt down on the grass a little way from her and seated himself .
There was an interval of silence .
`` They have killed millions .
Millions -- who had fathers and mothers and wives and sweethearts ... . ''
`` An amazement ... a blow ... a splattering of blood .
Rags of tormented skin and brain stuff ... .
What had taken eighteen years -- love and care ... . ''
`` And he 's broken up and thrown away ... .
Like a cartridge case by the side of a covert ... . ''
Then , after a pause , `` The Treaty of Bucharest was an evil treaty .
It must be undone .
Whatever this German King of Bulgaria does , that treaty must be undone and the Bulgarians united again into one people .
They must have themselves , whatever punishment they deserve , they must have nothing more , whatever reward they win . ''
`` And you think it will come ? ''
`` It will come . ''
`` And you believe that men will listen to such schemes ? ''
`` But -- _Yes !
_ '' said Mr. Britling .
`` No , '' said Mr. Britling .
`` Yes , '' said Mr. Britling after a long pause ; `` I do believe in God . ''
`` Who lets these things happen ! ''
She raised herself on her arm and thrust her argument at him with her hand .
`` Who kills my Teddy and your Hugh -- and millions . ''
`` But it 's your teachers and catechisms have set you against God ... .
They want to make out He owns all Nature .
And all sorts of silly claims .
Like the heralds in the Middle Ages who insisted that Christ was certainly a great gentleman entitled to bear arms .
But God is within Nature and necessity .
Necessity is a thing beyond God -- beyond good and ill , beyond space and time , a mystery everlastingly impenetrable .
God is nearer than that .
Necessity is the uttermost thing , but God is the innermost thing .
Closer He is than breathing and nearer than hands and feet .
He is the Other Thing than this world .
Greater than Nature or Necessity , for he is a spirit and they are blind , but not controlling them ... .
Not yet ... . ''
Letty considered these strange ideas .
`` Do n't you see that it must be like that , Letty ?
Do n't you see that it must be like that ? ''
`` This God who struggles , '' she repeated .
`` I have never thought of Him like that . ''
`` Of course He must be like that , '' said Mr. Britling .
`` How can God be a Person ; how can He be anything that matters to man , unless He is limited and defined and -- human like ourselves ... .
With things outside Him and beyond Him . ''
She had left Mr. Britling to his atlas .
He lay prone under the hedge with it spread before him .
His occupation would have seemed to her only a little while ago the absurdest imaginable .
He was drawing boundaries on his maps very carefully in red ink , with a fountain pen .
But now she understood .
It was a man in queer-looking foreign clothes , baggy trousers of some soft-looking blue stuff and a blouse , and he had a white-bandaged left arm .
He had a hat stuck at the back of his head , and a beard ... .
He was entirely a stranger , a foreigner .
Was she going insane ?
Of course he was a stranger !
And she began to run forward , with legs that seemed misfits , waving her hands about , and as she ran she saw more and more certainly that this wounded man in strange clothing was Teddy .
She ran faster and still faster , stumbling and nearly falling .
If she did not get to him speedily the world would burst .
It was all right .
She had always known it was all right .
( Hold close to him . )
Except just for a little while .
But that had been foolishness .
Had n't she always known he was alive ?
And here he was alive !
( Hold close to him . )
Only it was so good to be sure -- after all her torment ; to hold him , to hang about him , to feel the solid man , kissing her , weeping too , weeping together with her .
`` Teddy my love ! ''
`` My hand has gone , dear little Letty .
It 's my left hand , luckily .
I shall have to wear a hook like some old pirate ... . ''
The bomb had driven some splinters of glass and corrugated iron into Teddy 's wrist ; it seemed a small place at first ; it did n't trouble him for weeks .
But then some dirt got into it .
Letty did not piece together the whole story at first .
She did not want the story very much ; she wanted to know about this hand and arm .
For instance , Teddy was presently talking to Mr. Direck .
`` I 've told a lie , '' he said triumphantly .
`` I 've shifted my birthplace six hundred miles .
`` Mind you , I do n't admit a thing that Cissie has ever said about America -- not one thing .
You do n't understand the sort of proposition America is up against .
America is the New World , where there are no races and nations any more ; she is the Melting Pot , from which we will cast the better state .
I 've believed that always -- in spite of a thousand little things I believe it now .
I go back on nothing .
I 'm not fighting as an American either .
I 'm fighting simply as myself ... .
I 'm not going fighting for England , mind you .
Do n't you fancy that .
I do n't know I'm so particularly in love with a lot of English ways as to do that .
I do n't see how any one can be very much in love with your Empire , with its dead-alive Court , its artful politicians , its lords and ladies and snobs , its way with the Irish and its way with India , and everybody shifting responsibility and telling lies about your common people .
I'm not going fighting for England .
I 'm going fighting for Cissie -- and justice and Belgium and all that -- but more particularly for Cissie .
And anyhow I ca n't look Pa Britling in the face any more ... .
And I want to see those trenches -- close .
I reckon they 're a thing it will be interesting to talk about some day ... .
So I 'm going , '' said Mr. Direck .
`` But chiefly -- it 's Cissie .
`` No , '' she said , arresting him with her hand .
`` But just now -- No , he will think of Hugh again ... .
Let him go ... .
He has God and his atlas there ... .
They 're more than you think . ''
But this night even this circle of lamplight would not hold his mind .
Doubt had crept into this last fastness .
He pulled the papers towards him , and turned over the portion he had planned .
Man has come , floundering and wounding and suffering , out of the breeding darknesses of Time , that will presently crush and consume him again .
Why not flounder with the rest , why not eat , drink , fight , scream , weep and pray , forget Hugh , stop brooding upon Hugh , banish all these priggish dreams of `` The Better Government of the World , '' and turn to the brighter aspects , the funny and adventurous aspects of the war , the Chestertonian jolliness , _Punch_ side of things ?
Think you because your sons are dead that there will be no more cakes and ale ?
Let mankind blunder out of the mud and blood as mankind has blundered in ... .
Their disposition towards under-feeding and a certain lack of fine sentiment were the only flaws in the English scheme that Herr Heinrich admitted .
He certainly found the English unfeeling .
His heart went even less satisfied than his Magen .
He was a being of expressive affections ; he wanted great friendships , mysterious relationships , love .
He tried very bravely to revere and to understand and be occultly understood by Mr. Britling ; he sought long walks and deep talks with Hugh and the small boys ; he tried to fill his heart with Cissie ; he found at last marvels of innocence and sweetness in the Hickson girl .
She wore her hair in a pigtail when first he met her , and it made her almost Marguerite .
This young man had cried aloud for love , warm and filling , like the Mittagsessen that was implicit in their understanding .
And all these Essex people failed to satisfy him ; they were silent , they were subtle , they slipped through the fat yet eager fingers of his heart , so that he fell back at last upon himself and his German correspondents and the idealisation of Maud Hickson and the moral education of Billy .
Mr. Britling 's memories came back at last to the figure of young Heinrich with the squirrel on his shoulder , that had so often stood in the way of the utter condemnation of Germany .
That , seen closely , was the stuff of one brutal Prussian .
What quarrel had we with him ?
Mr. Britling left that blank for the time until he could arrange the method of sending to the Norwegian intermediary .
_I want to tell you that all the stress and passion of this war has not made us here in Matching 's Easy forget our friend your son .
He was one of us , he had our affection , he had friends here who are still his friends .
We found him honourable and companionable , and we share something of your loss .
I have got together for you a few snapshots I chance to possess in which you will see him in the sunshine , and which will enable you perhaps to picture a little more definitely than you would otherwise do the life he led here .
There is one particularly that I have marked .
Our family is lunching out-of-doors , and you will see that next to your son is a youngster , a year or so his junior , who is touching glasses with him .
I have put a cross over his head .
He is my eldest son , he was very dear to me , and he too has been , killed in this war .
They are , you see , smiling very pleasantly at each other._
Three hours later Mr. Britling was working by daylight , though his study lamp was still burning , and his letter to old Heinrich was still no better than a collection of material for a letter .
But the material was falling roughly into shape , and Mr. Britling 's intentions were finding themselves .
It was clear to him now that he was no longer writing as his limited personal self to those two personal selves grieving , in the old , large , high-walled , steep-roofed household amidst pine woods , of which Heinrich had once shown him a picture .
He knew them too little for any such personal address .
He was writing , he perceived , not as Mr. Britling but as an Englishman -- that was all he could be to them -- and he was writing to them as Germans ; he could apprehend them as nothing more .
He was just England bereaved to Germany bereaved ... .
If England had still the longer account to pay , the French had paid already nearly to the limits of endurance .
They must have lost well over a million of their mankind , and still they bled and bled .
Russia too in the East had paid far more than man for man in this vast swapping off of lives .
In a little while no Censorship would hold the voice of the peoples .
There would be no more talk of honour and annexations , hegemonies and trade routes , but only Europe lamenting for her dead ... .
_Your boy , as no doubt you know , dreamt constantly of such a world peace as this that I foreshadow ; he was more generous than his country .
He could envisage war and hostility only as misunderstanding .
He thought that a world that could explain itself clearly would surely be at peace .
He was scheming always therefore for the perfection and propagation of Esperanto or Ido , or some such universal link .
My youngster too was full of a kindred and yet larger dream , the dream of human science , which knows neither king nor country nor race_ ... .
_These boys , these hopes , this war has killed_ ... .
`` If you had lived , my dear , you and your England would have talked with a younger Germany -- better than I can ever do ... . ''
This had come almost as a matter of course .
He turned over the rest of the night 's writing presently , and read it now as though it was the work of another man .
He was persuaded that a couple of Egyptian cigarettes , or three at the outside , a day , would do wonders in restoring his nervous calm .
That , and just a weak whisky and soda at lunch and dinner .
There came before his memory the image of a boy 's face , a swarthy little boy , grinning , grinning with a horrible knowingness and pointing his finger -- an accusing finger .
It had been the most exasperating , humiliating , and shameful incident in the bishop 's career .
It was the afternoon for his fortnightly address to the Shop-girls ' Church Association , and he had been seized with a panic fear , entirely irrational and unjustifiable , that he would not be able to deliver the address .
The fear had arisen after lunch , had gripped his mind , and then as now had come the thought , `` If only I could smoke ! ''
And he had smoked .
It seemed better to break a vow than fail the Association .
He had fallen to the temptation with a completeness that now filled him with shame and horror .
He had stalked Dunk , his valet-butler , out of the dining-room , had affected to need a book from the book-case beyond the sideboard , had gone insincerely to the sideboard humming `` From Greenland 's icy mountains , '' and then , glancing over his shoulder , had stolen one of his own cigarettes , one of the fatter sort .
With this and his bedroom matches he had gone off to the bottom of the garden among the laurels , looked everywhere except above the wall to be sure that he was alone , and at last lit up , only as he raised his eyes in gratitude for the first blissful inhalation to discover that dreadful little boy peeping at him from the crotch in the yew-tree in the next garden .
As though God had sent him to be a witness !
`` Oh , God ! ''
`` The meanness of it !
How did I bring myself -- ? ''
He turned out the light convulsively , and rolled over in the bed , making a sort of cocoon of himself .
He bored his head into the pillow and groaned , and then struggled impatiently to throw the bed-clothes off himself .
Then he sat up and talked aloud .
`` I must go to Brighton-Pomfrey , '' he said .
`` And get a medical dispensation .
If I do not smoke -- ''
Then he perceived with surprise that he had not thought of praying .
What should he say ?
To what could he pray ?
CHAPTER THE SECOND - THE WEAR AND TEAR OF EPISCOPACY
There is an entire difference in the mental quality of those who are converts to a faith and those who are brought up in it .
The former know it from outside as well as from within .
They know not only that it is , but also that it is not .
The latter have a confidence in their creed that is one with their apprehension of sky or air or gravitation .
It is a primary mental structure , and they not only do not doubt but they doubt the good faith of those who do .
They think that the Atheist and Agnostic really believe but are impelled by a mysterious obstinacy to deny .
So it had been with the Bishop of Princhester ; not of cunning or design but in simple good faith he had accepted all the inherited assurances of his native rectory , and held by Church , Crown , Empire , decorum , respectability , solvency -- and compulsory Greek at the Little Go -- as his father had done before him .
If in his undergraduate days he had said a thing or two in the modern vein , affected the socialism of William Morris and learnt some Swinburne by heart , it was out of a conscious wildness .
He did not wish to be a prig .
He had taken a far more genuine interest in the artistry of ritual .
`` They used to heave lumps of slag at old Hood 's gaiters , '' said Lord Gatling .
At first the magnates and influences seemed to be fighting only among themselves , and he was so ill-advised as to broach the Ganford House project as a compromise that would glorify no one unfairly , and leave the erection of an episcopal palace for some future date when he perhaps would have the good fortune to have passed to `` where beyond these voices there is peace , '' forgetting altogether among other oversights the importance of architects and builders in local affairs .
His proposal seemed for a time to concentrate the rich passions of the whole countryside upon himself and his wife .
And he disappointed Princhester with his equipage .
Princhester had a feeling that it deserved more for coming over to the church from nonconformity as it was doing .
It wanted a bishop in a mitre and a gilt coach .
It wanted a pastoral crook .
It wanted something to go with its mace and its mayor .
And ( obsessed by The Snicker ) it wanted less of Lady Ella .
The cruelty and unreason of these attacks upon his wife distressed the bishop beyond measure , and baffled him hopelessly .
He could not see any means of checking them nor of defending or justifying her against them .
The palace was awaiting its tenant , but the controversies and bitternesses were still swinging and swaying and developing when King George was being crowned .
Close upon that event came a wave of social discontent , the great railway strike , a curious sense of social and political instability , and the first beginnings of the bishop 's ill health .
`` But that is exactly the business of the church , '' said the bishop brightly , `` to reconcile men to their duty . ''
`` This thing is a fight , '' said the big employer , carrying on before the bishop could reply .
`` Religion had better get out of the streets until this thing is over .
The men wo n't listen to reason .
They do n't mean to .
They 're bit by Syndicalism .
They 're setting out , I tell you , to be unreasonable and impossible .
It is n't an argument ; it 's a fight .
They do n't want to make friends with the employer .
They want to make an end to the employer .
Whatever we give them they 'll take and press us for more .
Directly we make terms with the leaders the men go behind it ... .
It 's a raid on the whole system .
They do n't mean to work the system -- anyhow .
I 'm the capitalist , and the capitalist has to go .
I 'm to be bundled out of my works , and some -- some `` -- he seemed to be rejecting unsuitable words -- '' confounded politician put in .
Much good it would do them .
But before that happens I 'm going to fight .
Then he went on abruptly to something that for a time he had been keeping back .
`` Where are they going ? ''
asked the bishop , leaning forward to look out of the window of the fly , and then : `` Where is it all going ? ''
And presently the road was under repair , and was being done at a great pace with a huge steam-roller , mechanically smashed granite , and kettles of stinking stuff , asphalt or something of that sort , that looked and smelt like Milton 's hell .
Beyond , a gaunt hoarding advertised extensively the Princhester Music Hall , a mean beastly place that corrupted boys and girls ; and also it clamoured of tyres and potted meats ... .
`` But you have n't understood the drift of Christianity , '' said the bishop .
`` It 's just to assert that men are One community and not two . ''
`` If the church chooses to speak in riddles , '' said the rationalist .
`` Symbols , '' said Morrice Deans , `` need not be riddles , '' and for a time the talk eddied about this minor issue and the chief labour spokesman and the bishop looked at one another .
The vicar instanced and explained certain apparently insignificant observances , his antagonist was contemptuously polite to these explanations .
`` That 's all very pratty , '' he said ... .
The labour leader became impatient with the ritualistic controversy ; he set his tea-cup aside out of danger and leant across the corner of the table to the bishop and spoke in a sawing undertone .
`` You see , '' he said , `` the church does not talk our language .
I doubt if it understands our language .
I doubt if we understand clearly where we are ourselves .
These things have to be fought out and hammered out .
It 's a big dusty dirty noisy job .
It may be a bloody job before it 's through .
You can't suddenly call a halt in the middle of the scrap and have a sort of millennium just because you want it ... .
He was hungry and , tired ; he would not get to the palace now until long after nine ; dinner would be over and Lady Ella would naturally suppose he had dined early with the Rev .
Very probably there would be nothing ready for him at all .
But would he have done much ?
But stating the church 's attitude with a new and convincing vigour .
`` Members of one Body , '' that should be his text ... .
At last it was finished .
The big congregation , which had kept so still , sighed and stirred .
The task of reconciliation was as good as done .
`` And now to God the Father , God the Son , and God the Holy Ghost ... . ''
She stood waiting for him in the inner hall , looking very grave and still .
The light fell upon her pale face and her dark hair and her long white silken dress , making her seem more delicate and unworldly than usual and making the bishop feel grimy and sordid .
`` There are cold things ... .
You shall have a tray in the study .
Not in the dining-room .
I want to tell you something .
But go upstairs first and wash your poor tired face . ''
`` Nothing serious , I hope ? ''
he asked , struck by an unusual quality in her voice .
`` She is in the dining-room now , '' she said , `` having some dinner .
She came in about a quarter past eight , half way through dinner . ''
`` Her dress was torn -- in two places .
Her wrist had been twisted and a little sprained . ''
`` Her face -- Grubby !
And she had been crying . ''
`` You did n't go to interrupt ? ''
`` I think , Norah , you should n't have been there at all , '' he said .
`` Do n't you think , my dear , that on the whole your mother and I , who have lived longer and know more , are more likely to know when it is best that you should begin to know -- this or that ? ''
`` It is n't trusting .
But one knows best for oneself when one is hungry . ''
`` I want to find out for myself what all this trouble about votes and things means . ''
She remained still for a time .
She felt the moment had come to make her demand .
`` Ye -- es , '' said the bishop and reflected .
The papers got hold of Eleanor 's share in the suffragette disturbance .
The White Blackbird said things about her .
And as he lay there , a weak phantom mentally and bodily , an endless succession and recurrence of anxieties for which he could find no reassurance besieged him .
She was the central figure in this new sense of illusion in familiar and trusted things .
It was not only that the world of his existence which had seemed to be the whole universe had become diaphanous and betrayed vast and uncontrollable realities beyond it , but his daughter had as it were suddenly opened a door in this glassy sphere of insecurity that had been his abiding refuge , a door upon the stormy rebel outer world , and she stood there , young , ignorant , confident , adventurous , ready to step out .
The wind blew through the door she opened , and scattered everything in the room .
And still she held the door open .
He was astonished at himself .
He started up in swift indignation .
Had he not taught the child ?
Had he not brought her up in an atmosphere of faith ?
What right had she to turn upon him in this matter ?
It was -- indeed it was -- a sort of insolence , a lack of reverence ... .
It was strange he had not perceived this at the time .
Well , if the people will not come to the bishop the bishop must go out to the people .
Should he go outside the Cathedral -- to the place where the trains met ?
Were n't there books she ought to read ?
Were n't there books she ought to be made to read ?
And books -- and friends -- that ought to be imperatively forbidden ?
Presently he pulled the coverlet over his ears .
Perhaps there they worked for some collective musical effect , had some sort of conductor in the place of this -- hullabaloo ... .
`` He giveth his Beloved sleep . ''
But the next day was a troubled one .
Whippham had muddled his timetable and crowded his afternoon ; the strike of the transport workers had begun , and the ugly noises they made at the tramway depot , where they were booing some one , penetrated into the palace .
He had to snatch a meal between services , and the sense of hurry invaded his afternoon lectures to the candidates .
He hated hurry in Ember week .
His ideal was one of quiet serenity , of grave things said slowly , of still , kneeling figures , of a sort of dark cool spiritual germination .
But what sort of dark cool spiritual germination is possible with an ass like Whippham about ?
But he knew from the young man 's eye even as he said this that it was not going to put him off for more than a day or so .
He did not give her much time to develop her objections .
He met her half way and stated them for her , and overwhelmed her with sympathy and understanding .
She had been `` too literal . ''
`` Too literal '' was his keynote .
He was a little astonished at the liberality of his own views .
He had been getting along now for some years without looking into his own opinions too closely and he was by no means prepared to discover how far he had come to meet his daughter 's scepticisms .
But he did meet them .
He met them so thoroughly that he almost conveyed that hers was a needlessly conservative and oldfashioned attitude .
The labour troubles of 1912 eased off as the year wore on , and the bitterness of the local press over the palace abated very considerably .
Indeed there was something like a watery gleam of popularity when he brought down his consistent friend , the dear old Princess Christiana of Hoch and Unter , black bonnet , deafness , and all , to open a new wing of the children 's hospital .
The Princhester conservative paper took the occasion to inform the diocese that he was a fluent German scholar and consequently a persona grata with the royal aunts , and that the Princess Christiana was merely just one of a number of royalties now practically at the beck and call of Princhester .
It was not true , but it was very effective locally , and seemed to justify a little the hauteur of which Lady Ella was so unjustly suspected .
Yet it involved a possibility of disappointments in the future .
Now green tea is the most lucid of poisons .
The bishop avoided `` The Light under the Altar '' for nearly a year .
It was only when a second book was announced with the winning title of `` The Core of Truth in Christianity '' that he perceived he must take action .
He sat up late one night with a marked copy , a very indignantly marked copy , of the former work that an elderly colonel , a Wombash parishioner , an orthodox Layman of the most virulent type , had sent him .
He perceived that he had to deal with a dialectician of exceptional ability , who had concentrated a quite considerable weight of scholarship upon the task of explaining away every scrap of spiritual significance in the Eucharist .
From Chasters the bishop was driven by reference to the works of Legge and Frazer , and for the first time he began to measure the dimensions and power of the modern criticism of church doctrine and observance .
Green tea should have lit his way to refutation ; instead it lit up the whole inquiry with a light of melancholy confirmation .
Neither by night nor by day could the bishop find a proper method of opening a counter attack upon Chasters , who was indisputably an intellectually abler man and a very ruthless beast indeed to assail , and meanwhile the demand that action should be taken increased .
The literature of church history and the controversies arising out of doctrinal development became the employment of the bishop 's leisure and a commanding preoccupation .
He would have liked to discuss with some one else the network of perplexities in which he was entangling himself , and more particularly with Canon Bliss , but his own positions were becoming so insecure that he feared to betray them by argument .
He had grown up with a kind of intellectual modesty .
Some things he had never yet talked about ; it made his mind blench to think of talking about them .
And his great aching gaps of wakefulness began now , thanks to the green tea , to be interspersed with theological dreams and visions of an extravagant vividness .
He would see Frazer 's sacrificial kings butchered picturesquely and terribly amidst strange and grotesque rituals ; he would survey long and elaborate processions and ceremonials in which the most remarkable symbols were borne high in the sight of all men ; he would cower before a gigantic and threatening Heaven .
These green-tea dreams and visions were not so much phases of sleep as an intensification and vivid furnishing forth of insomnia .
It added greatly to his disturbance that -- exceeding the instructions of Brighton-Pomfrey -- he had now experimented ignorantly and planlessly with one or two narcotics and sleeping mixtures that friends and acquaintances had mentioned in his hearing .
For the first time in his life he became secretive from his wife .
He knew he ought not to take these things , he knew they were physically and morally evil , but a tormenting craving drove him to them .
Subtly and insensibly his character was being undermined by the growing nervous trouble .
These doctrinal and physical anxieties and distresses were at their worst in the spring and early summer of 1914 .
That was a time of great mental and moral disturbance .
There was premonition in the air of those days .
It was like the uneasiness sensitive people experience before a thunderstorm .
The moral atmosphere was sullen and close .
The whole world seemed irritable and mischievous .
The suffragettes became extraordinarily malignant ; the democratic movement went rotten with sabotage and with a cant of being `` rebels '' ; the reactionary Tories and a crew of noisy old peeresses set themselves to create incurable confusion again in the healing wounds of Ireland , and feuds and frantic folly broke out at every point of the social and political edifice .
And then a bomb burst at Sarajevo that silenced all this tumult .
The unstable polity of Europe heeled over like a ship that founders .
Black and evil thing as the war was , it was at any rate a great thing ; it did this much for countless minds that for the first time they realized the epic quality of history and their own relationship to the destinies of the race .
The flimsy roof under which we had been living our lives of comedy fell and shattered the floor under our feet ; we saw the stars above and the abyss below .
We perceived that life was insecure and adventurous , part of one vast adventure in space and time ... .
All this sort of thing was fresh and exciting at first , and then it began to fall into a routine and became habitual , and as it became habitual he found that old sense of detachment and futility was creeping back again .
One day he realized that indeed the whole flood and tumult of the war would be going on almost exactly as it was going on now if there had been neither cathedral nor bishop in Princhester .
It came to him that if archbishops were rolled into patriarchs and patriarchs into archbishops , it would matter scarcely more in the world process that was afoot than if two men shook hands while their house was afire .
At times all of us have inappropriate thoughts .
The unfortunate thought that struck the bishop as a bullet might strike a man in an exposed trench , as he was hurrying through the cloisters to a special service and address upon that doubly glorious day in our English history , the day of St. Crispin , was of Diogenes rolling his tub .
THAT night when he cried aloud at the memory of his furtive cigarette , the bishop was staying with a rich man named Garstein Fellows .
These Garstein Fellows people were steel people with a financial side to them ; young Garstein Fellows had his fingers in various chemical businesses , and the real life of the firm was in various minor partners called Hartstein and Blumenhart and so forth , who had acquired a considerable amount of ungentlemanly science and energy in Germany and German Switzerland .
But the Fellows element was good old Princhester stuff .
There had been a Fellows firm in Princhester in 1819 .
They were not people the bishop liked and it was not a house the bishop liked staying at , but it had become part of his policy to visit and keep in touch with as many of the local plutocracy as he could , to give and take with them , in order to make the presence of the church a reality to them .
It had been not least among the negligences and evasions of the sainted but indolent Hood that he had invariably refused overnight hospitality whenever it was possible for him to get back to his home .
The morning was his working time .
His books and hymns had profited at the cost of missing many a generous after-dinner subscription , and at the expense of social unity .
From the outset Scrope had set himself to alter this .
A certain lack of enthusiasm on Lady Ella 's part had merely provoked him to greater effort on his own .
His ideal of what was needed with the people was something rather jolly and familiar , something like a very good and successful French or Irish priest , something that came easily and readily into their homes and laid a friendly hand on their shoulders .
The less he liked these rich people naturally the more familiar his resolution to be successfully intimate made him .
He put down the names and brief characteristics of their sons and daughters in a little note-book and consulted it before every visit so as to get his most casual enquiries right .
And he invited himself to the Garstein Fellows house on this occasion by telegram .
Now Mrs. Garstein Fellows was a thoroughly London woman ; she was one of the banking Grunenbaums , the fair tall sort , and she had a very decided tendency to smartness .
She had a little party in the house , a sort of long week-end party , that made her hesitate for a minute or so before she framed a reply to the bishop 's request .
The bishop returned his frank glance .
`` I 'd like to know above all things , '' he said .
`` If Mrs. Garstein Fellow will permit us .
It 's my business to know . ''
`` Need it be ? ''
whispered Lady Sunderbund very softly .
`` Our utmost words , our most elaborately phrased creeds , can at the best be no better than the shadow of something unseen thrown upon the screen of experience . ''
He spoke in the most casual way .
He made the thing seem the most incidental of observations .
`` What puzzles me , '' he said , `` is why the early Christians identified the Spermaticos Logos of the Stoics with the second and not with the third person of the Trinity . ''
She went on with an impulsive rapidity .
O'thodoxy had always 'ipelled her , -- always .
She had felt herself confronted by the most insurmountable difficulties , and yet whenever she had gone away from Christianity -- she had gone away from Christianity , to the Theosophists and the Christian Scientists -- she had felt she was only `` st'aying fu'tha . ''
And then suddenly when he was speaking last night , she had felt he knew .
It was so wonderful to hear the `` k'eed was only a symbol . ''
`` Symbol is the proper name for it , '' said the bishop .
`` It was n't for centuries it was called the Creed . ''
And there she was , and the point was there were thousands and thousands and thousands of educated people like her who were dying to get through these old-fashioned symbols to the true faith that lay behind them .
That they knew lay behind them .
She did n't know if he had read `` The Light under the Altar '' ?
`` My dear lady , I wo n't disguise , '' he began ; `` in fact I do n't see how I could , that for some years I have been growing more and more discontented with some of our most fundamental formulae .
But it 's been very largely a shapeless discontent -- hitherto .
I do n't think I 've said a word to a single soul .
No , not a word .
You are the first person to whom I 've ever made the admission that even my feelings are at times unorthodox . ''
With her hands she acted her sense of his difficulty .
She started indeed a new topic .
`` Shall we eva , do 'ou think , have a new 'iligion -- t'ua and betta ? ''
`` I wish we could talk for houas , '' said Lady Sunderbund .
He had never set eyes on this Dr. Dale .
Indeed , he had never heard of Dr. Dale .
Seeing his old friend Brighton-Pomfrey and being gently and tactfully told to do exactly what he was longing to do was one thing ; facing some strange doctor and going slowly and elaborately through the whole story of his illness , his vow and his breakdown , and perhaps having his reaction time tested and all sorts of stripping and soundings done , was quite another .
He was within an ace of turning away .
If he had turned away his whole subsequent life would have been different .
It was the very slightest thing in the world tipped the beam .
It was the thought that , after all , whatever inconvenience and unpleasantness there might be in this interview , there was at the end of it a very reasonable prospect of a restored and legitimate cigarette .
He did not seem to expect anything from the bishop .
`` I do n't see that because a case brings one suddenly right up against the frontier of metaphysics , why a doctor should necessarily pull up short at that , why one should n't go on into either metaphysics or psychology if such an extension is necessary for the understanding of the case .
At any rate if you 'll permit it in this consultation ... . ''
`` I follow you , '' said the bishop a little wearily , `` I follow you .
Phenomena and noumena and so on and so on .
Kant and so forth .
`` By all the established tests .
As a matter of fact many of our best drinking waters have all sorts of unspecified qualities .
Burton water , for example , is radioactive by Beetham 's standards up to the ninth degree .
But that is by the way .
My theory about your case is that this produced a change in your blood , that quickened your sensibilities and your critical faculties just at a time when a good many bothers -- I don't of course know what they were , but I can , so to speak , see the marks all over you -- came into your life . ''
said the bishop , and brightened up .
`` And the sooner I go back to them the better , '' said the bishop brightly .
`` I quite see that . ''
`` Hitherto , of course , '' said the bishop , `` I 've been in his hands . ''
Dr. Dale completed the sentence : `` to go back . ''
`` You may die like a madman , '' he said , `` but you wo n't die like a tame rabbit . ''
Again the bishop had a twinge of misgiving .
But in the end he succumbed .
He did n't want to take the stuff , but also he did not want to go without his promised comfort .
And yet it was difficult not to betray a little inflation .
He was so filled with assurance that things were right with him and that God was there with him .
After all it was not mere fancy ; he was looking through the peepholes of his eyes at the world of illusion and appearance .
The world that was so intent upon its immediate business , so regardless of eternal things , that had so dominated him but a little while ago , was after all a thing more mortal than himself .
For the first time he saw the war as something measurable , as something with a beginning and an end , as something less than the immortal spirit in man .
He had been too much oppressed by it .
He perceived all these people in the street were too much oppressed by it .
He wanted to tell them as much , tell them that all was well with them , bid them be of good cheer .
He wanted to bless them .
He found his arm floating up towards gestures of benediction .
Self-control became increasingly difficult .
He set out to cross the road just opposite Prince 's , and jumping needlessly to give way to an omnibus had the narrowest escape from a taxicab .
Brighton-Pomfrey ought never to have left his practice in the hands of this wild-eyed experimenter .
And presently he had a doubt of his name and began to repeat it .
The porter of the Athenaeum saw him come in , looking well -- flushed indeed -- but queer in expression ; his blue eyes were wide open and unusually vague and blue .
`` Tell me , '' he whispered , `` are you God ? ''
`` And I have been in orders , '' he murmured ; `` I have been teaching people the only orthodox and perfect truth about these things for seven and twenty years . ''
And suddenly he was back in his gaiters and his apron and his shovel hat , a little black figure exceedingly small in a very great space ... .
The thoughts and sensations of the bishop seemed to have lifted for a time clean away from the condition of time , and then through a vast orbit to be returning to that limitation .
To begin with it seemed to him that an immediate renunciation was demanded .
But it was a momentous step .
He wanted to think .
And to go on thinking .
Rather than to act precipitately .
Although the imperative seemed absolute , some delaying and arresting instinct insisted that he must `` think '' If he went back to Princhester , the everyday duties of his position would confront him at once with an effect of a definite challenge .
He decided to take one of the Reform club bedrooms for two or three days , and wire to Princhester that he was `` unavoidably delayed in town , '' without further explanations .
Then perhaps this inhibitory force would give way .
But he had already betrayed his disposition to `` go on with our talk '' in his telephone enquiry , and Lady Sunderbund , perceiving his shyness , began to make openings for him , at first just little hinting openings , and then larger and larger ones , until at last one got him .
She beamed at him happily .
`` I 've thought ova ev'y wo 'd you said , '' she went on , when she had finished conveying her pretty bliss to him .
`` I 've been so helped by thinking the k'eeds are symbols .
And all you said .
And I 've felt time after time , you could n't stay whe ' you we ' .
That what you we ' saying to me , would have to be said 'ight out . ''
`` I have been t'ying to think , '' she said in a confirmatory tone , as if she had co-operated .
`` And yet feeling nearer , infinitely nearer to God , '' he said .
`` To religion , '' he said .
`` It is so wondyful , '' she said , with her hands straight down upon the couch upon which she was sitting , and leaning forward at him , so as to seem almost as much out of drawing as a modern picture .
`` At any rate , in a progressive and learning church . ''
`` I have been haunted , '' he said , `` by those words spoken at Athens .
'Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship , Him declare I unto you . '
That comes to me with an effect of -- guidance is an old-fashioned word -- shall I say suggestion ?
To stand by the altar bearing strange names and ancient symbols , speaking plainly to all mankind of the one true God -- ! ''
`` You leave our stupid old Trinities -- as I left them long ago , '' said old Likeman , with his lean hand feeling and clawing at the arm of his chair .
`` Fate -- which is God the Father , the Power of the Heart , which is God the Son , and that Light which comes in upon us from the inaccessible Godhead , which is God the Holy Spirit . ''
`` You saw ! ''
The Bishop of Princhester had not meant to go so far .
But he stuck to his words .
`` As if I saw with my eyes .
A God of light and courage . ''
`` You have had visions , Scrope ? ''
`` No , you have just been dreaming dreams . ''
The things of the spirit .
These symbols as realities !
These metaphors as men walking ! ''
For some moments it sounded true .
`` No man , '' the bishop thought aloud , `` putteth new wine into old bottles . ''
`` And besides , '' he was inspired ; `` true religion is old wine -- as old as the soul .
The old man awaited the answer to his abrupt enquiry with a handful of lozenges .
`` No , '' said the Bishop of Princhester , `` practically -- I have n't . ''
You have a wife and children ? ''
`` I have n't looked very much at that side of the matter yet , '' said the Bishop of Princhester .
He sat down contentedly in the low armchair beside her .
It was n't a setting that one would rashly destroy ... .
And just then his eye fell upon the epergne , a very old and beautiful piece of silver , that graced the dinner-table .
It had been given him , together with an episcopal ring , by his curates and choristers at the Church of the Holy Innocents , when he became bishop of Pinner .
When they gave it him , had any one of them dreamt that some day he might be moved to strike an ungracious blow at the mother church that had reared them all ?
`` Things developing out of that .
I must tell you later . ''
It would be , he felt , a good way of breaking the matter to her .
`` I should love it , my dear . ''
And he leant back and prepared to listen in such a thorough way that Eleanor would have no chance of discussing the Chasters ' heresies .
But this was interrupted by the consummation of the coffee , and Mr. Blent , breaking a long silence with `` Mate in three , if I 'm not mistaken , '' leapt to his feet to be of service .
Eleanor , with the rough seriousness of youth , would not leave the Chasters case alone .
`` It 's a very complicated subject , my dear , '' he said .
His wife became as it were the representative of all that held him helpless .
She and he had never kept secret from one another any plan of action , any motive , that affected the other .
It was clear to him that any movement towards the disavowal of doctrinal Christianity and the renunciation of his see must be first discussed with her .
He must tell her before he told the world .
He felt that something of the general tension would be relieved if they could all three be got to sit down .
He put a chair for Lady Sunderbund to the right of Lady Ella , got her into it by infusing an ecclesiastical insistence into his manner , and then went and sat upon the music-stool on his wife 's left , so as to establish a screen of tea-things and cakes and so forth against her more intimate enthusiasm .
Meanwhile he began to see his way clearer and to develop his line .
`` We will , we will , '' said the bishop in a tone that ignored her passionate note .
Lady Ella was always pleased to hear her husband praised .
Her colour brightened a little .
`` They seem very ordinary views , '' she said modestly .
`` You share them ? ''
`` Remarkable person , '' he said tentatively .
`` I never met any one whose faults were more visible .
I met her at Wimbush House . ''
`` Now , my dear Brother and erstwhile pupil , I ask you not to do this thing .
Wait , I implore you .
Give me -- and some others , a little time .
I have your promise for three months , but even after that , I ask you to wait .
Let the reform come from within the church .
The church is something more than either its creeds , its clergy , or its laymen .
Look at your cathedral rising out of and dominating Princhester .
It stands not simply for Athanasius ; it stands but incidentally for Athanasius ; it stands for all religion .
Within that fabric -- let me be as frank here as in our private conversation -- doctrine has altered again and again .
To-day two distinct religions worship there side by side ; one that fades and one that grows brighter .
There is the old quasi-materialistic belief of the barbarians , the belief in such things , for example , as that Christ the physical Son of God descended into hell and stayed there , seeing the sights I suppose like any tourist and being treated with diplomatic civilities for three terrestrial days ; and on the other hand there is the truly spiritual belief that you and I share , which is absolutely intolerant of such grotesque ideas .
My argument to you is that the new faith , the clearer vision , gains ground ; that the only thing that can prevent or delay the church from being altogether possessed by what you call and I admit is , the true God , is that such men as yourself , as the light breaks upon you , should be hasty and leave the church .
You see my point of view , do you not ?
It is not one that has been assumed for our discussion ; it is one I came to long years ago , that I was already feeling my way to in my St. Matthew 's Lenton sermons .
The old man had written his Greek tags in shakily resolute capitals .
It was his custom always to quote the Greek Testament in his letters , never the English version .
It is a practice not uncommon with the more scholarly of our bishops .
It is as if some eminent scientific man were to insist upon writing H2O instead of `` water , '' and `` sodium chloride '' instead of `` table salt '' in his private correspondence .
Or upon hanging up a stuffed crocodile in his hall to give the place tone .
The Bishop of Princhester construed these brief dicta without serious exertion , he found them very congenial texts , but there were insuperable difficulties in the problem why Likeman should suppose they had the slightest weight upon his side of their discussion .
The more he thought the less they seemed to be on Likeman 's side , until at last they began to take on a complexion entirely opposed to the old man 's insidious arguments , until indeed they began to bear the extraordinary interpretation of a special message , unwittingly delivered .
A MONTH later found the bishop 's original state of perplexity and insomnia returned and intensified .
He had done none of all the things that had seemed so manifestly needing to be done after his vision in the Athenaeum .
All the relief and benefit of his experience in London had vanished out of his life .
He was afraid of Dr. Dale 's drug ; he knew certainly that it would precipitate matters ; and all his instincts in the state of moral enfeeblement to which he had relapsed , were to temporize .
Although he had said nothing further about his changed beliefs to Lady Ella , yet he perceived clearly that a shadow had fallen between them .
She had a wife 's extreme sensitiveness to fine shades of expression and bearing , and manifestly she knew that something was different .
Meanwhile Lady Sunderbund had become a frequent worshipper in the cathedral , she was a figure as conspicuous in sombre Princhester as a bird of paradise would have been ; common people stood outside her very very rich blue door on the chance of seeing her ; she never missed an opportunity of hearing the bishop preach or speak , she wrote him several long and thoughtful letters with which he did not bother Lady Ella , she communicated persistently , and manifestly intended to become a very active worker in diocesan affairs .
It was inevitable that she and the bishop should meet and talk occasionally in the cathedral precincts , and it was inevitable that he should contrast the flexibility of her rapid and very responsive mind with a certain defensiveness , a stoniness , in the intellectual bearing of Lady Ella .
There came upon him the acutest remorse and misery .
For he saw that amidst these petty immediacies he had lost touch with God .
The last month became incredible .
He had seen God .
He had touched God 's hand .
God had been given to him , and he had neglected the gift .
He was still lost amidst the darkness and loneliness , the chaotic ends and mean shifts , of an Erastian world .
For a month now and more , after a vision of God so vivid and real and reassuring that surely no saint nor prophet had ever had a better , he had made no more than vague responsive movements ; he had allowed himself to be persuaded into an unreasonable and cowardly delay , and the fetters of association and usage and minor interests were as unbroken as they had been before ever the vision shone .
Was it credible that there had ever been such a vision in a life so entirely dictated by immediacy and instinct as his ?
We are all creatures of the dark stream , we swim in needs and bodily impulses and small vanities ; if ever and again a bubble of spiritual imaginativeness glows out of us , it breaks and leaves us where we were .
He was little , he was funny .
His prevarications with his wife , for example , were comic .
There was no other word for him but `` funny . ''
He stood with Dale 's tonic in his hand .
He remained for some time holding it , and feeling a curious indisposition to go on with the thing in his mind .
`` No , '' he said , as Dunk hesitated whether to remove or leave the tumbler .
`` Leave that . ''
The bishop remained motionless facing the day .
There stood the draught of decision that he had lacked the decision even to touch .
He had a sense of adventure , a pleasant fear in the thing that he had done .
He got out of bed , leaving his cup of tea untasted , and began to dress .
He had the sensation of relief a prisoner may feel who suddenly tries his cell door and finds it open upon sunshine , the outside world and freedom .
It seemed to the bishop that now he could distinguish dimly but surely the form and features of the great Angel to whom he talked .
For a little while there was silence , and then the Angel spoke .
`` Am I not here beside you ? ''
`` It is very wonderful , '' said the bishop , and stood for a moment marvelling at the compass of his vision .
For here was India , here was Samarkand , in the light of the late afternoon ; and China and the swarming cities upon her silvery rivers sinking through twilight to the night and throwing a spray and tracery of lantern spots upon the dark ; here was Russia under the noontide , and so great a battle of artillery raging on the Dunajec as no man had ever seen before ; whole lines of trenches dissolved into clouds of dust and heaps of blood-streaked earth ; here close to the waiting streets of Constantinople were the hills of Gallipoli , the grave of British Imperialism , streaming to heaven with the dust and smoke of bursting shells and rifle fire and the smoke and flame of burning brushwood .
In the sea of Marmora a big ship crowded with Turkish troops was sinking ; and , purple under the clear water , he could see the shape of the British submarine which had torpedoed her and had submerged and was going away .
Berlin prepared its frugal meals , still far from famine .
He saw the war in Europe as if he saw it on a map , yet every human detail showed .
Over hundreds of miles of trenches east and west of Germany he could see shells bursting and the men below dropping , and the stretcher-bearers going back with the wounded .
The roads to every front were crowded with reserves and munitions .
For a moment a little group of men indifferent to all this struggle , who were landing amidst the Antarctic wilderness , held his attention ; and then his eyes went westward to the dark rolling Atlantic across which , as the edge of the night was drawn like a curtain , more and still more ships became visible beating upon their courses eastward or westward under the overtaking day .
It was a Chinaman sitting with two others in a little low room separated by translucent paper windows from a noisy street of shrill-voiced people .
The three had been talking of the ultimatum that Japan had sent that day to China , claiming a priority in many matters over European influences they were by no means sure whether it was a wrong or a benefit that had been done to their country .
From that topic they had passed to the discussion of the war , and then of wars and national aggressions and the perpetual thrusting and quarrelling of mankind .
The older man had said that so life would always be ; it was the will of Heaven .
The little , very yellow-faced , emaciated man had agreed with him .
But now this younger man , to whose thoughts the Angel had so particularly directed the bishop 's attention , was speaking .
He did not agree with his companion .
The Englishmen wanted to know why .
The German 's mind was one amazement .
He had been sure of being shot , he had meant to make a good end , fierce and scornful , a relentless fighter to the last ; and these men who might have shot him like a man were going to spare him like a dog .
His mind was a tumbled muddle of old and new ideas .
He had been brought up in an atmosphere of the foulest and fiercest militarism ; he had been trained to relentlessness , ruthlessness and so forth ; war was war and the bitterer the better , frightfulness was your way to victory over every enemy .
But these people had found a better way .
Here were Dutch and English side by side ; sixteen years ago they had been at war together and now they wore the same uniform and rode together , and laughed at him for a queer fellow because he was for spitting at them and defying them , and folding his arms and looking level at the executioners ' rifles .
There were to be no executioners' rifles ... .
If it was so with Dutch and English , why should n't it be so presently with French and Germans ?
Why someday should n't French , German , Dutch and English , Russian and Pole , ride together under this new star of mankind , the Southern Cross , to catch whatever last mischief-maker was left to poison the wells of goodwill ?
For a long time it seemed that the bishop watched the thoughts that gathered in the young attache 's mind .
Until suddenly he broke into a quotation , into that last cry of the dying Goethe , for `` Light .
`` It 's 'ow to stop them ? ''
`` Call it Science if you will , '' said the bishop .
`` God is wisdom . ''
`` You see they all turn in one direction , although none of them seem to dream yet that they are all turning in the same direction .
They turn , every one , to the rule of righteousness , which is the rule of God .
They turn to that communism of effort in the world which alone permits men to serve God in state and city and their economic lives ... .
They are all coming to the verge of the same salvation , the salvation of one human brotherhood under the rule of one Righteousness , one Divine will ... .
Is that the salvation your church offers ? ''
`` And now that we have seen how religion grows and spreads in men's hearts , now that the fields are white with harvest , I want you to look also and see what the teachers of religion are doing , '' said the Angel .
`` Dunk came to me in great distress .
He said you were insensible and breathing heavily .
I told him to say nothing to any one , but to fetch me a tray with your breakfast .
I have kept all the other servants away and I have waited here by you ... .
Dunk I think is safe ... .
You have been muttering and moving your head from side to side ... . ''
She looked at him wild-eyed .
Then she glanced at the phial , gripped in her hand .
`` Do n't waste that ! ''
he cried , and stepping forward caught hold of her wrist .
The phial fell from her white fingers , and crashed upon the rough paved garden path below .
`` They are not blasphemies , '' he said .
`` But I ought not to have surprised you and shocked you as I have done .
I want to tell you of changes that have happened to my mind . ''
`` Is there any reason , '' she pleaded , `` why you should have hidden things from me ? ''
`` I wo n't have a doctor , '' said the bishop .
The next words were : `` bound to believe and do all those things , which your Godfathers and Godmothers then undertook for you . ''
He could not stand those words .
He hesitated , and then substituted : `` acknowledge yourselves to be the true servants of the one God , who is the Lord of Mankind ? ''
The bishop looked up and saw Lady Ella 's expression .
Lady Ella was sitting up very stiffly , listening but not looking round .
A vague horror and a passionate desire to prevent the entry of Lady Sunderbund at any cost , seized upon the bishop .
She would , he felt , be the last overwhelming complication .
He descended to a base subterfuge .
He lay back in his chair slowly as though he unfolded himself , he covered his eyes with his hand and then groaned aloud .
`` Leave me alone ! ''
he cried in a voice of agony .
`` Leave me alone !
I can see no one ... .
I can -- no more . ''
The bishop thought he would like to talk to those two ordination candidates , but they prevailed upon him not to do so .
He lay for the best part of one night confiding remarkable things to two imaginary ordination candidates .
He had many weaknesses , but had he this egotism ?
No ; that wasn't the justice of the case .
The old man , bitterly disappointed , was endeavouring to wound .
Scrope asked himself whether he was to blame for that disappointment .
That was a more difficult question ... .
`` I want to be privileged to help build that First Church of the World Unified under God .
It is a dreadful thing to says but , you see , I am very rich ; this dreadful war has made me ever so much richer -- steel and shipping and things -- it is my trustees have done it .
I am ashamed to be so rich .
I want to give .
I want to give and help this great beginning of yours .
I want you to let me help on the temporal side , to make it easy for you to stand forth and deliver your message , amidst suitable surroundings and without any horrid worries on account of the sacrifices you have made .
Please do not turn my offering aside .
I have never wanted anything so much in all my life as I want to make this gift .
Unless I can make it I feel that for me there is no salvation !
I shall stick with my loads and loads of stocks and shares and horrid possessions outside the Needle 's Eye .
But if I could build a temple for God , and just live somewhere near it so as to be the poor woman who sweeps out the chapels , and die perhaps and be buried under its floor !
Do n't smile at me .
I mean every word of it .
Years ago I thought of such a thing .
After I had visited the Certosa di Pavia -- do you know it ?
So beautiful , and those two still alabaster figures -- recumbent .
But until now I could never see my way to any such service .
I am all afire to do it .
Let me stand behind you and make your mission possible .
I feel I have come to the most wonderful phase in my life .
I feel my call has come ... .
A letter demanding enormous deliberation .
She argued closely in spite of her italics .
It had never dawned upon the bishop before how light is the servitude of the disciple in comparison with the servitude of the master .
In many ways this proposal repelled and troubled him , in many ways it attracted him .
And the argument of his clear obligation to accept her co-operation gripped him ; it was a good argument .
The bishop became aware that Eleanor was returning to him across the sands .
She had made an end to her paddling , she had put on her shoes and stockings and become once more the grave and responsible young woman who had been taking care of him since his flight from Princhester .
He replaced the two letters in his pocket , and sat ready to smile as she drew near ; he admired her open brow , the toss of her hair , and the poise of her head upon her neck .
It was good to note that her hard reading at Cambridge had n't bent her shoulders in the least ... .
`` No , '' said the bishop in a grave tone that made her look up into his face .
`` I must go hack . ''
`` Daddy , '' she said , after a little pause ; `` the things you said and did that afternoon were the noblest you ever did in your life .
I wish I had been there .
It must have been splendid to be there .
I 've not told you before -- I 've been dying to ... .
I 'd promised not to say a word -- not to remind you .
I promised the doctor .
But now you ask me , now you are well again , I can tell you .
Kitty Kingdom has told me all about it , how it felt .
It was like light and order coming into a hopeless dark muddle .
What you said was like what we have all been trying to think -- I mean all of us young people .
Suddenly it was all clear . ''
`` But should I have said that -- in the cathedral ? ''
`` Perhaps rather a longer time than you think , Norah .
In the meantime -- ''
`` She will , '' said young enthusiasm , `` when she understands . ''
`` You do believe -- ? ''
He left his sentence unfinished .
`` And you are going to preach that , Daddy ? ''
Then she turned to her father .
`` And you think that His Kingdom will come -- perhaps in quite a little time -- perhaps in our lifetimes ?
And that all these ridiculous or wicked little kings and emperors , and these political parties , and these policies and conspiracies , and this nationalist nonsense and all the patriotism and rowdyism , all the private profit-seeking and every baseness in life , all the things that it is so horrible and disgusting to be young among and powerless among , you think they will fade before him ? ''
He smiled and left his sentence unfinished , and she smiled back at him to show she understood .
ONE afternoon in October , four months and more after that previous conversation , the card of Mr. Edward Scrope was brought up to Dr. Brighton-Pomfrey .
The name awakened no memories .
The doctor descended to discover a man so obviously in unaccustomed plain clothes that he had a momentary disagreeable idea that he was facing a detective .
Then he saw that this secular disguise draped the familiar form of his old friend , the former Bishop of Princhester .
Scrope was pale and a little untidy ; he had already acquired something of the peculiar , slightly faded quality one finds in a don who has gone to Hampstead and fallen amongst advanced thinkers and got mixed up with the Fabian Society .
His anxious eyes and faintly propitiatory manner suggested an impending appeal .
The ex-bishop sat down , and the doctor placed himself between his patient and the light .
At the beginning of this speech Dr. Brighton-Pomfrey 's hands had fallen to his hips .
As Scrope went on the doctor 's pose had stiffened .
His head had gone a little on one side ; he had begun to play with his glasses .
At the end he gave vent to one or two short coughs , and then pointed his words with his glasses held out .
Dr. Brighton-Pomfrey was meditating now with his eyes on his carpet and the corners of his mouth tucked in .
He was swinging his glasses pendulum-wise .
`` Tell me , '' he said , looking sideways at Scrope , `` what were the effects of this drug ?
It may have been anything .
How did it give you this -- this vision of the truth -- that led to your resignation ? ''
And when you took it ? ''
`` And did things look as usual ? ''
asked the doctor , protruding his knobby little face like a clenched fist .
`` They differed ? ''
said the doctor , relaxing .
`` You 'd get visions .
They would n't be divine visions .
If you took small quantities very discreetly you might get a temporary quickening .
But the swift result of all repeated drug-taking is , I can assure you , moral decay -- rapid moral decay .
To touch drugs habitually is to become hopelessly unpunctual , untruthful , callously selfish and insincere .
I am talking mere textbook , mere everyday common-places , to you when I tell you that . ''
`` I would n't if I could .
For your good I would n't .
And even if I would I could n't , for I do n't know the drug .
One of his infernal brews , no doubt .
It 's lost -- for good -- for your good , anyhow ... . ''
`` That door closes , '' he said .
`` There 's no getting back that way .
At the outset of this new phase in Scrope 's life that had followed the crisis of the confirmation service , everything had seemed very clear before him .
He believed firmly that he had been shown God , that he had himself stood in the presence of God , and that there had been a plain call to him to proclaim God to the world .
He had realized God , and it was the task of every one who had realized God to help all mankind to the same realization .
The proposal of Lady Sunderbund had fallen in with that idea .
He had been steeling himself to a prospect of struggle and dire poverty , but her prompt loyalty had come as an immense relief to his anxiety for his wife and family .
When he had talked to Eleanor upon the beach at Hunstanton it had seemed to him that his course was manifest , perhaps a little severe but by no means impossible .
They had sat together in the sunshine , exalted by a sense of fine adventure and confident of success , they had looked out upon the future , upon the great near future in which the idea of God was to inspire and reconstruct the world .
At the time he had no answer .
`` It is not the poverty I fear , '' said Lady Ella .
These domestic details , irrelevant as they may seem in a spiritual history , need to be given because they added an intimate keenness to Scrope 's readiness for this private chapel enterprise that he was discussing with Lady Sunderbund .
Along that line and along that line alone , he saw the way of escape from the great sea of London dinginess that threatened to submerge his family .
And it was also , he felt , the line of his duty ; it was his `` call . ''
Almost imperceptibly that resolve had weakened .
Then the decline had been perceived as one sometimes perceives a thing in the background out of the corner of one 's eye .
In all his early anticipations of the chapel enterprise , he had imagined himself in the likeness of a small but eloquent figure standing in a large exposed place and calling this lost misled world back to God .
Lady Sunderbund , he assumed , was to provide the large exposed place ( which was dimly paved with pews ) and guarantee that little matter which was to relieve him of sordid anxieties for his family , the stipend .
He had agreed in an inattentive way that this was to be eight hundred a year , with a certain proportion of the subscriptions .
`` At first , I shall be the chief subscriber , '' she said .
`` Before the rush comes . ''
He had been so content to take all this for granted and think no more about it -- more particularly to think no more about it -- that for a time he entirely disregarded the intense decorative activities into which Lady Sunderbund incontinently plunged .
Had he been inclined to remark them he certainly might have done so , even though a considerable proportion was being thoughtfully veiled for a time from his eyes .
`` Absolutely free , '' interrupted the young architect .
`` He might , for example , build a temple like a star . ''
Scrope hazarded the idea that a chanting people was a religious people .
He said , moreover , that there was a fine religiosity about Moussorgski , but that the most beautiful single piece of music in the world was Beethoven 's sonata , Opus 111 , -- he was thinking , he said , more particularly of the Adagio at the end , molto semplice e cantabile .
It had a real quality of divinity .
At first there was little or no doubt of his own faith .
He was still altogether convinced that he had to confess and proclaim God in his life .
He was as sure that God was the necessary king and saviour of mankind and of a man 's life , as he was of the truth of the Binomial Theorem .
But what began first to fade was the idea that he had been specially called to proclaim the True God to all the world .
He would have the most amiable conference with Lady Sunderbund , and then as he walked back to Notting Hill he would suddenly find stuck into his mind like a challenge , Heaven knows how : `` Another prophet ? ''
Even if he succeeded in this mission enterprise , he found himself asking , what would he be but just a little West-end Mahomet ?
He would have founded another sect , and we have to make an end to all sects .
How is there to be an end to sects , if there are still to be chapels -- richly decorated chapels -- and congregations , and salaried specialists in God ?
That was a very disconcerting idea .
It was particularly active at night .
He did his best to consider it with a cool detachment , regardless of the facts that his private income was just under three hundred pounds a year , and that his experiments in cultured journalism made it extremely improbable that the most sedulous literary work would do more than double this scanty sum .
Yet for all that these nasty , ugly , sordid facts were entirely disregarded , they did somehow persist in coming in and squatting down , shapeless in a black corner of his mind -- from which their eyes shone out , so to speak -- whenever his doubt whether he ought to set up as a prophet at all was under consideration .
`` But if the ' is n't 'oem ! ''
she said -- conclusively .
`` And is n't this -- isn't it rather a costly undertaking , rather more costly -- ''
He put the elevation down .
He took the plan from her hands and seemed to study it .
But he was really staring blankly at the whole situation .
`` But what for ? ''
he asked , stemming the torrent .
`` What need is there for chapels ?
There are to be no altars , no masses , no sacraments ? ''
`` I see your intention , '' he admitted .
`` I see your intention . ''
It is not in the least my idea .
I want to tell the whole world of the one God that can alone unite it and save it -- and you make this extravagant toy . ''
do n't Lady Sunderbund me ! ''
she cried with a novel rudeness .
`` Don't you see I 've done it all for you ? ''
`` Pe'haps I shall live it again ... . ''
She dashed her grief away with a hand beringed with stones as big as beetles .
`` But it is just these temples that have confused mankind , '' he said .
`` Except that it 's a clerical fashion .
I want to be just as I am now . ''
Very like the Binomial Theorem as one thought over that comparison .
A trivial matter , as it may seem to the reader , intensified that regret .
Three weeks ago Borrowdale , the bishop of Howeaster , had died , and Scrope would have been the next in rotation to succeed him on the bench of bishops .
He had always looked forward to the House of Lords , intending to take rather a new line , to speak more , and to speak more plainly and fully upon social questions than had hitherto been the practice of his brethren .
Well , that had gone ... .
She gathered her wits .
Then she spoke rather volubly .
`` I know it looks bad , Daddy .
I came up to meet a boy I know , who is going to France to-morrow .
I had to make excuses -- up there .
I hardly remember what excuses I made . ''
His next question took a little time in coming .
`` Dear Daddy ! ''
`` Dear Daddy ! ''
and touched his hand .
`` He 'll be coming here ... . ''
Eleanor got up , and was immediately greeted with joyful gestures by an approaching figure in khaki .
The two young people quickened their paces as they drew nearer one another .
There was a rapid greeting ; they stood close together and spoke eagerly .
Scrope could tell by their movements when he became the subject of their talk .
He saw the young man start and look over Eleanor 's shoulder , and he assumed an attitude of philosophical contemplation of the water , so as to give the young man the liberty of his profile .
He did not look up until they were quite close to him , and when he did he saw a pleasant , slightly freckled fair face a little agitated , and very honest blue eyes .
`` I hope you do n't think , Sir , that it 's bad form of me to ask Eleanor to come up and see me as I 've done .
I telegraphed to her on an impulse , and it 's been very kind of her to come up to me . ''
`` Sit down , '' said Scrope , `` sit down .
She assented as carelessly .
The fact that she and her lover were to go , with their meeting legalized and blessed , excluded all other considerations .
The two young people turned to each other .
Scrope stood for a moment or so and then sat down again .
Presently he sought to resume the interrupted thread of his thoughts .
He knew that he had been dealing with some very tremendous and urgent problem when Eleanor had appeared .
Then he remembered that Eleanor at the time of her approach had seemed to be a solution rather than an interruption .
Well , she had her own life .
She was making her own life .
Instead of solving his problems she was solving her own .
God bless those dear grave children !
They were nearer the elemental things than he was .
That eastward path led to Victoria -- and thence to a very probable death .
The lad was in the infantry and going straight into the trenches .
It was no longer a riddle that little immediate things should seem of more importance than great and final things .
For man is a creature thrusting his way up from the beast to divinity , from the blindness of individuality to the knowledge of a common end .
We stand deep in the engagements of our individual lives looking up to God , and only realizing in our moments of exaltation that through God we can escape from and rule and alter the whole world-wide scheme of individual lives .
Only in phases of illumination do we realize the creative powers that lie ready to man 's hand .
Personal affections , immediate obligations , ambitions , self-seeking , these are among the natural and essential things of our individual lives , as intimate almost as our primordial lusts and needs ; God , the true God , is a later revelation , a newer , less natural thing in us ; a knowledge still remote , uncertain , and confused with superstition ; an apprehension as yet entangled with barbaric traditions of fear and with ceremonial surgeries , blood sacrifices , and the maddest barbarities of thought .
We are only beginning to realize that God is here ; so far as our minds go he is still not here continually ; we perceive him and then again we are blind to him .
God is the last thing added to the completeness of human life .
To most His presence is imperceptible throughout their lives ; they know as little of him as a savage knows of the electric waves that beat through us for ever from the sun .
All this appeared now so clear and necessary to Scrope that he was astonished he had ever found the quality of contradiction in these manifest facts .
God was coming into the life of all mankind in the likeness of a captain and a king ; all the governments of men , all the leagues of men , their debts and claims and possessions , must give way to the world republic under God the king .
For five troubled years he had been staring religion in the face , and now he saw that it must mean this -- or be no more than fetishism , Obi , Orphic mysteries or ceremonies of Demeter , a legacy of mental dirtiness , a residue of self-mutilation and superstitious sacrifices from the cunning , fear-haunted , ape-dog phase of human development .
But it did mean this .
And every one who apprehended as much was called by that very apprehension to the service of God 's kingdom .
To live and serve God 's kingdom on earth , to help to bring it about , to propagate the idea of it , to establish the method of it , to incorporate all that one made and all that one did into its growing reality , was the only possible life that could be lived , once that God was known .
He sat with his hands gripping his knees , as if he were holding on to his idea .
`` And now for my part , '' he whispered , brows knit , `` now for my part . ''
`` It is curious how I drift back to Jesus , '' said Scrope .
`` I have never seen how much truth and good there was in his teaching until I broke away from Christianity and began to see him plain .
If I go on as I am going , I shall end a Nazarene ... . ''
The evening was growing dark and chill about him now , the sky was barred with deep bluish purple bands drawn across a chilly brightness that had already forgotten the sun , the trees were black and dim , but his understanding of his place and duty was growing very definite .
`` Not if I may have it again , '' consented Clementina .
What did a girl like Clementina make of all this ?
How had she got the book ?
The stuff had not hurt Eleanor .
Eleanor had been able to take the good that Chasters taught , and reject the evil of his spirit ... .
`` What is it ? ''
Her face became anxious .
`` What do you mean ? ''
she interrupted in a voice that made him look up sharply .
`` You're not going away , Ted ? ''
`` Oh , no .
But I hoped we should all be going away in a little time .
It is n't so . ''
`` I thought I should be able to set up a sort of broad church chapel .
I had a promise . ''
`` You mean , '' he said , beginning for the first time to comprehend her , `` that you do n't mind the poverty ? ''
`` But where is young Riverton ? ''
`` Three months ago that would have shocked me , '' said Lady Ella .
`` We 'd have hated that , '' said Clementina , with a glance as if for assent , at her mother .
`` We should all have hated that . ''
`` Are we never to go to church again ? ''
she asked , as if at a loss .
Scrope went back into his little study .
He felt shy and awkward with his daughters now .
He felt it would be difficult to get back to usualness with them .
To-night it would be impossible .
To-morrow he must come down to breakfast as though their talk had never occurred ... .
In his rehearsal of this deliverance during his walk home he had spoken much more plainly of his sense of the coming of God to rule the world and end the long age of the warring nations and competing traders , and he had intended to speak with equal plainness of the passionate subordination of the individual life to this great common purpose of God and man , an aspect he had scarcely mentioned at all .
But in that little room , in the presence of those dear familiar people , those great horizons of life had vanished .
The room with its folding doors had fixed the scale .
The wallpaper had smothered the Kingdom of God ; he had been , he felt , domestic ; it had been an after-supper talk .
He had been put out , too , by the mention of Lady Sunderbund and the case of Chasters ... .
After the girls had gone to bed , Lady Ella came to him and she was glowing and tender ; she was in love again as she had not been since the shadow had first fallen between them .
`` I was so glad you spoke to them , '' she said .
`` They had been puzzled .
But they are dear loyal girls . ''
`` But , '' he said , `` you are still a churchwoman ? ''
`` But I thought always that was what hurt you most , my breach with the church . ''
He thought of her sisters .
They had said but little to his clumsy explanations .
He thought of the years and experience that they must needs pass through before they could think the fulness of his present thoughts , and so he tempered his disappointment .
They were a gallant group , he felt .
He had to thank Ella and good fortune that so they were .
There was Clementina with her odd quick combatant sharpness , a harder being than Eleanor , but nevertheless a fine-spirited and even more independent .
There was Miriam , indefatigably kind .
Phoebe too had a real passion of the intellect and Daphne an innate disposition to service .
But it was strange how they had taken his proclamation of a conclusive breach with the church as though it was a command they must , at least outwardly , obey .
He had expected them to be more deeply shocked ; he had thought he would have to argue against objections and convert them to his views .
Their acquiescence was strange .
They were content he should think all this great issue out and give his results to them .
And his wife , well as he knew her , had surprised him .
He thought of her words : `` Whither thou goest -- ''
`` Oh God ! ''
`` Thou who has shown thyself to me , let me never forget thee again .
Save me from forgetfulness .
And show thyself to those I love ; show thyself to all mankind .
Use me , O God , use me ; but keep my soul alive .
Save me from the presumption of the trusted servant ; save me from the vanity of authority ... .
There was a very small grate , made of cast-iron in one piece and painted buff , and a still smaller misfit of a cast-iron fender that confessed the gray stone of the hearth .
No fire was laid , only a few scraps of torn paper and the bowl of a broken corn-cob pipe were visible behind the bars , and in the corner and rather thrust away was an angular japanned coal-box with a damaged hinge .
It was the custom in those days to warm every room separately from a separate fireplace , more prolific of dirt than heat , and the rickety sash window , the small chimney , and the loose-fitting door were expected to organize the ventilation of the room among themselves without any further direction .
Parload 's truckle bed hid its gray sheets beneath an old patchwork counterpane on one side of the room , and veiled his boxes and suchlike oddments , and invading the two corners of the window were an old whatnot and the washhandstand , on which were distributed the simple appliances of his toilet .
You must understand -- and every year it becomes increasingly difficult to understand -- how entirely different the world was then from what it is now .
It was a dark world ; it was full of preventable disorder , preventable diseases , and preventable pain , of harshness and stupid unpremeditated cruelties ; but yet , it may be even by virtue of the general darkness , there were moments of a rare and evanescent beauty that seem no longer possible in my experience .
The great Change has come for ever more , happiness and beauty are our atmosphere , there is peace on earth and good will to all men .
None would dare to dream of returning to the sorrows of the former time , and yet that misery was pierced , ever and again its gray curtain was stabbed through and through by joys of an intensity , by perceptions of a keenness that it seems to me are now altogether gone out of life .
Is it the Change , I wonder , that has robbed life of its extremes , or is it perhaps only this , that youth has left me -- even the strength of middle years leaves me now -- and taken its despairs and raptures , leaving me judgment , perhaps , sympathy , memories ?
After we had kissed and decided not to tell our parents for awhile of the irrevocable choice we had made , the time came for us to part , shyly and before others , and I and my mother went off back across the moonlit park -- the bracken thickets rustling with startled deer -- to the railway station at Checkshill and so to our dingy basement in Clayton , and I saw no more of Nettie -- except that I saw her in my thoughts -- for nearly a year .
But at our next meeting it was decided that we must correspond , and this we did with much elaboration of secrecy , for Nettie would have no one at home , not even her only sister , know of her attachment .
So I had to send my precious documents sealed and under cover by way of a confidential schoolfellow of hers who lived near London .
I could write that address down now , though house and street and suburb have gone beyond any man 's tracing .
Mr. Gabbitas , you see , did sometimes , as the phrase went , `` take notice '' of me , he had induced me to go on reading after I left school , and with the best intentions in the world and to anticipate the poison of the times , he had lent me Burble 's `` Scepticism Answered , '' and drawn my attention to the library of the Institute in Clayton .
`` It 's a bad time to change just now , '' he said after a little pause .
And with that we began one of our interminable conversations , one of those long , wandering , intensely generalizing , diffusely personal talks that will be dear to the hearts of intelligent youths until the world comes to an end .
The Change has not abolished that , anyhow .
It would be an incredible feat of memory for me now to recall all that meandering haze of words , indeed I recall scarcely any of it , though its circumstances and atmosphere stand out , a sharp , clear picture in my mind .
I posed after my manner and behaved very foolishly no doubt , a wounded , smarting egotist , and Parload played his part of the philosopher preoccupied with the deeps .
That was our style , you know , and meanwhile we walked together up the narrow street outside his lodging , up the stepway and the lanes toward Clayton Crest and the high road .
I wanted intensely to salve my self-respect by some revenge upon him , and I felt that if that could be done by slaying the hydra , I might drag its carcass to the feet of Nettie , and settle my other trouble as well .
`` What do you think of me NOW , Nettie ? ''
I can look back upon myself with , I believe , an almost perfect detachment , things have so changed that indeed now I am another being , with scarce anything in common with that boastful foolish youngster whose troubles I recall .
I see him vulgarly theatrical , egotistical , insincere , indeed I do not like him save with that instinctive material sympathy that is the fruit of incessant intimacy .
Because he was myself I may be able to feel and write understandingly about motives that will put him out of sympathy with nearly every reader , but why should I palliate or defend his quality ?
`` That 's all very well , '' began Parload .
`` Good night , mummy , '' said I , and kissed her a little roughly , and lit and took my candle and went off at once up the staircase to bed , not looking back at her .
Yet that night I pushed by her harshly .
I answered her curtly , left her concerned and perplexed in the passage , and slammed my door upon her .
And for a long time I lay raging at the hardship and evil of life , at the contempt of Rawdon , and the loveless coolness of Nettie's letter , at my weakness and insignificance , at the things I found intolerable , and the things I could not mend .
Over and over went my poor little brain , tired out and unable to stop on my treadmill of troubles .
Suddenly I came upon emotional exhaustion .
Some clock was striking midnight .
After all , I was young ; I had these quick transitions .
I remember quite distinctly , I stood up abruptly , undressed very quickly in the dark , and had hardly touched my pillow again before I was asleep .
Yes ; the comet was already dominant before I went over to make everything clear to Nettie .
And Parload had spent two hoarded pounds in buying himself a spectroscope , so that he could see for himself , night after night , that mysterious , that stimulating line -- the unknown line in the green .
How many times I wonder did I look at the smudgy , quivering symbol of the unknown things that were rushing upon us out of the inhuman void , before I rebelled ?
But at last I could stand it no longer , and I reproached Parload very bitterly for wasting his time in `` astronomical dilettantism . ''
`` Nothing matters but human beings . ''
We were obsessed by the books we read , by all the talk about us that once we had linked ourselves we were linked for life .
Then afterwards we discovered that other was also an egotism , a thing of ideas and impulses , that failed to correspond with ours .
She held a little book in her hand , open as if she were walking along and reading it .
That chanced to be her pose , but indeed she was standing quite still , looking away towards the gray and lichenous shrubbery wall and , as I think now , listening .
Her lips were a little apart , curved to that faint , sweet shadow of a smile .
When I and Nettie had been sixteen we had been just of an age and contemporaries altogether .
Now we were a year and three-quarters older , and she -- her metamorphosis was almost complete , and I was still only at the beginning of a man 's long adolescence .
I told her I had walked .
Whatever I wanted to explain I had no chance to do so .
I said a few discrepant things that she answered rather by her intonation than her words .
Her dress marked the end of her transition .
She told them in a marveling key that I had walked all the way from Clayton , and they gathered about me and echoed her notes of surprise .
`` You 'd better sit down , Willie , '' said her father ; `` now you have got here .
How 's your mother ? ''
We did n't shake down into comfort even with the coming of the tea-things .
Tea at the gardener 's cottage was a serious meal , with a big cake and little cakes , and preserves and fruit , a fine spread upon a table .
You must imagine me , sullen , awkward , and preoccupied , perplexed by the something that was inexplicably unexpected in Nettie , saying little , and glowering across the cake at her , and all the eloquence I had been concentrating for the previous twenty-four hours , miserably lost somewhere in the back of my mind .
Nettie's father tried to set me talking ; he had a liking for my gift of ready speech , for his own ideas came with difficulty , and it pleased and astonished him to hear me pouring out my views .
Indeed , over there I was , I think , even more talkative than with Parload , though to the world at large I was a shy young lout .
`` You ought to write it out for the newspapers , '' he used to say .
`` That 's what you ought to do .
I never heard such nonsense . ''
She startled me by the assent that flashed out upon her face .
But she said nothing , and stood waiting .
I thought really they were very good letters , and that Nettie was stupid to think otherwise , but I was for the moment clearly aware of the impossibility of conveying that to her .
`` No , '' she cried abruptly , starting into motion .
cried I , and still protesting , pursued her along the narrow alley between the staging toward the hot-house door .
I pursued her like an accusation , and she went before me like one who is guilty and ashamed .
So I recall it now .
But Nettie remained thoughtful and said very little .
She was lost in perplexities I could not fathom , and presently she slipped away from us and went upstairs .
All my enormous hatred of his class had flared up at the sight of his costume , at the fancied challenge of his words .
He was Edward Verrall , son of the man who owned not only this great estate but more than half of Rawdon 's pot-bank , and who had interests and possessions , collieries and rents , all over the district of the Four Towns .
He was a gallant youngster , people said , and very clever .
Young as he was there was talk of parliament for him ; he had been a great success at the university , and he was being sedulously popularized among us .
He took with a light confidence , as a matter of course , advantages that I would have faced the rack to get , and I firmly believed myself a better man than he .
He was , as he stood there , a concentrated figure of all that filled me with bitterness .
One day he had stopped in a motor outside our house , and I remember the thrill of rage with which I had noted the dutiful admiration in my mother 's eyes as she peered through her blind at him .
`` That's young Mr. Verrall , '' she said .
`` They say he 's very clever . ''
My retort was the cheap expedient of re-echoing , `` Who the devil are you ? ''
`` WELL , '' he said .
He replaced his cigar , and there was a brief pause .
`` Catching a train ? ''
The comet was perhaps twenty degrees from the moon .
What a wonderful thing it looked floating there , a greenish-white apparition in the dark blue deeps !
It looked brighter than the moon because it was smaller , but the shadow it cast , though clearer cut , was much fainter than the moon 's shadow .
I went on noting these facts , watching my two shadows precede me .
When the train stopped at the next station I had given up all thoughts of going back .
I was sitting in the corner of the carriage with my bruised and wounded hand pressed under my arm , and still insensible to its pain , trying to think out clearly a scheme of action -- action that should express the monstrous indignation that possessed me .
So said one of the two men who got into the train and settled down .
I pushed and threaded my way through the bystanders and went on , and his curious harsh flat voice pursued me .
I went on with the thoughts that had occupied me before -- where I could buy a revolver , and how I might master its use -- and probably I should have forgotten all about him had he not taken a part in the hideous dream that ended the little sleep I had that night .
For the most part I lay awake thinking of Nettie and her lover .
I had a kind of shyness of the moment when I should have to face the shopman , and I was particularly anxious to have a story ready if he should see fit to ask questions why I bought such a thing .
I determined to say I was going to Texas , and I thought it might prove useful there .
Texas in those days had the reputation of a wild lawless land .
As I knew nothing of caliber or impact , I wanted also to be able to ask with a steady face at what distance a man or woman could be killed by the weapon that might be offered me .
I was pretty cool-headed in relation to such practical aspects of my affair .
I had some little difficulty in finding a gunsmith .
In Clayton there were some rook-rifles and so forth in a cycle shop , but the only revolvers these people had impressed me as being too small and toylike for my purpose .
It was in a pawnshop window in the narrow High Street of Swathinglea that I found my choice , a reasonably clumsy and serious-looking implement ticketed `` As used in the American army . ''
A dark , quiet crowd , that was greater each day , a crowd more than half women , brooded as a cloud will sometimes brood permanently upon a mountain crest , in the market-place outside the Clayton Town Hall , where the conference was held .
I consider myself justified in regarding Lord Redcar 's passing automobile with a special animosity because of the leaks in our roof .
All this begins to sound incredible .
I can only assure you that it was so .
But I , when I learned that old Pettigrew had been down to tell my mother all about his rheumatism , to inspect the roof , and to allege that nothing was needed , gave way to my most frequent emotion in those days , a burning indignation , and took the matter into my own hands .
I wrote and asked him , with a withering air of technicality , to have the roof repaired `` as per agreement , '' and added , `` if not done in one week from now we shall be obliged to take proceedings . ''
I had not mentioned this high line of conduct to my mother at first , and so when old Pettigrew came down in a state of great agitation with my letter in his hand , she was almost equally agitated .
The road I followed came down between banks of wretched-looking working-men 's houses , in close-packed rows on either side , and took upon itself the role of Swathinglea High Street , where , at a lamp and a pillar-box , the steam-trams began .
So far that dirty hot way had been unusually quiet and empty , but beyond the corner , where the first group of beershops clustered , it became populous .
It was very quiet still , even the children were a little inactive , but there were a lot of people standing dispersedly in little groups , and with a general direction towards the gates of the Bantock Burden coalpit .
All the men had not come out of the Bantock Burden pit .
Something was wrong there , an indecision if nothing else ; the mine was still working , and there was a rumor that men from Durham had been held in readiness by Lord Redcar , and were already in the mine .
Now , it is absolutely impossible to ascertain certainly how things stood at that time .
The newspapers say this and that , but nothing trustworthy remains .
By this time the comet had begun to assume the cloudlike form still familiar through the medium of a thousand photographs and sketches .
At first it had been an almost telescopic speck ; it had brightened to the dimensions of the greatest star in the heavens ; it had still grown , hour by hour , in its incredibly swift , its noiseless and inevitable rush upon our earth , until it had equaled and surpassed the moon .
Now it was the most splendid thing this sky of earth has ever held .
I have never seen a photograph that gave a proper idea of it .
Never at any time did it assume the conventional tailed outline , comets are supposed to have .
Astronomers talked of its double tail , one preceding it and one trailing behind it , but these were foreshortened to nothing , so that it had rather the form of a bellying puff of luminous smoke with an intenser , brighter heart .
It rose a hot yellow color , and only began to show its distinctive greenness when it was clear of the mists of the evening .
Preoccupied with myself and with my dark dream about Nettie and my honor , I threaded my course through the stagnating threat of this gathering , and was caught unawares , when suddenly the whole scene flashed into drama .
It was natural , I suppose , that my fingers should close upon the revolver in my pocket .
It was my own purpose coming to meet me half way .
There was to be a fight here , it seemed certain to come to a scuffle , and here we were --
Of course I had to kill him .
Lord Redcar , I believe , had jumped down from his car and felled Mitchell , and men were already running out to his assistance from the colliery gates .
I had some difficulty in shoving through the crowd ; I can still remember very vividly being jammed at one time between two big men so that my arms were pinned to my sides , but all the other details are gone out of my mind until I found myself almost violently projected forward into the `` scrap . ''
`` Cut , Teddy !
It wo n't do .
The picketa 's got i'on bahs .
Feet swayed about me , and some hobnailed miner kicked my ankle and went stumbling .
There were shouts and curses , and then everything had swept past me .
I rolled over on my face and beheld the chauffeur , young Verrall , and Lord Redcar -- the latter holding up his long skirts of fur , and making a grotesque figure -- one behind the other , in full bolt across a coldly comet-lit interval , towards the open gates of the colliery .
A feeling of ridiculous impotence overwhelmed me .
I struggled painfully to my feet .
Here were we British , forty-one millions of people , in a state of almost indescribably aimless , economic , and moral muddle that we had neither the courage , the energy , nor the intelligence to improve , that most of us had hardly the courage to think about , and with our affairs hopelessly entangled with the entirely different confusions of three hundred and fifty million other persons scattered about the globe , and here were the Germans over against us , fifty-six millions , in a state of confusion no whit better than our own , and the noisy little creatures who directed papers and wrote books and gave lectures , and generally in that time of world-dementia pretended to be the national mind , were busy in both countries , with a sort of infernal unanimity , exhorting -- and not only exhorting but successfully persuading -- the two peoples to divert such small common store of material , moral and intellectual energy as either possessed , into the purely destructive and wasteful business of war .
And -- I have to tell you these things even if you do not believe them , because they are vital to my story -- there was not a man alive who could have told you of any real permanent benefit , of anything whatever to counterbalance the obvious waste and evil , that would result from a war between England and Germany , whether England shattered Germany or was smashed and overwhelmed , or whatever the end might be .
The press -- those newspapers that are now so strange to us -- like the `` Empires , '' the `` Nations , '' the Trusts , and all the other great monstrous shapes of that extraordinary time -- was in the nature of an unanticipated accident .
It had happened , as weeds happen in abandoned gardens , just as all our world has happened , -- because there was no clear Will in the world to bring about anything better .
Towards the end this `` press '' was almost entirely under the direction of youngish men of that eager , rather unintelligent type , that is never able to detect itself aimless , that pursues nothing with incredible pride and zeal , and if you would really understand this mad era the comet brought to an end , you must keep in mind that every phase in the production of these queer old things was pervaded by a strong aimless energy and happened in a concentrated rush .
Let me describe to you , very briefly , a newspaper day .
The whole affair a noisy paroxysm of nonsense , unreasonable excitement , witless mischief , and waste of strength -- signifying nothing .
It was like one of a flood of disease germs that have invaded a body , that paper .
There I was , one corpuscle in the big amorphous body of the English community , one of forty-one million such corpuscles and , for all my preoccupations , these potent headlines , this paper ferment , caught me and swung me about .
And all over the country that day , millions read as I read , and came round into line with me , under the same magnetic spell , came round -- how did we say it ?
-- '' to face the foe . ''
You must understand that I had no set plan of murder when I walked over to Checkshill .
I had no set plan of any sort .
There was a great confusion of dramatically conceived intentions in my head , scenes of threatening and denunciation and terror , but I did not mean to kill .
The revolver was to turn upon my rival my disadvantage in age and physique .
Through the open door of one of the glass houses I saw old Stuart .
He was leaning against the staging , his hands in his pockets , and so deep in thought he gave no heed to me .
Something struck me as unusual about the place , but I could not tell at first what it was .
One of the bedroom windows was open , and the customary short blind , with its brass upper rail partly unfastened , drooped obliquely across the vacant space .
It looked negligent and odd , for usually everything about the cottage was conspicuously trim .
The door was standing wide open , and everything was still .
But giving that usually orderly hall an odd look -- it was about half-past two in the afternoon -- was a pile of three dirty plates , with used knives and forks upon them , on one of the hall chairs .
I went into the hall , looked into either room , and hesitated .
For a time no one answered me , and I stood listening and expectant , with my fingers about my weapon .
Some one moved about upstairs presently , and was still again .
The tension of waiting seemed to brace my nerves .
She vanished round the corner of the house .
`` Mrs. Stuart , '' I said , clearing my throat ; `` what has become of Nettie ? ''
There came a lull .
I forgot the weapon in my pocket .
I said nothing , and suddenly she stood erect before me , wiping her swollen eyes .
`` Willie , '' she gulped , `` she 's gone ! ''
`` Yes , yes .
But where has she gone ? ''
She went on with sobs , and now telling her story with a sort of fragmentary hurry : `` She went out bright and shining , out of this house for ever .
She was smiling , Willie -- as if she was glad to be going .
( `` Glad to be going , '' I echoed with soundless lips . )
'You're mighty fine for the morning , ' I says ; 'mighty fine . '
'Let the girl be pretty , ' says her father , 'while she 's young ! '
And somewhere she 'd got a parcel of her things hidden to pick up , and she was going off -- out of this house for ever ! ''
`` Her father took it . ''
Where is her letter ?
Let me see it .
And as for this gentleman -- ''
She made no answer .
`` All I could do for you , Willie , '' she began presently .
`` Was it young Verrall ? ''
I cried , `` why -- Do ! ''
he cried , looking at me for the first time , `` What 's come to your chin , Willie ? ''
`` Make him marry her !
Horsewhip him , I say !
-- I'd strangle him ! ''
I came near to raving .
I had a wild impulse to strike him in the face .
Once in my boyhood I happened upon a bird terribly mangled by some cat , and killed it in a frenzy of horror and pity .
I had a gust of that same emotion now , as this shameful mutilated soul fluttered in the dust , before me .
Then , you know , I dismissed him from the case .
What was the good of telling him ?
`` Hampton , '' he repeated .
How could you make Hampton ? ''
He turned the envelope about .
-- why , Willie , you 're a worse hand at the job than me ! ''
But if you can really grasp the shameful grotesqueness of the old life , you will begin to appreciate the interpretation of old Mrs. Verrall 's appearance that leapt up at once in my mind .
I saw her expression change , her mouth fell a little way open , her forehead wrinkled , and her eyes grew round .
She found me a queer customer even at the first sight , and there was something in the manner of my advance that took away her breath .
And so I addressed this poor little expensive old woman in the following terms , converting her by a violent metonymy into a comprehensive plural .
`` You infernal land thieves ! ''
I said point-blank into her face .
`` HAVE YOU COME TO OFFER THEM MONEY ? ''
None of her sort of people ever did seem to understand such livid flashes of hate , as ever and again lit the crowded darkness below their feet .
The thing leapt out of the black for a moment and vanished , like a threatening figure by a desolate roadside lit for a moment by one 's belated carriage-lamp and then swallowed up by the night .
They counted it with nightmares , and did their best to forget what was evidently as insignificant as it was disturbing .
`` Why am I here only to suffer ignominies ? ''
`` Why have you made me with pride that can not be satisfied , with desires that turn and rend me ?
Is it a jest , this world -- a joke you play on your guests ?
I -- even I -- have a better humor than that ! ''
And in one of these raving fits I drew my revolver from my pocket and fired into the quiet night .
Three times I fired it .
I was like a man in a solitary desert who has suddenly heard a voice .
As I came over Clayton Crest I recalled that I missed the multitude that now night after night walked out to stare at the comet , and the little preacher in the waste beyond the hoardings , who warned sinners to repent before the Judgment , was not in his usual place .
You figure that empty mean street , emptily echoing to my footsteps -- no soul awake and audible but me .
Then my halt at the placard .
And amidst that sleeping stillness , smeared hastily upon the board , a little askew and crumpled , but quite distinct beneath that cool meteoric glare , preposterous and appalling , the measureless evil of that word --
`` I got a letter last evening , dear , '' and as she bent near me to put the tray upon my knees , she kissed my hair softly .
For a moment we both remained still , resting on that , her cheek just touching my head .
There was an air of culture about his room that always cowed me , and that made me constrained even on this occasion .
The table under the window was littered with photographic material and the later albums of his continental souvenirs , and on the American cloth trimmed shelves that filled the recesses on either side of the fireplace were what I used to think in those days a quite incredible number of books -- perhaps eight hundred altogether , including the reverend gentleman 's photograph albums and college and school text-books .
This suggestion of learning was enforced by the little wooden shield bearing a college coat-of-arms that hung over the looking-glass , and by a photograph of Mr. Gabbitas in cap and gown in an Oxford frame that adorned the opposite wall .
And in the middle of that wall stood his writing-desk , which I knew to have pigeon-holes when it was open , and which made him seem not merely cultured but literary .
At that he wrote sermons , composing them himself !
`` Yes , '' he said , taking possession of the hearthrug , `` the war had to come sooner or later .
If we smash their fleet for them now ; well , there 's an end to the matter ! ''
He invited me to smoke -- that queer old practice !
-- and then when I declined , began talking in a confidential tone of this `` dreadful business '' of the strikes .
`` The war wo n't improve THAT outlook , '' he said , and was very grave for a moment .
`` You see , '' I said , `` I 'm a socialist .
I do n't think this world was made for a small minority to dance on the faces of every one else . ''
`` He reasons closely , eh ? ''
he said , and indicated the armchair with a flat hand , and beamed persuasively .
`` That he 's wrong .
I do n't think he proves his case .
I do n't think Christianity is true .
He knows himself for the pretender he is .
His reasoning 's -- Rot . ''
`` I 'm sorry you think that , '' he said at last , with a catch in his breath .
Faith we can understand to-day , all men live by faith , but in the old time every one confused quite hopelessly Faith and a forced , incredible Belief in certain pseudo-concrete statements .
I am inclined to say that neither believers nor unbelievers had faith as we understand it -- they had insufficient intellectual power .
They could not trust unless they had something to see and touch and say , like their barbarous ancestors who could not make a bargain without exchange of tokens .
If they no longer worshipped stocks and stones , or eked out their needs with pilgrimages and images , they still held fiercely to audible images , to printed words and formulae .
I am , I know , putting a strain upon your credulity when I tell you that I now have little doubt that the Rev .
Gabbitas was absolutely ignorant even of the name of Nietzsche , although that writer presented a separate and distinct attitude of attack upon the faith that was in the reverend gentleman 's keeping .
He shied away so awkwardly at the name that I repeated it at once .
It came on the heels of my question in the form of a clatter of horses without , and the gride and cessation of wheels .
I glimpsed a straw-hatted coachman and a pair of grays .
It seemed an incredibly magnificent carriage for Clayton .
He went out of the room waving vague prohibitory gestures .
That held me perplexed for a space .
Well , anyhow I was leaving it all !
Thank God I was leaving it all !
Then , as I turned to go on , I thought of my mother .
Then I thought of the curate 's sovereigns .
If he has missed them already , what should I return to ?
And , even if I returned , how could I put them back ?
So the hot day came to its own again , and people forgot the night .
I walked backward and forward , backward and forward , along the sea front , peering into the faces of the young couples who promenaded , with my hand in my pocket ready , and a curious ache in my heart that had no kindred with rage .
Until at last all the promenaders had gone home to bed , and I was alone with the star .
How was I to ask ?
What was I to ask for ?
I puzzled for a long time over that -- at first I was a little tired and indolent -- and then presently I had a flow of ideas .
My solution was fairly ingenious .
I invented the following story .
I happened to be taking a holiday in Shaphambury , and I was making use of the opportunity to seek the owner of a valuable feather boa , which had been left behind in the hotel of my uncle at Wyvern by a young lady , traveling with a young gentleman -- no doubt a youthful married couple .
They had reached Shaphambury somewhen on Thursday .
I went over the story many times , and gave my imaginary uncle and his hotel plausible names .
At any rate this yarn would serve as a complete justification for all the questions I might wish to ask .
`` I want to find a lady and gentleman who came to Shaphambury on Tuesday , '' I said .
Then I fell into conversation with a salacious wooden-legged old man with a silver ring , who swept the steps that went down to the beach from the parade .
He knew much about young couples , but only in general terms , and nothing of the particular young couple I sought .
He reminded me in the most disagreeable way of the sensuous aspects of life , and I was not sorry when presently a gunboat appeared in the offing signalling the coastguard and the camp , and cut short his observations upon holidays , beaches , and morals .
I walked back to the parade trying to reason my next step out , and muttering to myself , because there was something in that luminous wonderfulness that touched one 's brain , and made one feel a little light-headed .
`` What 's that flicker ?
A gunflash -- or I 'm a lost soul ! ''
Then there was the sky , the wonderful , luminous , starless , moonless sky , and the empty blue deeps of the edge of it , between the meteor and the sea .
And once -- strange phantoms !
-- I saw far out upon the shine , and very small and distant , three long black warships , without masts , or sails , or smoke , or any lights , dark , deadly , furtive things , traveling very swiftly and keeping an equal distance .
And when I looked again they were very small , and then the shine had swallowed them up .
I stood upon the edge of the great ocean , and I was filled with an inarticulate spirit of prayer , and I desired greatly -- peace from myself .
And presently , there in the east , would come again the red discoloring curtain over these mysteries , the finite world again , the gray and growing harsh certainties of dawn .
My resolve I knew would take up with me again .
This was a rest for me , an interlude , but to-morrow I should be William Leadford once more , ill-nourished , ill-dressed , ill-equipped and clumsy , a thief and shamed , a wound upon the face of life , a source of trouble and sorrow even to the mother I loved ; no hope in life left for me now but revenge before my death .
It was troublesome to go further because the hummocks and the tangled bushes began .
I sat down amidst a black cluster of shrubs , and rested , chin on hand .
I drew my revolver from my pocket and looked at it , and held it in my hand .
Each wore a tightly fitting bathing dress that hid nothing of the shining , dripping beauty of their youthful forms .
I heard him shout between exhaustion and laughter .
Some one disputed that , and there followed a little indistinct babble of argument .
I went on slowly in the circuit I had marked out , watching these people as I went .
They shouted together with such a common intensity of direction that I halted and looked seaward .
I saw the tall fountain flung by a shot that had just missed the great warship .
A second rose still nearer us , a third , and a fourth , and then a great uprush of dust , a whirling cloud , leapt out of the headland whence the rocket had come , and spread with a slow deliberation right and left .
Hard on that an enormous crash , and the man with the full voice leapt and cried , `` Hit ! ''
It was fifty yards , forty yards , thirty yards -- the little group of people , still heedless of me , was larger and more important now , the green-shot sky and the fighting ships remoter .
Some one darted out from the bungalow , with an interrupted question , and stopped , suddenly aware of me .
It was Nettie , with some coquettish dark wrap about her , and the green glare shining on her sweet face and white throat .
I could see her expression , stricken with dismay and terror , at my advance , as though something had seized her by the heart and held her still -- a target for my shots .
He gripped her arm , and dragged her forward .
They doubled to the left .
We were off the road again and on turf .
It felt like turf .
I tripped and fell at a ditch that was somehow full of smoke , and was up again , but now they were phantoms half gone into the livid swirls about me .
I stared unwonderingly at these things for a time , and then there rose upon my consciousness , intermingling with these , the bristling golden green heads of growing barley .
A remote faint question , where I might be , drifted and vanished again in my mind .
Everything was very still .
There was something in it now , something absurd , that made me smile pityingly .
And on the worn oak of the stile was a round label , and on the label these words , `` Swindells ' G 90 Pills . ''
My mind ran for a time on Swindells , on the imbecile pushfulness of that extinct creature , dealing in rubbish , covering the country-side with lies in order to get -- what had he sought ?
-- a silly , ugly , great house , a temper-destroying motor-car , a number of disrespectful , abject servants ; thwarted intrigues for a party-fund baronetcy as the crest of his life , perhaps .
You can not imagine the littleness of those former times ; their naive , queer absurdities !
And for the first time in my existence I thought of these things without bitterness .
In the former days I had seen wickedness , I had seen tragedy , but now I saw only the extraordinary foolishness of the old life .
The ludicrous side of human wealth and importance turned itself upon me , a shining novelty , poured down upon me like the sunrise , and engulfed me in laughter .
My vision of Judgment became a delightful burlesque .
I saw the chuckling Angel sayer with his face veiled , and the corporeal presence of Swindells upheld amidst the laughter of the spheres .
`` Here 's a thing , and a very pretty thing , and what 's to be done with this very pretty thing ? ''
I saw a soul being drawn from a rotund , substantial-looking body like a whelk from its shell .
I laughed loudly and long .
even as I laughed the keen point of things accomplished stabbed my mirth , and I was weeping , weeping aloud , convulsed with weeping , and the tears were pouring down my face .
`` I say , '' he said , in his full deliberate tones , straining round to see me and showing a profile , a well-modeled nose , a sensitive , clumsy , big lip , known to every caricaturist in the world , `` I 'm in a fix .
I fell and wrenched my ankle .
Where are you ? ''
He surveyed me and meditated gravely .
`` I woke up , '' he said , feeling his way in his memory .
By all the standards of the former time it would have been remarkable that I talked quite easily and freely with so great a man .
`` Yes , '' I said ; `` that 's it .
One feels one has awakened -- from something more than that green gas .
As though the other things also -- weren't quite real . ''
`` My ankle is !
It 's either broken or badly sprained -- I think sprained ; it 's very painful to move , but personally I 'm not in pain .
That sort of general sickness that comes with local injury -- not a trace of it !
He mused and remarked , `` I was speaking at Colchester , and saying things about the war .
I begin to see it better .
The reporters -- scribble , scribble .
Max Sutaine , 1885 .
Compliments about the oysters .
A war that must needs be long and bloody , taking toll from castle and cottage , taking toll !
Was I drunk last night ? ''
It was a most natural part of the wonder of that morning that he should adopt this incredible note of frankness , and that it should abate nothing from my respect for him .
That memory stands out against the dark past of the world with extraordinary clearness and brightness .
The air , I remember , was full of the calling and piping and singing of birds .
I have a curious persuasion too that there was a distant happy clamor of pealing bells , but that I am half convinced is a mistake .
Nevertheless , there was something in the fresh bite of things , in the dewy newness of sensation that set bells rejoicing in one 's brain .
And that big , fair , pensive man sitting on the ground had beauty even in his clumsy pose , as though indeed some Great Master of strength and humor had made him .
I wish I could give every word he said to me ; he struck out image after image to my nascent intelligence , with swift broken fragments of speech .
If I had a precise full memory of that morning I should give it you , verbatim , minutely .
But here , save for the little sharp things that stand out , I find only blurred general impressions .
Throughout I have to make up again his half-forgotten sentences and speeches , and be content with giving you the general effect .
But I can see and hear him now as he said , `` The dream got worst at the end .
The war -- a perfectly horrible business !
And it was just like a nightmare , you could n't do anything to escape from it -- every one was driven ! ''
He glanced at me from under his light eyelashes .
`` If others feel like you and I , '' he said , `` there 'll be a lot of pistols left among the barley to-day .
But most I recall Melmount as he talked a little later , sitting upon a great chalk boulder with the sunlight on his big , perspiration-dewed face .
He made his resolves .
`` We must end war , '' he said , in that full whisper of his ; `` it is stupidity .
With so many people able to read and think -- even as it is -- there is no need of anything of the sort .
What have we rulers been at ?
Drowsing like people in a stifling room , too dull and sleepy and too base toward each other for any one to get up and open the window .
What haven't we been at ? ''
`` Stop what ? ''
said I , stepping forward instinctively to help him .
Speaking of the fishes reminds me of a queer little inset upon that great world-dreaming .
The odd fate of the crew of the submarine vessel B 94 has always seemed memorable to me .
So far as I know , they were the only men alive who never saw that veil of green drawn across the world .
All the while that the stillness held above , they were working into the mouth of the Elbe , past the booms and the mines , very slowly and carefully , a sinister crustacean of steel , explosive crammed , along the muddy bottom .
They trailed a long clue that was to guide their fellows from the mother ship floating awash outside .
Then in the long channel beyond the forts they came up at last to mark down their victims and get air .
That must have been before the twilight of dawn , for they tell of the brightness of the stars .
They were amazed to find themselves not three hundred yards from an ironclad that had run ashore in the mud , and heeled over with the falling tide .
It was afire amidships , but no one heeded that -- no one in all that strange clear silence heeded that -- and not only this wrecked vessel , but all the dark ships lying about them , it seemed to their perplexed and startled minds must be full of dead men !
But the thought of certain stokers the sailors of the submarine failed altogether to save brings me back to the thread of grotesque horror that runs through all this event , the thread I can not overlook for all the splendors of human well-being that have come from it .
I can not forget the unguided ships that drove ashore , that went down in disaster with all their sleeping hands , nor how , inland , motor-cars rushed to destruction upon the roads , and trains upon the railways kept on in spite of signals , to be found at last by their amazed , reviving drivers standing on unfamiliar lines , their fires exhausted , or , less lucky , to be discovered by astonished peasants or awakening porters smashed and crumpled up into heaps of smoking , crackling ruin .
The foundry fires of the Four Towns still blazed , the smoke of our burning still denied the sky .
Fires burnt indeed the brighter for the Change -- and spread .
And soon the machines must have exhausted their feed of ink and paper , and thumped and banged and rattled emptily amidst the general quiet .
Then I suppose the furnaces failed for want of stoking , the steam pressure fell in the pistons , the machinery slackened , the lights burnt dim , and came and went with the ebb of energy from the power-station .
Who can tell precisely the sequence of these things now ?
Then , you know , slowly and with much conversation and doubt , they set about to produce the paper .
The postmaster had heard them in the gathering darkness , `` In Zion 's Hope abiding . ''
It was the most extraordinary thing in the world to hear this flushed and happy-eyed man telling that story of his recent death .
It did not seem at all possible to have happened in the last twelve hours .
It was minute and remote , these people who went singing through the darkling to their God .
It was like a scene shown to me , very small and very distinctly painted , in a locket .
I remember how one day she confessed herself .
That also went with me through the stillness -- that silent kneeling figure , that frozen prayer to God to shield me , silent in a silent world , rushing through the emptiness of space .
Already , when it came to us , the soldiers , crowded between the lines of dusty poplars along the road to Allarmont , were chatting and sharing coffee with the French riflemen , who had hailed them from their carefully hidden pits among the vineyards up the slopes of Beauville .
A certain perplexity had come to these marksmen , who had dropped asleep tensely ready for the rocket that should wake the whirr and rattle of their magazines .
At the sight and sound of the stir and human confusion in the roadway below , it had come to each man individually that he could not shoot .
One conscript , at least , has told his story of his awakening , and how curious he thought the rifle there beside him in his pit , how he took it on his knees to examine .
Then , as his memory of its purpose grew clearer , he dropped the thing , and stood up with a kind of joyful horror at the crime escaped , to look more closely at the men he was to have assassinated .
`` Brave types , '' he thought , they looked for such a fate .
The summoning rocket never flew .
Below , the men did not fall into ranks again , but sat by the roadside , or stood in groups talking , discussing with a novel incredulity the ostensible causes of the war .
`` The Emperor ! ''
said they ; and `` Oh , nonsense !
Get some one else for this job !
Where 's the coffee ? ''
The officers held their own horses , and talked to the men frankly , regardless of discipline .
Some Frenchmen out of the rifle-pits came sauntering down the hill .
Others stood doubtfully , rifles still in hand .
Curious faces scanned these latter .
Little arguments sprang as : `` Shoot at us !
They 're respectable French citizens . ''
There is a picture of it all , very bright and detailed in the morning light , in the battle gallery amidst the ruins at old Nancy , and one sees the old-world uniform of the `` soldier , '' the odd caps and belts and boots , the ammunition-belt , the water-bottle , the sort of tourist 's pack the men carried , a queer elaborate equipment .
The soldiers had awakened one by one , first one and then another .
I wonder sometimes whether , perhaps , if the two armies had come awake in an instant , the battle , by mere habit and inertia , might not have begun .
But the men who waked first , sat up , looked about them in astonishment , had time to think a little .
Everywhere there was laughter , everywhere tears .
Those old-time revivals were , I say , the convulsive movements of a body that suffocates .
They are the clearest manifestations from before the Change of a sense in all men that things were not right .
But they were too often but momentary illuminations .
Their force spent itself in inco-ordinated shouting , gesticulations , tears .
They were but flashes of outlook .
Disgust of the narrow life , of all baseness , took shape in narrowness and baseness .
The quickened soul ended the night a hypocrite ; prophets disputed for precedence ; seductions , it is altogether indisputable , were frequent among penitents !
and Ananias went home converted and returned with a falsified gift .
And it was almost universal that the converted should be impatient and immoderate , scornful of reason and a choice of expedients , opposed to balance , skill , and knowledge .
Incontinently full of grace , like thin old wine-skins overfilled , they felt they must burst if once they came into contact with hard fact and sane direction .
One irrelevant memory comes back to me , irrelevant , and yet by some subtle trick of quality it summarizes the Change for me .
It is the memory of a woman 's very beautiful face , a woman with a flushed face and tear-bright eyes who went by me without speaking , rapt in some secret purpose .
I passed her when in the afternoon of the first day , struck by a sudden remorse , I went down to Menton to send a telegram to my mother telling her all was well with me .
Whither this woman went I do not know , nor whence she came ; I never saw her again , and only her face , glowing with that new and luminous resolve , stands out for me .
But that expression was the world 's .
I remember as one thing that struck me very forcibly at the time , the absence of any discussion , any difference of opinion , about the broad principles of our present state .
These men had lived hitherto in a system of conventions and acquired motives , loyalty to a party , loyalty to various secret agreements and understandings , loyalty to the Crown ; they had all been capable of the keenest attention to precedence , all capable of the most complete suppression of subversive doubts and inquiries , all had their religious emotions under perfect control .
They had seemed protected by invisible but impenetrable barriers from all the heady and destructive speculations , the socialistic , republican , and communistic theories that one may still trace through the literature of the last days of the comet .
But now it was as if the very moment of the awakening those barriers and defences had vanished , as if the green vapors had washed through their minds and dissolved and swept away a hundred once rigid boundaries and obstacles .
They had admitted and assimilated at once all that was good in the ill-dressed propagandas that had clamored so vehemently and vainly at the doors of their minds in the former days .
It was exactly like the awakening from an absurd and limiting dream .
They had come out together naturally and inevitably upon the broad daylight platform of obvious and reasonable agreement upon which we and all the order of our world now stand .
And as it was with the question of the land , so was it also with a hundred other systems and institutions and complicated and disingenuous factors in the life of man .
They spoke of trade , and I realized for the first time there could be buying and selling that was no loss to any man ; they spoke of industrial organization , and one saw it under captains who sought no base advantages .
The haze of old associations , of personal entanglements and habitual recognitions had been dispelled from every stage and process of the social training of men .
Things long hidden appeared discovered with an amazing clearness and nakedness .
These men who had awakened , laughed dissolvent laughs , and the old muddle of schools and colleges , books and traditions , the old fumbling , half-figurative , half-formal teaching of the Churches , the complex of weakening and confusing suggestions and hints , amidst which the pride and honor of adolescence doubted and stumbled and fell , became nothing but a curious and pleasantly faded memory .
`` There must be a common training of the young , '' said Richover ; `` a frank initiation .
We have not so much educated them as hidden things from them , and set traps .
And it might have been so easy -- it can all be done so easily . ''
I seemed to see these two for the first time ; how fine they were , how graceful and human .
It was as though I had never really looked at them before , and , indeed , always before I had beheld them through a mist of selfish passion .
They had shared the universal darkness and dwarfing of the former time ; they shared the universal exaltation of the new .
Now suddenly Nettie , and the love of Nettie , a great passion for Nettie , lived again in me .
This change which had enlarged men 's hearts had made no end to love .
Indeed , it had enormously enlarged and glorified love .
She stepped into the center of that dream of world reconstruction that filled my mind and took possession of it all .
A little wisp of hair had blown across her cheek , her lips fell apart in that sweet smile of hers ; her eyes were full of wonder , of a welcoming scrutiny , of an infinitely courageous friendliness .
I relinquished her hand .
It was absurd to part in these terms .
While I waited for Nettie and Verrall in this agreeable trysting place , I talked to the landlady -- a broad-shouldered , smiling , freckled woman -- about the morning of the Change .
That motherly , abundant , red-haired figure of health was buoyantly sure that everything in the world was now to be changed for the better .
That confidence , and something in her voice , made me love her as I talked to her .
`` Now we 're awake , '' she said , `` all sorts of things will be put right that had n't any sense in them .
I 'm sure of it . ''
They were indeed a pretty couple , but that did not greatly gladden me .
No -- I winced a little at that .
I can hear his voice saying that now , and see the lift of his eyebrows and his pleasant smile .
He had wanted to say that , but it was not the thing we had to say .
`` Something said 'Take her . '
It was a raging desire -- for her .
I do n't know .
Everything contributed to that -- or counted for nothing .
You -- -- -- ''
Verrall answered for her .
But things dropped ; I saw you that night , my instincts were all awake .
I knew it was you . ''
`` I was , '' he interpolated .
`` As for me , '' I went on , and glanced at Nettie 's downcast face , and then sat forward with my eyes upon the flowers between us , `` since I am swayed and shall be swayed by an affection for Nettie , since that affection is rich with the seeds of desire , since to see her yours and wholly yours is not to be endured by me -- I must turn about and go from you ; you must avoid me and I you .
We must divide the world like Jacob and Esau .
I must direct myself with all the will I have to other things .
After all -- this passion is not life !
It is perhaps for brutes and savages , but for men .
We must part and I must forget .
What else is there but that ? ''
I did not look up , I sat very tense with the red petals printing an indelible memory in my brain , but I felt the assent of Verrall's pose .
There were some moments of silence .
`` But -- -- -- '' she said , and ceased .
I looked up and found her with her eyes on Verrall .
`` You see , '' she said , `` I like Willie .
It 's hard to say what one feels -- but I do n't want him to go away like that . ''
`` No , '' said Nettie , and swept her half-arranged carnation petals back into a heap of confusion .
She began to arrange them very quickly into one long straight line .
`` Yes , '' I said , `` but I do n't see -- -- -- ''
For awhile no one spoke , and Nettie , with a quick movement , swept the petals into the shape of a pyramid .
`` No woman ever has believed them . ''
`` We 're brought up to that .
We 're told -- it 's in books , in stories , in the way people look , in the way they behave -- one day there will come a man .
He will be everything , no one else will be anything .
Leave everything else ; live in him . ''
`` She used to , '' I said .
Verrall leant forward on the table , elbows upon it , and the fingers of his two hands intertwined .
`` But , '' said Nettie , `` you do n't struggle .
That has been altered because men have minds . ''
`` If I do n't choose to choose ? ''
`` But MUST I go ? ''
she said at last , with quivering lips , and the tears in her eyes were stars .
Then she began , `` Willie -- -- -- ''
Whereupon she had courage and gave way and sobbed aloud , none chiding her .
Some theological intricacy made it necessary to her , but still -- -- --
I was moved to tease her a little .
`` There 's jewels , you know , walls and gates of jewels -- and singing . ''
I said nothing to that .
And once she sprang a question on me suddenly that surprised me .
And presently I was in a black rage at all the irrecoverable sorrows of the past , of that great ocean of avoidable suffering of which this was but one luminous and quivering red drop .
I walked in the garden and the garden was too small for me ; I went out to wander on the moors .
`` The past is past , '' I cried , and all the while across the gulf of five and twenty years I could hear my poor mother's heart-wrung weeping for that daughter baby who had suffered and died .
Indeed that old spirit of rebellion has not altogether died in me , for all the transformation of the new time .
I quieted down at last to a thin and austere comfort in thinking that the whole is not told to us , that it can not perhaps be told to such minds as ours ; and anyhow , and what was far more sustaining , that now we have strength and courage and this new gift of wise love , whatever cruel and sad things marred the past , none of these sorrowful things that made the very warp and woof of the old life , need now go on happening .
We could foresee , we could prevent and save .
`` The past is past , '' I said , between sighing and resolve , as I came into view again on my homeward way of the hundred sunset-lit windows of old Lowchester House .
`` Those sorrows are sorrows no more . ''
But I could not altogether cheat that common sadness of the new time , that memory , and insoluble riddle of the countless lives that had stumbled and failed in pain and darkness before our air grew clear .
IN the end my mother died rather suddenly , and her death came as a shock to me .
Diagnosis was still very inadequate at that time .
The doctors were , of course , fully alive to the incredible defects of their common training and were doing all they could to supply its deficiencies , but they were still extraordinarily ignorant .
Some unintelligently observed factor of her illness came into play with her , and she became feverish and sank and died very quickly .
I do not know what remedial measures were attempted .
I hardly knew what was happening until the whole thing was over .
One writes now with a peculiar horror of the dress of the old world .
The men 's clothes were worn without any cleansing process at all , except an occasional superficial brushing , for periods of a year or so ; they were made of dark obscurely mixed patterns to conceal the stage of defilement they had reached , and they were of a felted and porous texture admirably calculated to accumulate drifting matter .
Many women wore skirts of similar substances , and of so long and inconvenient a form that they inevitably trailed among all the abomination of our horse-frequented roads .
It was our boast in England that the whole of our population was booted -- their feet were for the most part ugly enough to need it , -- but it becomes now inconceivable how they could have imprisoned their feet in the amazing cases of leather and imitations of leather they used .
I have heard it said that a large part of the physical decline that was apparent in our people during the closing years of the nineteenth century , though no doubt due in part to the miscellaneous badness of the food they ate , was in the main attributable to the vileness of the common footwear .
They shirked open-air exercise altogether because their boots wore out ruinously and pinched and hurt them if they took it .
I have mentioned , I think , the part my own boots played in the squalid drama of my adolescence .
I had a sense of unholy triumph over a fallen enemy when at last I found myself steering truck after truck of cheap boots and shoes ( unsold stock from Swathinglea ) to the run-off by the top of the Glanville blast furnaces .
Most of our public buildings we destroyed and burnt as we reshaped our plan of habitation , our theater sheds , our banks , and inconvenient business warrens , our factories ( these in the first year of all ) , and all the `` unmeaning repetition '' of silly little sham Gothic churches and meeting-houses , mean looking shells of stone and mortar without love , invention , or any beauty at all in them , that men had thrust into the face of their sweated God , even as they thrust cheap food into the mouths of their sweated workers ; all these we also swept away in the course of that first decade .
Then we had the whole of the superseded steam-railway system to scrap and get rid of , stations , signals , fences , rolling stock ; a plant of ill-planned , smoke-distributing nuisance apparatus , that would , under former conditions , have maintained an offensive dwindling obstructive life for perhaps half a century .
Then also there was a great harvest of fences , notice boards , hoardings , ugly sheds , all the corrugated iron in the world , and everything that was smeared with tar , all our gas works and petroleum stores , all our horse vehicles and vans and lorries had to be erased .
But I have said enough now perhaps to give some idea of the bulk and quality of our great bonfires , our burnings up , our meltings down , our toil of sheer wreckage , over and above the constructive effort , in those early years .
I was so busy , I say , with my share in this dustman 's work that I did not notice , as I should otherwise have done , the little indications of change in my mother 's state .
Indeed , I thought her a little stronger ; she was slightly flushed , slightly more talkative .
When I got there the last offices were over , and I was shown my old mother 's peaceful white face , very still , but a little cold and stern to me , a little unfamiliar , lying among white flowers .
I recall very distinctly being upon the great staircase of Lowchester House ( though I do n't remember getting there from the room in which my mother lay ) , and how upon the landing I met Anna ascending as I came down .
She had but just heard of my return , and she was hurrying upstairs to me .
She stopped and so did I , and we stood and clasped hands , and she scrutinized my face in the way women sometimes do .
So we remained for a second or so .
I could say nothing to her at all , but I could feel the wave of her emotion .
I halted , answered the earnest pressure of her hand , relinquished it , and after a queer second of hesitation went on down , returning to my own preoccupations .
It did not occur to me at all then to ask myself what she might be thinking or feeling .
A fragment of thought has linked itself with an effect of long shadows upon turf golden with the light of the sinking sun .
The world was singularly empty , I thought , without either Nettie or my mother .
There was n't any sense in it any more .
Nettie was already back in my mind then .
I wandered into a lonely meadow , and presently in a hollow of deep shadows I lay down to stare at the stars .
I lay hidden in the darkness , and ever and again the sough and uproar of the Beltane fires that were burning up the sere follies of a vanished age , and the shouting of the people passing through the fires and praying to be delivered from the prison of themselves , reached my ears .
We went to the council of our group -- commune it was then called -- and she was given me in marriage , and within a year she had borne me a son .
We saw much of one another , and talked ourselves very close together .
My faithful friend she became and has been always , and for a time we were passionate lovers .
Always she has loved me and kept my soul full of tender gratitude and love for her ; always when we met our hands and eyes clasped in friendly greeting , all through our lives from that hour we have been each other 's secure help and refuge , each other 's ungrudging fastness of help and sweetly frank and open speech .
And after a little while my love and desire for Nettie returned as though it had never faded away .
It was manifest he did not understand me .
`` I forgot , '' he said .
`` You are pretending the old world is still going on .
I stood up beside him and looked out .
I was a little flushed , my ears a little reddened , by the inconvenience of my curiosities , and by my uneasy sense of profound moral differences .
He was taller than I. .
And speaking of letters and invitations brings me round to friends .
I dislike most people ; in London they get in one 's way in the street and fill up railway carriages , and in the country they stare at you -- but I _hate_ my friends .
Yet Euphemia says I _must_ `` keep up '' my friends .
They would be all very well if they were really true friends and respected my feelings and left me alone , just to sit quiet .
But they come wearing shiny clothes , and mop and mow at me and expect me to answer their gibberings .
Polite conversation always appears to me to be a wicked perversion of the blessed gift of speech , which , I take it , was given us to season our lives rather than to make them insipid .
New friends are the worst in this respect .
With old friends one is more at home ; you give them something to eat or drink , or look at , or something -- whatever they seem to want -- and just turn round and go on smoking quietly .
But every now and then Euphemia or Destiny inflicts a new human being upon me .
I do not mean a baby , though the sentence has got that turn somehow , but an introduction ; and the wretched thing , all angles and offence , keeps bobbing about me and discovering new ways of worrying me , trying , I believe , to find out what topics interest me , though the fact is no topics interest me .
Once or twice , of course , I have met human beings I think I could have got on with very well , after a time ; but in this mood , at least , I doubt if any human being is quite worth the bother of a new acquaintance .
For there is still one other bother , a kind of _bother botherum_ , to tell of , though I hesitate at the telling .
It brings this rabble herd of worries into line and makes them formidable ; it is , so to speak , the Bother Commander-in-Chief .
I simply worship the ground she treads upon , mind , but at the same time the truth is the truth .
Euphemia is a bother .
She is a brave little woman , and helps me in every conceivable way .
But I wish she would not .
It is so obviously all her doing .
She makes me get up of a morning -- I would not stand as much from anybody else -- and keeps a sharp eye on my chin and collar .
If it were not for her I could sit about always with no collar or tie on in that old jacket she gave to the tramp , and just smoke and grow a beard and let all the bothers slide .
I would never wash , never shave , never answer any letters , never go to see any friends , never do any work -- except , perhaps , an insulting postcard to a publisher now and again .
I would just sit about .
Sometimes I think this may be peculiar in me .
At other times I fancy I am giving voice to the secret feeling of every member of my sex .
I suspect , then , that we would all do as the noble savage does , take our things off and lie about comfortable , if only someone had the courage to begin .
It is these women -- all love and reverence to Euphemia notwithstanding -- who make us work and bother us with Things .
They keep us decent , and remind us we have a position to support .
And really , after all , this is not my original discovery !
There is the third chapter of Genesis , for instance .
And then who has not read Carlyle 's gloating over a certain historical suit of leather ?
It gives me a queer thrill of envy , that Quaker Fox and his suit of leather .
Conceive it , if you can !
One would never have to quail under the scrutiny of a tailor any more .
Thoreau , too , come to think of it , was , by way of being a prophet , a pioneer in this Emancipation of Man from Bothery .
A MANUSCRIPT FOUND IN A BOX
I must admit that in conversation I am not a brilliant success .
Partly , indeed , that may be owing to the assiduity with which my aunt suppressed my early essays in the art : `` Children , '' she said , `` should be seen but not heard , '' and incontinently rapped my knuckles .
To a larger degree , however , I regard it as intrinsic .
This tendency to silence , to go out of the rattle and dazzle of the conversation into a quiet apart , is largely , I hold , the consequence of a certain elevation and breadth and tenderness of mind ; I am no blowfly to buzz my way through the universe , no rattle that I should be expected to delight my fellow-creatures by the noises I produce .
I go about to this social function and that , deporting myself gravely and decently in silence , taking , if possible , a back seat ; and , in consequence of that , people who do not understand me have been heard to describe me as a `` stick , '' as `` shy , '' and by an abundance of the like unflattering terms .
So that I am bound almost in self-justification to set down my reasons for this temperance of mine in conversation .
Let me once more insist that this keeping up a conversation is a sign of insecurity , of want of confidence .
All those who have had real friends know that when the friendship is assured the gabble ceases .
You are not at the heart of your friend , if either of you can not go off comfortably to sleep in the other 's presence .
Speech was given us to make known our needs , and for imprecation , expostulation , and entreaty .
This pitiful necessity we are under , upon social occasions , to say something -- however inconsequent -- is , I am assured , the very degradation of speech .
And then there is the taint of `` copy '' everywhere .
That is really the fundamental distinction .
It is the misfortune of literary people , that they have to write about something .
There is no reason , of course , why they should , but the thing is so .
Consequently , they are always looking about them for something to write about .
They can not take a pure-minded interest in anything in earth or heaven .
Their servant is no servant , but a character ; their cat is a possible reservoir of humorous observation ; they look out of window and see men as columns walking .
Even the sanctity of their own hearts , their self-respect , their most private emotions are disregarded .
The wife is infected with the taint .
Her private opinion of her husband she makes into a short story -- forgets its origin and shows it him with pride -- while the husband decants his heart-beats into occasional verse and minor poetry .
It is amazing what a lot of latter-day literature consists of such breaches of confidence .
And not simply latter-day literature .
The visitor is fortunate who leaves no marketable impression behind .
The literary entertainers eye you over , as if they were dealers in a slave mart , and speculate on your uses .
They try to think how you would do as a scoundrel , and mark your little turns of phrase and kinks of thought to that end .
The innocent visitor bites his cake and talks about theatres , while the meditative person in the arm-chair may be in imagination stabbing him , or starving him on a desert island , or even -- horrible to tell !
-- flinging him headlong into the arms of the young lady to the right and `` covering her face with a thousand passionate kisses . ''
A manuscript in the rough of Euphemia 's , that I recently suppressed , was an absolutely scandalous example of this method of utilising one 's acquaintances .
Mrs. Harborough , who was indeed Euphemia 's most confidential friend for six weeks and more , she had made to elope with Scrimgeour -- as steady and honourable a man as we know , though unpleasant to Euphemia on account of his manner of holding his teacup .
I believe there really was something -- quite harmless , of course -- between Mrs. Harborough and Scrimgeour , and that , imparted in confidence , had been touched up with vivid colour here and there and utilised freely .
Scrimgeour is represented as always holding teacups in his peculiar way , so that anyone would recognise him at once .
Euphemia calls that character .
Then Harborough , who is really on excellent terms with his wife , and , in spite of his quiet manner , a very generous and courageous fellow , is turned aside from his headlong pursuit of the fugitives across Wimbledon Common -- they elope , by the bye , on Scrimgeour 's tandem bicycle -- by the fear of being hit by a golf ball .
I pointed out to Euphemia that these things were calculated to lose us friends , and she promises to destroy the likeness ; but I have no confidence in her promise .
She will probably clap a violent auburn wig on Mrs. Harborough and make Scrimgeour squint and give Harborough a big beard .
The point that she wo n't grasp is , that with that fatal facility for detail , which is one of the most indisputable proofs of woman's intellectual inferiority , she has reproduced endless remarks and mannerisms of these excellent people with more than photographic fidelity .
But this is really a private trouble , though it illustrates very well the shameless way in which those who have the literary taint will bring to market their most intimate affairs .
ON SCHOOLING AND THE PHASES OF MR. SANDSOME
I saw to his creature comforts .
His tie was hanging outside his waistcoat , and his complexion was like white pasteboard that has got wet .
`` Courage , '' said I .
`` It will not occur again -- -- ''
He helped himself to a cigarette .
Assumed I was a spendthrift millionaire at first .
Produced in an off-hand way an eighty-guinea bedroom suite -- we 're trying to do the entire business , you know , on about two hundred pounds .
Well -- that's ten editions , you know .
Came down , with evidently dwindling respect , to things that were still ruinously expensive .
I told him we wanted an idyll -- love in a cottage , and all that kind of thing .
He brushed that on one side , said idols were upstairs in the Japanese Department , and that perhaps we might _do_ with a servant 's set of bedroom furniture .
Do with a set !
He was a gloomy man with ( I should judge ) some internal pain .
I tried to tell him that there was quite a lot of middle-class people like myself in the country , people of limited or precarious means , whose existence he seemed to ignore ; assured him some of them led quite beautiful lives .
But he had no ideas beyond wardrobes .
I quite forgot the business of shopping in an attempt to kindle a little human enthusiasm in his heart .
We were in a great vast place full of wardrobes , with a remote glittering vista of brass bedsteads -- skeleton beds , you know -- and I tried to inspire him with some of the poetry of his emporium ; tried to make him imagine these beds and things going east and west , north and south , to take sorrow , servitude , joy , worry , failing strength , restless ambition in their impartial embraces .
He only turned round to Annie , and asked her if she thought she could _do_ with 'enamelled . '
But I was quite taken with my idea -- -- Where is it ?
I left Annie to settle with this misanthrope , amidst his raw frameworks of the Homes of the Future . ''
`` Not ; it went wrong -- ballades often do .
The preoccupation of the 'Painted Pine ' was too much for me .
-- Sludge sells music stools at -- ' No .
Here we are ( first half unwritten ) : --
`` Comes round again , you see !
`` Then you meet other couples and solitary people going about , each with a gloomy salesman leading .
The run of them look uncomfortable ; some are hot about the ears and in the spiteful phase of ill-temper ; all look sick of the business except the raw new-comers .
It 's the only time they will ever select any furniture , their first chance and their last .
Most of their selections are hurried a little .
The salesman must not be kept all day ... .
Yet it goes hard with you if you buy your Object in Life and find it just a 'special line ' made to sell ... .
We 're all amateurs at living , just as we are all amateurs at furnishing -- or dying .
Some of the poor devils one meets carry tattered little scraps of paper , and fumble conscientiously with stumpy pencils .
It 's a comfort to see how you go , even if you do have to buy rubbish .
'If we have _this_ so good , dear , I do n't know _how_ we shall manage in the kitchen , ' says the careful housewife ... .
So it is we do our shopping in the Great Emporium . ''
A careful study of the records of literary men in the past , and a considerable knowledge of living authors , suggests two chief ways of losing one 's digestion and engendering literary capacity .
You go and live in humble lodgings , -- we could name dozens of prominent men who have fed a great ambition in this way , -- or you marry a nice girl who does not understand housekeeping .
The former is the more efficacious method , because , as a rule , the nice girl wants to come and sit on your knee all day , and that is a great impediment to literary composition .
Belonging to a club -- even a literary club -- where you can dine is absolute ruin to the literary beginner .
Many a bright young fellow , who has pushed his way , or has been pushed by indiscreet friends , into the society of successful literary men , has been spoilt by this fatal error , and he has saved his stomach to lose his reputation .
However , these remarks are mainly by way of suggestion .
Every writer in the end , so soon as his digestion is destroyed , must ascertain for himself the peculiar diet that suits him best -- that is , which disagrees with him the most .
If everything else fails he might try some chemical food .
`` Jabber 's Food for Authors , '' by the bye , well advertised , and with portraits of literary men , in their drawing-rooms , `` Fed entirely on Jabber 's Food , '' with medical certificates of its unwholesomeness , and favourable and expurgated reviews of works written on it , ought to be a brilliant success among literary aspirants .
A small but sufficient quantity of arsenic might with advantage be mixed in .
Whenever Crichton has been particularly exasperating , getting himself appreciated in a new quarter , or rising above his former successes , I find some consolation in thinking of my Uncle Augustus .
He was the glory of our family .
Even Aunt Charlotte 's voice drooped a little in the mention of his name .
He was conspicuous for an imposing and even colossal stupidity : he rose to eminence through it , and , what is more , to wealth and influence .
He was as reliable , as unlikely to alter his precise position , or do anything unexpected , as the Pyramids of Egypt .
I do not know any topic upon which he was not absolutely uninformed , and his contributions to conversation , delivered in that ringing baritone of his , were appallingly dull .
Often I have seen him utterly flatten some cheerful clever person of the Crichton type with one of his simple garden-roller remarks -- plain , solid , and heavy , which there was no possibility either of meeting or avoiding .
He was very successful in argument , and yet he never fenced .
He simply came down .
It was , so to speak , a case of small sword _versus_ the avalanche .
His moral inertia was tremendous .
He was never excited , never anxious , never jaded ; he was simply massive .
Cleverness broke upon him like shipping on an ironbound coast .
His monument is like him -- a plain large obelisk of coarse granite , unpretending in its simple ugliness and prominent a mile off .
Among the innumerable little white sorrows of the cemetery it looks exactly as he used to look among clever people .
I watched the little spurts of flame jet out from between the writhing pages of my manuscript , watched the sheets coil up in their fiery anguish and start one from another .
I helped the fire to the very vitals of the mass by poking the brittle heap , and at last the sacrifice was over , the flames turned from pink to blue and died out , the red glow gave place to black , little luminous red streaks coiled across the charred sheets and vanished at the margins , and only the ashes of my inspiration remained .
The ink was a lustrous black on the dull blackness of the burnt paper .
I could still read this much of my indiscretion remaining , `` He smiled at them all and said nothing . ''
I said , and stirred the crackling mass into a featureless heap of black scraps .
Then with my chin on my fists and elbows on knees I stared at the end of my labours .
His neighbours do not like him , because he will not take their cricket or their whist seriously , because he will persist in offering counsel and the stimulus of his gift of satire .
All whist than his he avers is `` Bumble-puppy . ''
His umpiring is pedagogic in tone ; he fails to see the contest in the game .
To him , who has heard his thousands roar as the bails of the best of All England went spinning , these village matches are mere puerile exercises to be corrected .
His corrections , too , are Olympian , done , as it were , in red ink , vivid , and without respect of persons .
He never uses vulgar bad language himself , but has a singular power of engendering it in others .
He has a word `` gaby , '' which he will sometimes enlarge to `` stuppid gaby , '' the which , flung neatly into a man who has just missed a catch , will fill the same with a whirl of furious curses difficult to restrain .
And if perchance one should escape , my ancient cricketer will be as startled as Cadmus at the crop he has sown .
And not only startled but pained at human wickedness and the follies of a new generation .
`` Why ca n't you play without swearing , Muster Gibbs ? ''
he will say , catching the whispered hope twenty yards away , and proclaiming it to a censorious world .
And so Gibbs , our grocer and draper , and one made much of by the vicar , is shamed before the whole parish , and damned even as he desired .
My ancient cricketer abounds in reminiscence of the glorious days that have gone for ever .
He can still recall the last echoes of the `` throwing '' controversy that agitated Nyren , when over-arm bowling began , and though he never played himself in a beaver hat , he can , he says , recollect seeing matches so played .
In those days everyone wore tall hats -- the policeman , the milkman , workmen of all sorts .
Some people I fancy must have bathed in them and gone to bed wearing them .
He recalls the Titans of that and the previous age , and particularly delights in the legend of Noah Mann , who held it a light thing to walk twenty miles from Northchapel to Hambledon to practise every Tuesday afternoon , and wander back after dark .
He himself as a stripling would run a matter of four miles , after a day 's work in the garden where he was employed , to attend an hour 's practice over the downs before the twilight made the balls invisible .
And afterwards came Teutonic revelry or wanderings under the summer starlight , as the mood might take him .
For there was a vein of silent poetry in the youth of this man .
This whets him to further outrage .
`` Look here , my man ! ''
I say at last , goaded to it , `` I came here for gloves .
After endless difficulties I at last induced you to let me have gloves .
I have also been intimidated , by the most shameful hints and insinuations , into buying that _beastly_ tie-holder .
I 'm not a child that I do n't know my own needs .
Now _will_ you let me go ?
How much do you want ? ''
`` Naturally , '' said the Professor in answer to my question , `` these investigations involve a certain element of danger .
The first condition of curse-collecting is to be unpopular , especially in the East , where comminatory swearing alone is practised , and you have to offend a man very grievously to get him to disgorge his treasure .
In this country , except among ladies in comparatively humble circumstances , anything like this fluent , explicit , detailed , and sincere cursing , aimed , missile-fashion , at a personal enemy , is not found .
It was quite common a few centuries ago ; indeed , in the Middle Ages it was part of the recognised procedure .
Aggrieved parties would issue a father 's curse , an orphan 's curse , and so forth , much as we should take out a county court summons .
And it played a large part in ecclesiastical policy too .
At one time the entire Church militant here on earth was swearing in unison , and the Latin tongue , at the Republic of Venice -- a very splendid and imposing spectacle .
It seems to me a pity to let these old customs die out so completely .
I estimate that more than half these Gothic forms have altogether passed out of memory .
There must have been some splendid things in Erse and Gaelic too ; for the Celtic mind , with its more vivid sense of colour , its quicker transitions , and deeper emotional quality , has ever over-cursed the stolid Teuton .
But it is all getting forgotten .
`` I say , '' said I , `` is not that rather rough on the ladies ? ''
But you may imagine I had a dismal time all that hour .
I understood the people about me were Sceptics , the kind of people who do n't believe things -- a singular class , and , I am told , a growing one .
These excellent people , it seems , have conscientious objections to going to chapel or church , but at the same time the devotional habit of countless generations of pious forerunners is strong in them .
Consequently they have invented things like these lectures to go to , with a professor instead of a priest , and a lantern slide of a stomach by way of altar-piece ; and alcohol they make their Devil , and their god is Hygiene -- a curious and instructive case of mental inertia .
I understand , too , there are several other temples of this Cult in London -- South Place Chapel and Essex Hall , for instance , where they worship the Spirit of the Innermost .
But the thing that struck me so oddly was the number of bald heads glimmering faintly in the reflected light from the lantern circle .
And that set me thinking upon a difficulty I have never been able to surmount .
`` There grows upon the impatient imagination a building , a dome of crystal , across the translucent surface of which flushes of the most glorious and pure prismatic colours pass and fade and change .
In the centre of this transparent chameleon-tinted dome is a circular white marble basin filled with some clear , mobile , amber liquid , and in this plunge and float strange beings .
`` The animals and plants die away before men , except such as he preserves for his food or delight , or such as maintain a precarious footing about him as commensals and parasites .
These vermin and pests must succumb sooner or later to his untiring inventiveness and incessantly growing discipline .
When he learns ( the chemists are doubtless getting towards the secret now ) to do the work of chlorophyll without the plant , then his necessity for other animals and plants upon the earth will disappear .
Sooner or later , where there is no power of resistance and no necessity , there comes extinction .
In the last days man will be alone on the earth , and his food will be won by the chemist from the dead rocks and the sunlight .
`` And -- one may learn the full reason in that explicit and painfully right book , the _Data of Ethics_ -- the irrational fellowship of man will give place to an intellectual co-operation , and emotion fall within the scheme of reason .
Undoubtedly it is a long time yet , but a long time is nothing in the face of eternity , and every man who dares think of these things must look eternity in the face . ''
The art of the essayist is so simple , so entirely free from canons of criticism , and withal so delightful , that one must needs wonder why all men are not essayists .
Perhaps people do not know how easy it is .
Or perhaps beginners are misled .
Rightly taught it may be learnt in a brief ten minutes or so , what art there is in it .
And all the rest is as easy as wandering among woodlands on a bright morning in the spring .
The Margaret Street in question is an apparently derelict thoroughfare , opening into Great Portland Street .
Immemorial dust is upon its pavements , and a profound silence broods over its vacant roadway .
The blinds of its houses are mostly down , and , where the blackness of some window suggests a dark interior , no face appears to reassure us in our doubt of humanity within .
It may be that somewhen in the past the entire population of this street set out on a boating party up the river , and was overset by steam launches , and so never returned , or perchance it has all been locked up for a long term of imprisonment -- though the houses seem almost too respectable for that ; or the glamour of the Sleeping Beauty is upon it all .
Certainly we saw the figure of a porter in an attitude of repose in the little glass lodge in the museum doorway .
He _may_ have been asleep .
But we feared to touch him -- and indeed slipped very stealthily by him -- lest he should suddenly crumble into dust .
The sky was a greasy grey that guttered down to the horizon , and the wind smote damp and chill .
There was a white fringe of ice in the cart-wheel ruts , but withal the frost was not so crisp as to prevent a thin and slippery glaze of softened clay upon the road .
The decaying triumphal arch outside the station sadly lacked a coat of paint , and was indistinctly regretful of remote royal visits and processions gone for ever .
Then we passed shuddering by many vacant booths that had once resounded with the revelry of ninepenny teas and the gingerbeer cork's staccato , and their forms were piled together and their trestles overturned .
And the wind ravened , and no human beings were to be seen .
So up the hill to the left , and along the road leading by devious windings between the black hedges and through clay wallows to the hilly part round High Beech .
The artistic temperament , the gay irresponsible cast of mind , does what it can to lighten the gravity of this too intellectual game .
To a mortal there is something indescribably horrible in these champions with their four moves an hour -- the bare thought of the mental operations of the fifteen minutes gives one a touch of headache .
Compulsory quick moving is the thing for gaiety , and that is why , though we revere Steinitz and Lasker , it is Bird we love .
His victories glitter , his errors are magnificent .
The true sweetness of chess , if it ever can be sweet , is to see a victory snatched , by some happy impertinence , out of the shadow of apparently irrevocable disaster .
And talking of cheerfulness reminds me of Lowson 's historical game of chess .
Lowson said he had been cheerful sometimes -- but , drunk !
Challenged , he would have proved it by some petty tests of pronunciation , some Good Templar's shibboleths .
He offered to walk along the kerb , to work any problem in mathematics we could devise , finally to play MacBryde at chess .
The other gentleman was appointed judge , and after putting the antimacassar over his head ( `` jush wigsh '' ) immediately went to sleep in a disorderly heap on the sofa .
The game was begun very solemnly , so I am told .
MacBryde , in describing it to me afterwards , swayed his hands about with the fingers twiddling in a weird kind of way , and said the board went like that .
The game was fierce but brief .
It was presently discovered that both kings had been taken .
Lowson was hard to convince , but this came home to him .
`` Man , '' he is reported to have said to MacBryde , `` I'm just drunk .
There 's no doubt in the matter .
I 'm feeling very ashamed of myself . ''
It was accordingly decided to declare the game drawn .
The position , as I found it next morning , is an interesting one .
Lowson's Queen was at K Kt 6 , his Bishop at Q B 3 , he had several Pawns , and his Knight occupied a commanding position at the intersection of four squares .
MacBryde had four Pawns , two Rooks , a Queen , a draught , and a small mantel ornament arranged in a rough semicircle athwart the board .
I have no doubt chess exquisites will sneer at this position , but in my opinion it is one of the cheerfulest I have ever seen .
I remember I admired it very much at the time , in spite of a slight headache , and it is still the only game of chess that I recall with undiluted pleasure .
And yet I have played many games .
Euphemia , who loves to have home dainty and delightful , would have no coals if she could dispense with them , much less a coal-scuttle .
Indeed , it would seem she would have no fireplace at all , if she had her will .
All the summer she is happy , and the fireplace is anything but the place for a fire ; the fender has vanished , the fireirons are gone , it is draped and decorated and disguised .
So would dear Euphemia drape and disguise the whole iron framework of the world , with that decorative and decent mind of hers , had she but the scope .
There are exotic ferns there , spreading their fanlike fronds , and majolica glows and gleams ; and fabrics , of which Morris is the actual or spiritual begetter , delight the eye .
In summer-time our fireplace is indeed a thing of beauty , but , alas for the solar system !
it is not a joy for ever .
The sun at last recedes beyond the equinoxes , and the black bogey who has slept awakens again .
Euphemia restores the fender kerb and the brazen dogs and the fireirons that will clatter ; and then all the winter , whenever she sits before the fire , her trouble is with her .
Even when the red glow of the fire lights up her features most becomingly , and flattery is in her ear , every now and then a sidelong glance at her ugly foe shows that the thought of it is in her mind , and that the crumpled roseleaf , if such a phrase may be used for a coal-scuttle , insists on being felt .
And she has even been discovered alone , sitting elbows on knees , and chin on her small clenched fist , frowning at it , puzzling how to circumvent the one enemy of her peace .
`` _It_ '' is what Euphemia always calls this utensil , when she can bring herself to give the indescribable an imperfect vent in speech .
But commonly the feeling is too deep for words .
Her war with this foeman in her household , this coarse rebel in her realm of soft prettiness , is one of those silent ones , those grim struggles without outcry or threat or appeal for quarter that can never end in any compromise , never find a rest in any truce , except the utter defeat of her antagonist .
And how she has tried -- the happy thoughts , the faint hopes , the new departures and outflanking movements !
And even to-day there the thing defies her -- a coal-box , with a broad smile that shows its black teeth , thick and squat , filling a snug corner and swaggering in unmanly triumph over the outrage upon her delicacy that it commits .
One of Euphemia 's brightest ideas was to burn wood .
Logs make even a picturesque pile in a corner -- look `` uncommon . ''
But there are objections to wood .
Wood finely divided burns with gay quirks and jets of flame , and making cheerful crackling noises the while ; but its warmth and brightness are as evanescent as love 's young dream .
And your solid log has a certain irritating inertness .
It is an absentee fuel , spending its fire up the chimney , and after its youthful clouds of glory turns but a cheerless side of black and white char towards the room .
And , above all , the marital mind is strangely exasperated by the log .
Smite it with the poker , and you get but a sullen resonance , a flight of red sparks , a sense of an unconquerable toughness .
It is worse than coke .
The crisp fracture of coal , the spitting flames suddenly leaping into existence from the shiny new fissures , are altogether wanting .
Old-seasoned timber burns indeed most delightfully , but then it is as ugly as coal , and withal very dear .
So Euphemia went back to coal again with a sigh .
Possibly if Euphemia had been surrounded by the wealth she deserves this trouble would not have arisen .
A silent servant , bearing the due dose of fresh fuel , would have come gliding from a mysterious Beneath , restored the waning animation of the grate , and vanished noiselessly again .
But this was beyond the range of Euphemia 's possibilities .
And so we are face to face with this problem of the scuttle again .
Now my theory of Bagarrow is this , that he has a kind of disease in his ideals , some interruption of nutrition that has left them small and emasculate .
He aims , it appears , at a state called `` Really Nice '' or the `` True Gentleman , '' the outward and visible signs of which are a conspicuous quietness of costume , gloves in all weathers , and a tightly-rolled umbrella .
But coupled in some way with this is a queer smack of the propagandist , a kind of dwarfed prophetic passion .
That is the particular oddness of him .
He displays a timid yet persistent desire to foist this True Gentleman of his upon an unwilling world , to make you Really Nice after his own pattern .
I always suspect him of trying to convert me by stealth when I am not looking .
[ Illustration : A Handwritten dedication , `` To my Dearest Friend '' followed by three successive names , two crossed out , then the whole dedication struck out ]
MY DEAR SALISBURY , -- Pray accept this unworthy tribute of my affectionate esteem .
I am almost inclined to think that Dedications are going out of fashion .
`` No music , '' says the cultivated man , `` no pictures , no books to read nor leisure to read in .
How can they pass their lives ? ''
The amateur nature-lover proceeds over the down , appreciating all this as hard as he can appreciate , and anon gazing up at the grey and white cloud shapes melting slowly from this form to that , and showing lakes , and wide expanses , and serene distances of blue between their gaps .
And then he looks round him for a zoological item .
Underfoot the grass of the down is recovering from the summer drought and growing soft and green again , and plentiful little flattened snail shells lie about , and here and there a late harebell still nods in the breeze .
Yonder bolts a rabbit , and then something whizzes by the amateur nature-lover 's ear .
They shoot here somewhere , he remembers suddenly ; and then looking round , in a palpitating state , is reassured by the spectacle of a lone golfer looming over the brow of the down , and gesticulating black and weird against the sky .
The Londoner , with an abrupt affectation of nonchalance , flings himself flat upon his back , and so remains comparatively safe until the golfer has passed .
These golfers are strange creatures , rabbit-coloured , except that many are bright red about the middle , and they repel and yet are ever attracted by a devil in the shape of a little white ball , which leads them on through toothed briars , sharp furzes , pricking goss , and thorns ; cursing the thing , weeping even , and anon laughing at their own foolish rambling ; muttering , heeding no one to the right or left of their career , -- demented creatures , as though these balls were their souls , that they ever sought to lose , and ever repented losing .
And silent , ever at the heel of each , is a familiar spirit , an eerie human hedgehog , all set about with walking-sticks , a thing like a cylindrical umbrella-stand with a hat and boots and a certain suggestion of leg .
And so they pass and are gone .
We take our last look at the country from the open down above Sutton .
Blue hills beyond blue hills recede into the remote distance ; from Banstead Down one can see into Oxfordshire .
Windsor Castle is in minute blue silhouette to the left , and to the right and nearer is the Crystal Palace .
And closer , clusters red-roofed Sutton and its tower , then Cheam , with its white spire , and further is Ewell , set in a variegated texture of autumn foliage .
Water gleams -- a silver thread -- at Ewell , and the sinking sun behind us catches a window here and there , and turns it into an eye of flame .
And so to Sutton station and home to Cockneydom once more .
The reason why the firm produces these articles may be guessed at .
They are probably easy to make , and require scarcely any skill .
The contemplative man has a dim vision of a grimy shed in a back street , where a human being passes dismally through life the while he chips out an unending succession of these cheap urns and obelisks for his employers ' retailing .
But the question why numberless people will profane the memory of their departed by these public advertisements of Slap & Dash , and their evil trade , is a more difficult problem .
For surely nothing could be more unmeaning or more ungainly than the monumental urn , unless it be the monumental obelisk .
The plain cross , by contrast , has the tenderest meaning , and is a simple and fitting monument that no repetition can stale .
One may go from end to end of this cemetery and find scarcely anything beautiful , appropriate , or tender .
A lion , ill done , and yet to some degree impressive , lies complacently above a menagerie keeper , and near this is a tomb of some imagination , with reliefs of the life of Christ .
In one place a grotesque horse , with a head disproportionately vast , is to be seen .
Perhaps among all these monuments the one to Mrs. Blake is the most pleasing .
It is a simply and quaintly executed kneeling figure , with a certain quiet and pathetic reverence of pose that is strangely restful against the serried vulgarity around it .
But the tradesman ghoul will not leave us ; he follows us up and down , indecently clamouring his name and address , and at last turns our meditation to despair .
Certain stock devices become as painful as popular autotypes .
There is the lily broken on its stalk ; we meet it here on a cross and there on an obelisk , presently on the pedestal of an urn .
There is the hand pointing upward , here balanced on the top of an obelisk and there upon a cross .
The white-robed angel , free from the remotest shadow of expression , meets us again and again .
`` All this is mine , '' says the tradesman ghoul .
`` Behold the names of me -- Slap & Dash here , the Ugliness Company there , and this the work of the Cheap and Elegant Funeral Association .
This is where we slew the art of sculpture .
These are our trophies that sculpture is no more .
All this marble might have been beautiful , all this sorrow might have been expressive , had it not been for us .
See , this is our border , No .
A 5 , and our pedestal No .
E , and our second quality urn , along of a nice appropriate text -- a pretty combination and a cheap one .
Or we can do it you better in border A 3 , and pedestal C , and a larger urn or a hangel -- -- ''
Very close to the tragedy of life is the comedy , brightest upon the very edge of the dark , and I remember now with a queer touch of sympathetic amusement my dear departed self of the middle eighties .
How the thing staggered me !
I was full of the vast ambition of youth ; I was still at the age when death is quite out of sight , when life is still an interminable vista of years ; and then suddenly , with a gout of blood upon my knuckle , with a queer familiar taste in my mouth , that cough which had been a bother became a tragedy , and this world that had been so solid grew faint and thin .
I saw through it ; saw his face near to my own ; suddenly found him beside me , when I had been dreaming he was far beyond there , far away over the hills .
We discussed the difficulties of our situation , and you passed sentence upon yourself .
I saw to it that the outraged dignity of Mademoiselle Potin was mocked by no mere formality of infliction .
You did your best to be stoical , I remember , but at last you yelped and wept .
Then , justice being done , you rearranged your costume .
The situation was a little difficult until you , still sobbing and buttoning -- you are really a shocking bad hand at buttons -- and looking a very small , tender , ruffled , rueful thing indeed , strolled towards my study window .
`` The pear tree is out next door , '' you remarked , without a trace of animosity , and sobbing as one might hiccough .
I was a Harbury boy as my father and grandfather were before me and as you are presently to be .
I went to Harbury at the age of fourteen .
Until then I was educated at home , first by a governess and then by my father 's curate , Mr. Siddons , who went from us to St. Philip 's in Hampstead , and , succeeding marvellously there , is now Bishop of Exminster .
My father became rector of Burnmore when I was nine ; my mother had been dead four years , and my second cousin , Jane Stratton , was already his housekeeper .
My father held the living until his resignation when I was nearly thirty .
So that all the most impressionable years of my life centre upon the Burnmore rectory and the easy spaciousness of Burnmore Park .
My boyhood and adolescence alternated between the ivied red-brick and ancient traditions of Harbury ( and afterwards Christ-church ) and that still untroubled countryside .
My memories of the Park are all under blue sky and sunshine , with just a thunderstorm or so ; on wet days and cold days I was kept to closer limits ; and it seems to me now rather an intellectual conviction than a positive memory that save for a few pine-clad patches in the extreme south-east , its soil was all thick clay .
That meant for me only beautiful green marshes , a number of vividly interesting meres upon the course of its stream , and a wealth of gigantic oaks .
The meres lay at various levels , and the hand of Lady Ladislaw had assisted nature in their enrichment with lilies and water plants .
There were places of sedge and scented rush , amidst which were sapphire mists of forget-me-not for long stretches , skirmishing commandoes of yellow iris and wide wastes of floating water-lilies .
The gardens passed insensibly into the Park , and beyond the house were broad stretches of grass , sun-lit , barred with the deep-green shadows of great trees , and animated with groups and lines of fallow deer .
Near the house was an Italianate garden , with balustradings and statuary , and a great wealth of roses and flowering shrubs .
There are persons to be found mixed up in those childish memories , -- Lady Ladislaw , tall and gracious , in dresses of floating blue or grey , or thin , subtly folding , flowering stuffs , Philip and his sister , Guy , the old butler , a multitude of fainter figures long become nameless and featureless ; they are far less vivid in my memory than the fine solitudes of the Park itself -- and the dreams I had there .
( Only yesterday I heard Mademoiselle Potin doing that very same thing to you .
`` It is that you do not care , Master Steve .
It is that you do not care .
You do not want to care . ''
`` Very unfortunate and all that , '' said Mr. Siddons , `` and uncommonly good of Lady Ladislaw to have them down .
But dirty little cads , Stephen , dirty little cads ; so do n't go near 'em if you can help it . ''
They played an indecent sort of cricket with coats instead of a wicket !
`` England has been made by the sons of the clergy . ''
I suppose one 's early adolescence is necessarily the period of maximum shyness in one 's life .
Even to Raymond I attempted no extremities of confidence .
Even to myself I tried to be the thing that was expected of me .
I professed a modest desire for temperate and tolerable achievement in life , though deep in my lost depths I wanted passionately to excel ; I worked hard , much harder than I allowed to appear , and I said I did it for the credit of the school ; I affected a dignified loyalty to queen and country and church ; I pretended a stoical disdain for appetites and delights and all the arts , though now and then a chance fragment of poetry would light me like a fire , or a lovely picture stir unwonted urgencies , though visions of delight haunted the shadows of my imagination and did not always fly when I regarded them .
But on the other hand I affected an interest in games that I was far from feeling .
Of some boys I was violently jealous , and this also I masked beneath a generous appreciation .
Certain popularities I applauded while I doubted .
Whatever my intimate motives I became less and less disposed to obey them until I had translated them into a plausible rendering of the accepted code .
If I could not so translate them I found it wise to control them .
When I wanted urgently one summer to wander by night over the hills towards Kestering and lie upon heather and look up at the stars and wonder about them , I cast about and at last hit upon the well-known and approved sport of treacling for moths , as a cloak for so strange an indulgence .
Given such ignorance , you know , it was n't by any means ignoble to be patriotic , to dream of this propagandist Empire of ours spreading its great peace and culture , its virtue and its amazing and unprecedented honesty , -- its honesty !
-- round the world .
I would serve the empire .
Law and custom conspire with the natural circumstances of man to exaggerate every consequence of this accumulating accident , and make it definite and fatal ... .
Then there was a photograph in my father 's study of the Delphic Sibyl from the Sistine Chapel , that for a time held my heart , and -- Yes , there was a girl in a tobacconist 's shop in the Harbury High Street .
Drawn by an irresistible impulse I used to go and buy cigarettes -- and sometimes converse about the weather .
But afterwards in solitude I would meditate tremendous conversations and encounters with her .
The cigarettes increased the natural melancholy of my state and led to a reproof from old Henson .
Almost always I suppose there is that girl in the tobacconist 's shop ... .
I was in a state of transition between the infinitely great and the infinitely little .
I had just ceased to be that noble and potent being , that almost statesmanlike personage , a sixth form boy at Harbury , and I was going to be an Oxford undergraduate .
Philip and I came down together by the same train from Harbury , I shared the Burnmore dog-cart and luggage cart , and he dropped me at the rectory .
I was a long-limbed youngster of seventeen , as tall as I am now , and fair , so fair that I was still boyish-faced while most of my contemporaries and Philip ( who favored his father ) were at least smudgy with moustaches .
With the head-master 's valediction and the grave elder-brotherliness of old Henson , and the shrill cheers of a little crowd of juniors still echoing in my head , I very naturally came home in a mood of exalted gravity , and I can still remember pacing up and down the oblong lawn behind the rockery and the fig-tree wall with my father , talking of my outlook with all the tremendous _savoir faire_ that was natural to my age , and noting with a secret gratification that our shoulders were now on a level .
No doubt we were discussing Oxford and all that I was to do at Oxford ; I do n't remember a word of our speech though I recall the exact tint of its color and the distinctive feeling of our measured equal paces in the sunshine ... .
I do not remember what I said to her or what else she said or what anyone said .
But I believe I could paint every detail of her effect .
I know that when she came out of the brightness into the shadow of the pavilion it was like a regal condescension , and I know that she was wonderfully self-possessed and helpful with her mother 's hospitalities , and that I marvelled I had never before perceived the subtler sweetness in the cadence of her voice .
I seem also to remember a severe internal struggle for my self-possession , and that I had to recall my exalted position in the sixth form to save myself from becoming tongue-tied and abashed and awkward and utterly shamed .
`` I did , '' she insists and I deny .
`` You could n't . ''
`` For you , '' I said , `` for you . ''
I stretched out my hand for hers , and my gesture went disregarded .
She sat rather crouched together with her eyes gazing far away across the great spaces of the park .
I did my boyish utmost to get to Scotland .
They were at Lankart near Invermoriston , and the nearest thing I could contrive was to join a reading party in Skye , a reading party of older men who manifestly had no great desire for me .
For more than a year we never met at all , and all sorts of new things happened to us both .
I perceived they happened to me , but I did not think they happened to her .
Of course we changed .
Of course in a measure and relatively we forgot .
Of course there were weeks when we never thought of each other at all .
Then would come phases of hunger .
I remember a little note of hers .
`` Oh Stevenage , '' it was scrawled , `` perhaps next Easter ! ''
Next Easter was an aching desolation .
The blinds of Burnmore House remained drawn ; the place was empty except for three old servants on board-wages .
The Christians went instead to the Canary Isles , following some occult impulse of Lady Ladislaw 's .
Lord Ladislaw spent the winter in Italy .
Then the whole sky of my life lit up again with a strange light of excitement and hope .
I had a note , glad and serenely friendly , to say they were to spend all the summer at Burnmore .
Beyond her stood an undersized , brown-clad middle-aged man with a big head , a dark face and expressive brown eyes fixed now in unrestrained admiration on Mary 's laughing face .
This then was Justin , the incredibly rich and powerful , whose comprehensive operations could make and break a thousand fortunes in a day .
He answered Evesham carelessly , with his gaze still on Mary , and in a voice too low for my straining ears .
There was some woman in the group also , but she has left nothing upon my mind whatever except an effect of black and a very decorative green sunshade .
She greeted Justin 's remark , I remember , with the little yelp of laughter that characterized that set .
I think too there was someone else in the group ; but I can not clearly recall who ... .
`` And this is Stephen , '' she said , aglow with happy confidence .
`` You 've kept your lead . ''
I caught her quick eye for a moment and knew she had more to say to me , but neither she nor I had the skill and alacrity to get that said .
She clearly did n't understand .
`` Do n't say that you forget ? ''
`` Oh do n't tell me you forget !
You wanted a little exact copy of a Japanese house -- -- I 've had it done .
Beneath the trees ... . ''
Justin walked with Lady Mary , and she was I saw an inch taller than his squat solidity .
A tall lady in rose-pink had taken possession of Guy , Evesham and Lady Ladislaw made the two centres of a straggling group who were bandying recondite political allusions .
Then came one or two couples and trios with nothing very much to say and active ears .
Philip and I brought up the rear silently and in all humility .
Even young Guy had gone over our heads .
I was too full of a stupendous realization for any words .
Of course , during those years , she had been doing -- no end of things !
And while I had been just drudging with lectures and books and theorizing about the Empire and what I could do with it , and taking exercise , she had learnt , it seemed -- the World .
`` And so that 's the great Mr. Justin , '' rustled Lady Viping and stared across me .
`` Whether it 's brachy , '' said Lady Viping , `` or whether it 's dolly -- _I_ can never remember ? ''
All this chatter is mixed up in my mind with an unusual sense of hovering attentive menservants , who seemed all of them to my heated imagination to be watching me ( and particularly one clean-shaven , reddish-haired , full-faced young man ) lest I looked too much at the Lady Mary Christian .
Of course they were merely watching our plates and glasses , but my nerves and temper were now in such a state that if my man went off to the buffet to get Sir Godfrey the pickled walnuts , I fancied he went to report the progress of my infatuation , and if a strange face appeared with the cider cup , that this was a new observer come to mark the revelation of my behavior .
My food embarrassed me .
I found hidden meanings in the talk of the Roden girl and her guardsman , and an ironical discovery in Sir Godfrey 's eye ... .
I felt like a poor relation .
I sympathized with Anarchists .
We had come out of the Park now finally , both Mary and I -- into this ... .
For a time I had been marooned conversationally , and Lady Viping had engaged Sir Godfrey .
Evidently he was refractory and she was back at me .
There it was in the park that for the first time I pitted myself against life upon a definite issue , and prepared my first experience of defeat .
`` I _will_ have her , '' I said , hammering at the turf with my fist .
I do not care if I give all my life ... . ''
`` I am dying to talk to you -- as we used to talk . ''
`` And I -- Stevenage .
But -- -- You see ? ''
`` Next time I come , '' I said , `` I shall bring you a letter .
There is so much -- -- ''
Things conspired against any more intimacy for a time .
But we got our moment on the way to tea .
She glanced back at Philip , who was loosening the net , and then forward to estimate the distance of Maxton and Guy .
`` They 're all three going , '' she said , `` after Tuesday .
Then -- before six . ''
Our next three or four meetings are not so clearly defined .
We did not meet every morning for fear that her early rising should seem too punctual to be no more than a chance impulse , nor did we go to the same place .
But there stands out very clearly a conversation in a different mood .
We had met at the sham ruins at the far end of the great shrubbery , a huge shattered Corinthian portico of rather damaged stucco giving wide views of the hills towards Alfridsham between its three erect pillars , and affording a dry seat upon its fallen ones .
It was an overcast morning , I remember probably the hour was earlier ; a kind of twilight clearness made the world seem strange and the bushes and trees between us and the house very heavy and still and dark .
And we were at cross purpose , for now it was becoming clear to me that Mary did not mean to marry me , that she dreaded making any promise to me for the future , that all the heroic common cause I wanted with her , was quite alien to her dreams .
`` You know I love you , Stevenage , '' she said .
`` You know . ''
`` But if two people love one another , they want to be always together , they want to belong to each other . ''
`` It is n't , '' I said , `` how people live . ''
`` It is n't the way life goes . ''
`` I want it to be .
Why should n't it be ?
Why at any rate should n't it be for me ? ''
And he began to probe my practical knowledge .
It was like an unfit man stripping for a medical inspection .
Did I know anything of oil , of rubber , of sugar , of substances generally , had I studied mineralogy or geology , had I any ideas of industrial processes , of technical chemistry , of rare minerals , of labor problems and the handling of alien labor , of the economics of railway management or of camping out in dry , thinly populated countries , or again could I maybe speak Spanish or Italian or Russian ?
The little dons who career about Oxford afoot and awheel , wearing old gowns and mortarboards , giggling over Spooner's latest , and being tremendous `` characters '' in the intervals of concocting the ruling-class mind , had turned my mind away from such matters altogether .
I had left that sort of thing to Germans and east-end Jews and young men from the upper-grade board schools of Sheffield and Birmingham .
I was made to realize appalling wildernesses of ignorance ... .
`` Along here a little further is night-stock .
The scent of it !
It lies -- like a bank of scented air ... .
And Stephen , there !
... A star -- a star without a sound , falling out of the blue !
It 's gone ! ''
It was nearly three when at last I came back into my father 's garden .
No one had missed me from my room and the house was all asleep , but I could not get in because I had closed a latch behind me , and so I stayed in the little arbor until day , watching the day break upon long beaches of pale cloud over the hills towards Alfridsham .
I slept at last with my head upon my arms upon the stone table , until the noise of shooting bolts and doors being unlocked roused me to watch my chance and slip back again into the house , and up the shuttered darkened staircase to my tranquil , undisturbed bedroom .
`` Dear Stephen , '' she explained , `` if I were to come away with you and marry you , in just a little time I should cease to be your lover , I should be your squaw .
I should have to share your worries and make your coffee -- and disappoint you , disappoint you and fail you in a hundred ways .
Should I be any good as a squaw ?
How can one love when one knows the coffee is n't what it should be , and one is giving one 's lover indigestion ?
And I do n't _want_ to be your squaw .
I do n't want that at all .
It is n't how I feel for you .
I do n't _want_ to be your servant and your possession . ''
`` He will make love to you , Mary .
do n't you understand ?
These things -- -- We 've never talked of them ... .
You will bear him children ! ''
Stephen , -- I am to own myself . ''
`` But -- He marries you ! ''
`` I do n't care .
I have his promise .
I shall be free .
I shall be free -- free !
He is a different man from you , Stephen .
He isn't so fierce ; he is n't so greedy . ''
`` It parts us . ''
`` It does not even part us , Stevenage .
We shall see one another !
we shall talk to one another . ''
`` I shall lose you . ''
But I insisted we should be parted , and parted in the end for ever , and there I was the wiser of the two .
I knew the insatiable urgency within myself .
I knew that if I continued to meet Mary I should continue to desire her until I possessed her altogether .
`` Then -- then _wait_ for me ! ''
`` You 've got me -- as much as anyone will ever have me .
You 'll always have me .
Always I will write to you , talk to you , watch you .
Why are you so greedy , Stephen ?
Why are you so ignoble ?
If I were to come now and marry you , it would n't help you .
It would turn you into -- a wife-keeper , into the sort of uninteresting preoccupied man one sees running after and gloating over the woman he 's bought -- at the price of his money and his dignity -- and everything ... .
It 's not proper for a man to live so for a woman and her children .
It 's -- it's indecent .
I 'd hate you so . ''
She told me Beatrice Normandy 's address .
`` Go ahead ! ''
I said , and lifted my hat to the little white face within .
`` My boy ! ''
he gasped , astonished and terrified .
`` You 've -- you 've not done -- some foolish thing ? ''
`` No , '' I said , already wiping the tears from my face , `` nothing ... .
But I want to go away . ''
I had never been out of England before except for a little mountaineering in the French Alps and one walking excursion in the Black Forest , and the scenery of lower Natal amazed me .
I had expected nothing nearly so tropical , so rich and vivid .
There were little Mozambique monkeys chattering in the thick-set trees beside the line and a quantity of unfamiliar birds and gaudy flowers amidst the abundant deep greenery .
There were aloe and cactus hedges , patches of unfamiliar cultivation upon the hills ; bunchy , frondy growths that I learnt were bananas and plantains , and there were barbaric insanitary-looking Kaffir kraals which I supposed had vanished before our civilization .
There seemed an enormous quantity of Kaffirs all along the line -- and all of them , men , women , and children , were staring at the train .
The scenery grew finer and bolder , and more bare and mountainous , until at last we came out into the great basin in which lay this Ladysmith .
It seemed a poor unimportant , dusty little street of huts as we approached it , but the great crests beyond struck me as very beautiful in the morning light ... .
I found myself murmuring : `` Get the proportions of things , get the proportions of things ! ''
I had an absurd impression of a duel between myself and the cavernous antagonism of the huge black spaces below me .
I argued that all this pain and waste was no more than the selvedge of a proportionately limitless fabric of sane , interested , impassioned and joyous living .
These stiff still memories seemed to refute me .
they seemed to insist .
In some way it 's essential , -- this margin .
I stopped at that .
I do not know how long I wrestled with God and prayed that night , but abruptly the shadows broke ; and very suddenly and swiftly my spirit seemed to flame up into space like some white beacon that is set alight .
Everything became light and clear and confident .
I was assured that all was well with us , with us who lived and fought and with the dead who rotted now in fifty thousand hasty graves ... .
I think that mood passed quite insensibly from waking to a kind of clear dreaming .
I have an impression that I fell asleep and was aroused by a gun .
Yet I was certainly still sitting up when I heard that gun .
They came up against the pale western sky , little nodding swaying black dots , and flashed over and were lost in the misty purple groove towards us .
They must have been riding through the night -- the British following .
To them we were invisible .
Behind us was the shining east , we were in a shadow still too dark to betray us .
We talked of the house and what a good house it was , and he took me out into the garden to see the peaches and grape vine and then brought me back without showing them to me in order to greet my cousin .
`` It 's very like Burnmore , '' he said with his eyes devouring me , `` very like .
A little more space and -- no services .
No services at all .
That makes a gap of course .
There 's a little chap about here , you 'll find -- his name is Wednesday -- who sorts my papers and calls himself my secretary ... .
Not necessary perhaps but -- _I missed the curate_ . ''
`` I 've come back in search of efficiency . ''
I have no doubt I said that at any rate .
`` We 're trying to run this big empire , '' I may have explained , `` with under-trained , under-educated , poor-spirited stuff , and we shall come a cropper unless we raise our quality .
I 'm still Imperialist , more than ever I was .
But I 'm an Imperialist on a different footing .
I 've no great illusions left about the Superiority of the Anglo-Saxons .
All that has gone .
But I do think it will be a monstrous waste , a disaster to human possibilities if this great liberal-spirited empire sprawls itself asunder for the want of a little gravity and purpose .
And it 's here the work has to be done , the work of training and bracing up and stimulating the public imagination ... . ''
`` It does n't seem to be keeping its place as a detail , '' said my father .
`` Very few men can touch tariffs and not get a little soiled .
I hate all this international sharping , all these attempts to get artificial advantages , all this making poor people buy inferior goods dear , in the name of the flag .
If it comes to that , damn the flag !
Custom-houses are ugly things , Stephen ; the dirty side of nationality .
Dirty things , ignoble , cross , cunning things ... .
They wake you up in the small hours and rout over your bags ... .
An imperial people ought to be an urbane people , a civilizing people -- above such petty irritating things .
I 'd as soon put barbed wire along the footpath across that field where the village children go to school .
Or claim that our mushrooms are cultivated .
Or prosecute a Sunday-Society Cockney for picking my primroses .
There are things a Great Country must n't do , Stephen .
A country like ours ought to get along without the manners of a hard-breathing competitive cad ... .
If it can't I 'd rather it did n't get along ... .
What 's the good of a huckster country ?
-- it 's like having a wife on the streets .
It 's no excuse that she brings you money .
But since the peace , and that man Chamberlain's visit to Africa , you Imperialists seem to have got this nasty spirit all over you ... .
The Germans do it , you say ! ''
`` Those big things come slowly , '' said my father .
And then with a sigh : `` Age after age .
They seem at times -- to be standing still .
Good things go with the bad ; bad things come with the good ... . ''
I left my hearthrug , and walked to the window to survey this .
`` We are your neighbors in Surrey , '' she said , going off abruptly from that .
`` We are quite near to your father . ''
`` I ca n't trust 'em , '' said Restall , with a deepening gloom .
`` Not after _that_ . ''
The motor-car looked self-conscious and uncomfortable , but said nothing by way of excuse , and Restall took me off in it like one whose sun has set for ever .
`` I would n't be surprised , '' said Restall as we went down the drive , `` if the damned thing turned a somersault .
It might do -- anything . ''
Those were the brighter days of motoring .
I went to Ridinghanger a number of times in the spring and early summer .
I talked a great deal with Rachel , and still I did not make love to her .
It was always in my mind that I would make love to her , the heavens and earth and all her family were propitious , glowing golden with consent and approval , I thought she was the most wonderful and beautiful thing in life , and her eyes , the intonation of her voice , her hurrying color and a hundred little involuntary signs told me how she quickened at my coming .
But there was a shyness .
I loved her as one loves and admires a white flower or a beautiful child -- some stranger 's child .
I felt that I might make her afraid of me .
I had never before thought that to make love is a coarse thing .
But still at high summer when I met Mary again no definite thing had been said between myself and Rachel .
But we knew , each of us knew , that somewhere in a world less palpable , in fairyland , in dreamland , we had met and made our vows .
You see how far my imagination had gone towards readjustment when Mary returned into my life .
You see how strange and distant it was to meet her again , changed completely into the great lady she had intended to be , speaking to me with the restrained and practised charm of a woman who is young and beautiful and prominent and powerful and secure .
There was no immediate sense of shock in that resumption of our broken intercourse , it seemed to me that night simply that something odd and curious had occurred .
I do not remember how we parted that evening or whether we even saw each other after dinner was over , but from that hour forth Mary by insensible degrees resumed her old predominance in my mind .
I woke up in the night and thought about her , and next day I found myself thinking of her , remembering things out of the past and recalling and examining every detail of the overnight encounter .
How cold and ineffective we had been , both of us !
We had been like people resuming a disused and partially forgotten language .
Had she changed towards me ?
Did she indeed want to see me again or was that invitation a mere demonstration of how entirely unimportant seeing me or not seeing me had become ?
`` I walked , '' I said .
`` It is nearly a straight path .
You know it ? ''
`` I never meant you , '' she said , `` to go away ... .
You could have written .
You never answered the notes I sent . ''
`` I was frantic , '' I said , `` with loss and jealousy .
I wanted to forget . ''
`` Nor I. I thought I had .
Until I saw you again .
I 've thought of you endlessly .
I 've wanted to talk to you .
We had a way of talking together .
But you went away .
You turned your back as though all that was nothing -- not worth having .
You -- you drove home my marriage , Stephen .
You made me know what a thing of sex a woman is to a man -- and how little else ... . ''
`` But in a man of twenty-six ? ''
`` I 've always had you in my mind , Stephen , '' she said .
`` When I saw I could n't marry you , it seemed to me I had better marry and be free of any further hope .
I thought we could get over that .
'Let 's get it over , ' I thought .
Now -- at any rate -- we have got over that . ''
Her eyes verified her words a little doubtfully .
`` And we can talk and you can tell me of your life , and the things you want to do that make life worth living .
life has been _stupid_ without you , Stephen , large and expensive and aimless ... .Tell me of your politics .
They say -- Justin told me -- you think of parliament ? ''
I began to tell her a little disjointedly of the probabilities of my Yorkshire constituency ... .
And it was not only a matter of concealments but of positive deceptions .
The figure of Justin comes back to me .
It is a curious thing that in spite of our bitter antagonism and the savage jealousy we were to feel for one another , there has always been , and there remains now in my thought of him , a certain liking , a regret at our opposition , a quality of friendliness .
His broad face , which the common impression and the caricaturist make so powerful and eagle-like , is really not a brutal or heavy face at all .
It is no doubt aquiline , after the fashion of an eagle-owl , the mouth and chin broad and the eyes very far apart , but there is a minute puckering of the brows which combines with that queer streak of brown discoloration that runs across his cheek and into the white of his eyes , to give something faintly plaintive and pitiful to his expression , an effect enhanced by the dark softness of his eyes .
They are gentle eyes ; it is absurd to suppose them the eyes of a violently forceful man .
And indeed they do not belie Justin .
It is not by vehemence or pressure that his wealth and power have been attained ; it is by the sheer detailed abundance of his mind .
In that queer big brain of his there is something of the calculating boy and not a little of the chess champion ; he has a kind of financial gift , he must be rich , and grows richer .
What else is there for him to do ?
How many times have I not tried to glance carelessly at his face and scrutinize that look in his eyes , and ask myself was that his usual look , or was it lit by an instinctive jealousy ?
Did he perhaps begin to suspect ?
I had become a persistent visitor in the house , he might well be jealous of such minor favors as she showed me , for with him she talked but little and shared no thoughts .
His manner with her was tinctured by an habituated despair .
They were extraordinarily polite and friendly with one another ... .
I told Mary I must cease my visits to the Mores .
I tried to make her feel my own sense of an accumulating cruelty to Rachel .
`` But it explains away so much , '' she said .
`` If you stop going there -- everyone will talk .
Everything will swing round -- and point here . ''
`` No , '' she said , overbearing me , `` you must keep on going to Ridinghanger .
But thoughts had been set going in my mind .
`` Why , '' I said presently , `` should you always speak of things that ca n't be ?
Why should we take all this as if it were all that there could be ?
I want long hours .
I want you to shine all the day through on my life .
Now , dear , it 's as if the sun was shown ever and again , and then put back behind an eclipse .
I come to you half-blinded , I go away unsatisfied .
All the world is dark in between , and little phantom _yous_ float over it . ''
She rested her cheek on her hand and looked at me gravely .
`` I want the more .
Mary , I want you to come away with me .
this life -- do n't think I 'm not full of the beauty , the happiness , the wonder -- -- But it 's a suspense .
It does n't go on .
It 's just a dawn , dear , a splendid dawn , a glory of color and brightness and freshness and hope , and -- no sun rises .
I want the day .
Everything else has stopped with me and stopped with you .
I do nothing with my politics now , -- I pretend .
I have no plans in life except plans for meeting you and again meeting you .
I want to go on , I want to go on with you and take up work and the world again -- you beside me .
I want you to come out of all this life -- out of all this immense wealthy emptiness of yours -- -- ''
She gripped a handful of my hair , and tugged hard between each word .
`` Have n't you got me ? ''
she asked between her teeth .
`` What more _could_ you have ? ''
`` We can stop all that , '' she said .
I turned to the window and became as rigid , facing Justin .
He was standing on the terrace , staring at us , with a face that looked stupid and inexpressive and -- very white .
The sky behind him , appropriately enough , was full of the tattered inky onset of a thunderstorm .
So we remained for a lengthy second perhaps , a trite _tableau vivant_ .
We two seemed to hang helplessly upon Justin , and he was the first of us to move .
I took a moment for my reply .
`` No , '' I said .
`` Since you know at last -- -- There are things to be said . ''
`` Stephen , '' I heard Mary say , `` will you leave me to talk to my husband ? ''
That was the gist of our confrontation , and then I turned about and walked along the gallery towards the entrance , with Justin following me slowly .
I was full of the wrath of baffled heroics ; I turned towards him with something of a gesture .
Down the perspective of the white and empty gallery he appeared small and perplexed .
The panes of the tall French windows were slashed with rain ... .
Maxton and Tarvrille appeared : `` Hullo , Stratton ! ''
said Tarvrille , with a fine flavor of an agreeable chance meeting .
Philip had doubts about his greeting me , and then extended his reluctant hand with a nervous grin to excuse the delay .
`` It is n't as though old Justin was any sort of beast , '' he reflected , `` or anything like that , you know .
He 's a most astonishing decent chap , clean as they make them . ''
`` What the devil 's it got to do with _you_ ? ''
I asked with an answering flash of fury .
`` I _think_ abroad , sir . ''
I expressed a reasonable generosity in the matter of expenses , and left him at last with a vague discomfort in my mind .
How far might n't this undesirable unearth the whole business in the course of his investigations ?
And then what could he do ?
Suppose I went back forthwith and stopped his enquiries before they began !
I had a disagreeable feeling of meanness that I could n't shake off ; I felt I was taking up a weapon that Justin did n't deserve .
Yet I argued with myself that the abduction of Mary justified any such course .
`` If you dare to speak to her -- -- ! ''
I suppose a couple of hundred people in London knew before I did that Lady Mary Justin had been carried off to Ireland and practically imprisoned there by her husband because I was her lover .
The thing reached me at last through little Fred Riddling , who came to my rooms in the morning while I was sitting over my breakfast .
said he , `` what is all this story of your shaking Justin by the collar , and threatening to kill him if he did n't give up his wife to you ?
And why do you want to fight a duel with Maxton ?
What 's it all about ?
Fire-eater you must be !
I stood up for you as well as I could , but I heard you abused for a solid hour last night , and there was a chap there simply squirting out facts and dates and names .
Got it all ... .
What have you been up to ? ''
An immense wet wind was blowing as we came over the big hill that lies to the south of Mirk .
Everything was wet , the hillside above me was either intensely green sodden turf or great streaming slabs of limestone , seaward was a rocky headland , a ruin of a beehive shape , and beyond a vast waste of tumbling waters unlit by any sun .
Not a tree broke that melancholy wilderness , nor any living thing but ourselves .
The horse went stumblingly under the incessant stimulation of the driver 's lash and tongue ... .
`` I want to see Lady Mary Justin , '' I said .
`` What do you mean ? ''
I asked , and questioned his face .
`` That 's why you ca n't see her . ''
`` No , '' I said .
`` There 's nothing else . ''
`` I tried , '' she said , `` that you should n't be sent from England . ''
My words were far too unexpected for Tarvrille to understand .
`` The flies , '' I repeated with an air of explanation .
He resumed with an air of plunging .
`` It will sound just rot to you now , Stratton , but after all it comes to this .
Behind us is a -- situation -- with half-a-dozen particular persons .
Out here -- I mean here round the world -- before you 've done with them -- there 's a thousand million people -- men and women . ''
Now here was I with a mind sore and inflamed .
I did not clearly understand what had happened to me .
I had blundered , offended , entangled myself ; and I had no more conception than a beast in a bog what it was had got me , or the method or even the need of escape .
The desires and passionate excitements , the anger and stress and strain and suspicion of the last few months had worn deep grooves in my brain , channels without end or issue , out of which it seemed impossible to keep my thoughts .
I had done dishonorable things , told lies , abused the confidence of a friend .
I kept wrestling with these intolerable facts .
If some momentary distraction released me for a time , back I would fall presently before I knew what was happening , and find myself scheming once more to reverse the accomplished , or eloquently restating things already intolerably overdiscussed in my mind , justifying the unjustifiable or avenging defeat .
I would dream again and again of some tremendous appeal to Mary , some violent return and attack upon the situation ... .
One very great factor in my mental and moral distress was the uncertain values of nearly every aspect of the case .
There is an invincible sense of wild rightness about passionate love that no reasoning and no training will ever altogether repudiate ; I had a persuasion that out of that I would presently extract a magic to excuse my deceits and treacheries and assuage my smarting shame .
And round these deep central preoccupations were others of acute exasperation and hatred towards secondary people .
There had been interventions , judgments upon insufficient evidence , comments , and often quite justifiable comments , that had filled me with an extraordinary savagery of resentment .
From all those things I was to escape at last unhelped , but I want you to understand particularly these phases through which I passed ; it falls to many and it may fall to you to pass through such a period of darkness and malign obsession .
Make the groove only a little deeper , a little more unclimbable , make the temperament a little less sanguine , and suicide stares you in the face .
And things worse than suicide , that suicide of self-respect which turns men to drugs and inflammatory vices and the utmost outrageous defiance of the dreaming noble self that has been so despitefully used .
Into these same inky pools I have dipped my feet , where other men have drowned .
I understand why they drown .
And my taste of misdeed and resentment has given me just an inkling of what men must feel who go to prison .
I know what it is to quarrel with a world .
But afterwards , later , I went out into the streets of Paris bent upon finding that woman .
She had become a hope , a desire .
All night long my head ached , and I lay awake swaying and jolting and listening to the rhythms of the wheels , Paris clean forgotten so soon as it was left , and my thoughts circling continually about Justin and Philip and Mary and the things I might have said and done .
The sun was setting , a warm glow fell upon the dissolving mountains of Savoy and upon the shining mirror of the lake .
The luminous , tranquil breadth of it caught me and held me .
`` I am done for . ''
The light upon the lake and upon the mountains , the downward swoop of a bird over the water and something in my heart , gave me the lie .
I can not explain how that mood came , I am doing my best to describe it , and it is not easy even to describe .
And I fear that to you who will have had I hope no experience of such shadows as I had passed through , it is impossible to convey its immense elation ... .
I remember once I came in a boat out of the caves of Han after two hours in the darkness , and there was the common daylight that is nothing wonderful at all , and its brightness ahead there seemed like trumpets and cheering , like waving flags and like the sunrise .
And so it was with this mood of my release .
I thought that perhaps I might get back those intimations of outlook and relief if I clambered alone into some high solitude and thought .
I had a crude attractive vision of myself far above the heat and noise , communing with the sky .
It was the worst season for climbing , and on the spur of the moment I could do nothing but get up the Rochers de Naye on the wrong side , and try and find some eyrie that was neither slippery nor wet .
I did not succeed .
In one place I slipped down a wet bank for some yards and held at last by a root ; if I had slipped much further I should not be writing here now ; and I came back a very weary and bruised climber , without any meditation ... .
I sat up on the side of my bed .
The dawn was just beginning to break up the featureless blackness of the small hours .
`` This is just some odd corner of my brain , '' I said ... .
It was Gidding , who is now my close friend and ally .
I remember very vividly the flavor of morning freshness as we watched Crete pass away northward and I listened to his talk .
I remember that much of our first talk , but the rest of it now is indistinct .
I wonder now if I can put before you very briefly the main generalizations that were growing up in my mind during my exile , the simplified picture into which I translated the billions of sights and sounds and -- smells , for every part of the world has its distinctive olfactory palette as much as its palette of colors -- that rained daily and nightly upon my mind .
But here I will not trace in any detail the growth of my conviction that the ancient and heavy obligation to work hard and continually throughout life has already slipped from man 's shoulders .
Suffice it that now I conceive of the task before mankind as a task essentially of rearrangement , as a problem in relationships , extremely complex and difficult indeed , but credibly solvable .
During my Indian and Chinese journey I was still at the Marxist stage .
I went about the east looking at labor , watching its organization and direction , seeing great interests and enterprises replace the diffused life of an earlier phase ; the disputes and discussions in the Transvaal which had first opened my mind to these questions came back to me , and steadily I lost my interest in those mere political and national issues with their paraphernalia of kings and flags and governments and parties that had hitherto blinded me to these more fundamental interactions .
Bombay , the gateway of what silly people were still calling in those days `` the immemorial East , '' Bombay , which is newer than Boston or New York , Bombay which has grown beneath the Englishman 's shadow out of a Portuguese fort in the last two hundred years ... .
By imperceptible degrees I came to realize that this matter of expropriation and enslavement and control , which bulks so vastly upon the modern consciousness , which the Socialists treat as though it was the comprehensive present process of mankind , is no more than one aspect of an overlife that struggles out of a massive ancient and traditional common way of living , struggles out again and again -- blindly and always so far with a disorderly insuccess ... .
`` Is n't old Eccles _good_ ? ''
whispered the colonel 's wife beside me , and recalled me to the play ... .
Then you know came a sort of astonishment , and I think , -- because afterwards Crosby picked up a dropped cartridge at the foot of the tree -- that I tried to reload .
I believe I was completely incredulous that the beast was going to have me until he actually got me .
The thing was too completely out of my imaginative picture .
I do n't believe I thought at all while he was coming up the tree .
I merely noted how astonishingly he resembled an angry cat .
Then he 'd got my leg , he was hanging on to it first by two claws and then by one claw , and the whole weight of him was pulling me down .
It did n't seem to be my leg .
I wasn't frightened , I felt absolutely nothing , I was amazed .
I slipped , tried to get a hold on the tree trunk , felt myself being hauled down , and then got my arm about the branch .
I still clung to my unloaded gun as an impoverished aristocrat might cling to his patent of nobility .
That was , I felt , my answer for him yet .
I achieved a cat-like celerity .
In another second I was back in my fork reloading , my legs tucked up as tightly as possible .
She had a villa upon the Rhine under a hill of vineyards , where she devoted herself -- she was a widow -- to matchmaking and belated regrets for the childlessness that necessitated a perpetual borrowing of material for her pursuit .
She had a motor-car , a steam-launch , several rowing boats and canoes , a tennis-lawn , a rambling garden , a devious house and a rapid mind , and in fact everything that was necessary for throwing young people together .
She made her surprise seem easy and natural , and with returning health I found myself already back upon my old footing of friendly intimacy with Rachel .
I told her something of the intention and range of my travels , and something of the views that were growing out of their experiences .
`` The House , '' I said , `` does n't hear things at my pitch .
Too shrill altogether . ''
I did n't want to answer that question , in which the personal note sounded so clearly .
`` I am going to America to see America , '' I said , `` and America may be rather a big thing to see . ''
My answer , if it was lame and ungallant to such a challenge , was at least perfectly honest .
`` I ca n't make up my mind , '' I said .
`` I 've been near making plans -- taking steps ... .
Something holds me back ... . ''
Her eyes had been on Rachel as she chattered .
The girl had turned to the distant hills again , and had forgotten even to pretend to listen to the answer she had evoked .
Now she came back sharply to the sound of her name .
`` Does _she_ know ? ''
`` Well , that 's what I want to know . ''
`` Until I came here perhaps that was almost nearly true .
But you've stirred me up , sweet cousin , and old things , old memories and habits have come to the surface again .
Mary wrote herself over my life -- in all sorts of places ... .
I ca n't tell you .
I 've never talked of her to anyone .
I 'm not able , very well , to talk about my feelings ... .
Perhaps a man of my sort -- does n't love twice over . ''
`` I made love , '' I said , `` to Lady Mary Justin , and we were found out .
We could n't go away together -- -- ''
`` Yes , '' I said .
`` Do n't you think it ought to fill my life ? ''
`` But why should n't it ? ''
We became aware of a jangling at the janitor 's bell .
Our opportunity for talk was slipping away .
And we were both still undecided , both blunderingly nervous and insecure .
We were hurried into clumsy phrases that afterwards we would have given much to recall .
`` But how could life be more beautiful , '' I said , `` than when it serves big human ends ? ''
`` You see , for me -- that 's gone . ''
`` There 's a sort of love , '' I hurried , `` that does n't renew itself ever .
Do n't let yourself believe it does .
Something else may come in its place , but that is different .
It 's youth , -- a wonderful newness ... .
Look at that youngster .
_He_ can love you like that .
I 've watched him .
You know he does ... . ''
And rather adroitly he contrived to let two of them slip , and captured Rachel to assist him .
`` That you 've got to forget . ''
`` I ca n't think what men are coming to , '' she went on .
`` You 're in love with her , or you would n't be so generous .
And she 's head over heels with you .
And here you are !
I 'll give you one more chance -- -- ''
`` I wo n't take it , '' I interrupted .
`` It is n't fair .
I tell you I won't take it .
I 'll go two days earlier to prevent you .
Unless you promise me -- -- Of course I see how things are with her .
She 's not a sphinx .
But it is n't fair .
Not to her , or to him -- or myself .
_He's_ got some claims .
He 's got more right to her than I ... . ''
But my spirit was saying all the time , `` I am still in my pit , in my pit .
After all I am still in my pit . ''
The onset of New York was extraordinarily stimulating to me .
It is indeed that .
New York rides up out of the waters , a cliff of man 's making ; its great buildings at a distance seem like long Chinese banners held up against the sky .
From Sandy Hook to the great landing stages and the swirling hooting traffic of the Hudson River there fails nothing in that magnificent crescendo of approach .
Here was the antithesis of India ; here were no peasants whatever , no traditional culture , no castes , no established differences ( except for the one schism of color ) ; this amazing place had never had a famine , never a plague ; here were no temples and no priesthoods dominating the lives of the people , -- old Trinity church embedded amidst towering sky-scrapers was a symbol for as much as they had of all that ; and here too there was no crown , no affectations of an ancient loyalty , no visible army , no traditions of hostility , for the old defiance of Britain is a thing now ridiculous and dead ; and everyone I met had an air as if he knew that to-morrow must be different from to-day and different and novel and remarkable by virtue of himself and such as himself .
That meeting was followed by another before I left New York , and presently Gidding joined me at Denver , where I was trying to measure the true significance of a labor paper called _The Appeal to Reason_ that , in spite of a rigid boycott by the ordinary agencies for news distribution went out in the middle west to nearly half a million subscribers , and was filled with such a fierceness of insurrection against labor conditions , such a hatred , blind and impassioned , as I had never known before .
Gidding remained with me there and came back with me to Chicago , where I wanted to see something of the Americanization of the immigrant , and my survey of America , the social and economic problem of America , resolved itself more and more into a conference with him .
And by the time I had reached America I had already come to see that just as the issues of party politics at home and international politics abroad are mere superficialities above the greater struggle of an energetic minority to organize and exploit the labor of the masses of mankind , so that struggle also is only a huge incident in the still more than half unconscious impulse to replace the ancient way of human living by a more highly organized world-wide social order , by a world civilization embodying itself in a World State .
And I saw now how that impulse could neither cease nor could it on the other hand realize itself until it became conscious and deliberate and merciful , free from haste and tyranny , persuasive and sustained by a nearly universal sympathy and understanding .
For until that arrives the creative forces must inevitably spend themselves very largely in blind alleys , futile rushes and destructive conflicts .
Upon that our two minds were agreed .
I will not say that this Great State , this World Republic of civilized men , is our dream , because it is not a dream , it is a manifestly reasonable possibility .
It is our intention .
It is what we are deliberately making and what in a little while very many men and women will be making .
We are secessionists from all contemporary nationalities and loyalties .
We have set ourselves with all the capacity and energy at our disposal to create a world-wide common fund of ideas and knowledge , and to evoke a world-wide sense of human solidarity in which the existing limitations of political structure must inevitably melt away .
There we went outside the province of Alphabet and Mollentrave and into an infinitely subtler system of interests .
We wanted to give sincere and clear-thinking writers encouragement and opportunity , to improve the critical tribunal and make it independent of advertising interests , so that there would be a readier welcome for luminous thinking and writing and a quicker explosion of intellectual imposture .
We sought to provide guides and intelligencers to contemporary thought .
We had already set up or subsidized or otherwise aided a certain number of magazines and periodicals that seemed to us independent-spirited , out-spoken and well handled , but we had still to devise our present scheme of financing groups of men to create magazines and newspapers , which became their own separate but inalienable property after so many years of success .
But all this I hope you will already have become more or less familiar with when this story reaches your hands , and I hope by the time it does so we shall be far beyond our present stage of experiment and that you will have come naturally to play your part in this most fascinating business of maintaining an onward intellectual movement in the world , a movement not simply independent of but often running counter to all sorts of political and financial interests .
I tell you this much here for you to understand that already in 1909 and considering the business side of my activities alone , I was a hard worker and very strenuously employed .
And in addition to all this huge network of enterprises I had developed with Gidding , I was still pretty actively a student .
I was n't -- I never shall be -- absolutely satisfied with my general ideas .
I was enquiring keenly and closely into those problems of group and crowd psychology from which all this big publishing work has arisen , and giving particular attention to the war-panics and outbreaks of international hostility that were then passing in deepening waves across Europe .
I had already accumulated a mass of notes for the book upon `` Group Jealousy in Religious Persecution , Racial Conflicts and War '' which I hope to publish the year after next , and which therefore I hope you will have read long before this present book can possibly come to you .
And moreover Rachel and I had established our home in London -- in the house we now occupy during the winter and spring -- and both you and your little sister had begun your careers as inhabitants of this earth .
Your little sister had indeed but just begun .
And then one morning at the breakfast-table I picked a square envelope out of a heap of letters , and saw the half-forgotten and infinitely familiar handwriting of Lady Mary Justin ... .
The sight of it gave me an odd mixture of sensations .
I was startled , I was disturbed , I was a little afraid .
I had n't forgiven her yet ; it needed but this touch to tell me how little I had forgotten ... .
It was a far longer letter than Mary had ever written me in the old days , and in a handwriting as fine as ever but now rather smaller .
I have it still , and here I open its worn folds and , except for a few trifling omissions , copy it out for you ... .
A few trifling omissions , I say , -- just one there is that is not trifling , but that I must needs make ... .
I read this letter to the end and looked up , and there was my home about me , a room ruddy-brown and familiar , with the row of old pewter things upon the dresser , the steel engravings of former Strattons that came to me from my father , a convex mirror exaggerating my upturned face .
And Rachel just risen again sat at the other end of the table , a young mother , fragile and tender-eyed .
The clash of these two systems of reality was amazing .
It was as though I had not been parted from Mary for a day , as though all that separation and all that cloud of bitter jealousy had been a mere silence between two people in the same room .
Indeed it was extraordinarily like that , as if I had been sitting at a desk , imagining myself alone , reading my present life as one reads in a book at a shaded lamp , and then suddenly that silent other had spoken .
`` I suppose , '' said Rachel , `` she wants to hear from you again . ''
Her eye fell on the letter in my hand for the smallest fraction of a second , and it was as if hastily she snatched away a thought from my observation .
I had a moment of illuminating embarrassment .
So far we had contrived to do as most young people do when they marry , we had sought to make our lives unreservedly open to one another , we had affected an entire absence of concealments about our movements , our thoughts .
If perhaps I had been largely silent to her about Mary it was not so much that I sought to hide things from her as that I myself sought to forget .
It is one of the things that we learn too late , the impossibility of any such rapid and wilful coalescences of souls .
But we had maintained a convention of infinite communism since our marriage ; we had shown each other our letters as a matter of course , shared the secrets of our friends , gone everywhere together as far as we possibly could .
I did not answer Mary 's letter for seven or eight days .
I do not remember at all clearly what I wrote to her .
It has disappeared from existence .
But it was certainly a long letter .
Throughout this book I have been trying to tell you the growth of my views of life and its purpose , from my childish dreams and Harbury attitudes to those ideas of human development that have made me undertake the work I do .
It is not glorious work I know , as the work of great artists and poets and leaders is glorious , but it is what I find best suits my gifts and my want of gifts .
Greater men will come at last to build within my scaffoldings .
In some summary phrasing I must have set out the gist of this .
I must have explained my sense of the supreme importance of mental clarification in human life .
All this is manifest in her reply .
And I think too I did my best to tell her plainly the faith that was in me , and why life seemed worth while to me ... .
`` Man is the most sexual of all the beasts , Stephen .
Half of him , womankind , rather more than half , is n't simply human at all , it's specialized , specialized for the young , not only naturally and physically as animals are , but mentally and artificially .
Womankind is n't human , it 's reduced human .
It 's 'the sex ' as the Victorians used to say , and from the point of view of the Lex Julia and the point of view of Mr. Malthus , and the point of view of biologists and saints and artists and everyone who deals in feeling and emotion -- and from the point of view of all us poor specialists , smothered up in our clothes and restrictions -- the future of the sex is the centre of the whole problem of the human future , about which you are concerned .
All this great world-state of your man 's imagination is going to be wrecked by us if you ignore us , we women are going to be the Goths and Huns of another Decline and Fall .
We are going to sit in the conspicuous places of the world and _loot_ all your patient accumulations .
We are going to abolish your offspring and turn the princes among you into undignified slaves .
Because , you see , specialized as we are , we are not quite specialized , we are specialized under duress , and at the first glimpse of a chance we abandon our cradles and drop our pots and pans and go for the vast and elegant side possibilities -- of our specialization .
Out we come , looking for the fun the men are having .
Dress us , feed us , play with us !
We'll pay you in excitement , -- tremendous excitement .
All your little triumphs of science and economy , all your little accumulations of wealth that you think will presently make the struggle for life an old story and the millennium possible -- _we spend_ .
And all your dreams of brotherhood !
-- we will set you by the ears .
We hold ourselves up as my little Christian nephews -- Philip 's boys -- do some coveted object , and say _Quis ?
_ and the whole brotherhood shouts '_Ego !
_ ' to the challenge ... .
Back you go into Individualism at the word and all your Brotherhood crumbles to dust again .
`` Perhaps I do n't properly estimate our position in the fabric , but I ca n't get away from the feeling that everything in social life leads up to this -- to us , -- the ridiculous canopy .
If so , then the universe means -- _nothing_ ; it 's blowing great forms and shapes as a swamp blows bubbles ; a little while ago it was megatheriums and plesiosauriums -- if that 's the name for them -- and now it is country-houses and motor-cars and coronation festivals .
And in the end -- it is all nonsense , Stephen .
It is utter nonsense .
`` Something has to be done for women , Stephen , something -- urgently -- and nothing is done until that is done , some release from their intolerable subjection to sex , so that for us everything else in life , respect , freedom , social standing , is entirely secondary to that .
But what has to be done ?
We women do not know .
Our efforts to know are among the most desolating of spectacles .
I read the papers of those suffrage women ; the effect is more like agitated geese upon a common than anything human has a right to be ... .
That 's why I turn to you .
Years ago I felt , and now I know , there is about you a simplicity of mind , a foolishness of faith , that is stronger and greater than the cleverness of any woman alive .
You are one of those strange men who take high and sweeping views -- as larks soar .
It is n't that you yourself are high and sweeping ... .
No , but still I turn to you .
In the old days I used to turn to you and shake your mind and make you think about things you seemed too sluggish to think about without my clamor .
Once do you remember at Martens I shook you by the ears ... .
And when I made you think , you thought , as I could never do .
Think now -- about women .
But I will not give you that particular letter in its order , nor its successors .
Altogether she wrote me twenty-two letters , and I one or two more than that number to her , and -- a thing almost inevitable in a discussion by correspondence -- there is a lot of overlapping and recapitulation .
Those letters spread over a space of nearly two and a half years .
Again and again she insists upon the monstrous exaggeration of the importance of sex in human life and of the need of some reduction of its importance , and she makes the boldest experimental suggestions for the achievement of that end .
But she comes slowly to recognize that there is a justification for an indirect attack , that sex and the position of women do not constitute the primary problem in that bristling system of riddles that lies like a hostile army across the path of mankind .
And she realized too that through art , through science and literature and the whole enquiring and creative side of man's nature , lies the path by which those positions are to be outflanked , and those eternal-looking impossibles and inconceivables overcome .
Here is a fragment -- saturated with the essence of her thought .
Three-quarters of her earlier letters are variations on this theme ... .
That August I was very much run down .
I had been staying in London through almost intolerably hot weather to attend a Races Congress that had greatly disappointed me .
I do n't know particularly now why I had been disappointed nor how far the feeling was due to my being generally run down by the pressure of detailed work and the stress of thinking about large subjects in little scraps of time .
But I know that a kind of despair came over me as I sat and looked at that multicolored assembly and heard in succession the heavy platitudes of white men , the slick , thin cleverness of Hindoos , the rich-toned florid rhetoric of negroes .
I lost sight of any germ of splendid possibility in all those people , and saw all too plainly the vanity , the jealousy , the self-interests that show up so harshly against the professions of every altruistic movement .
It seemed all such a windy business against the firm prejudices , the vast accumulated interests that grind race against race .
We had no common purpose at all at that conference , no proposal to hold us together .
So much of it was like bleating on a hillside ... .
The next morning I descended at some late hour by Swiss reckoning , and discovered two ladies in the morning sunlight awaiting breakfast at a little green table .
One rose slowly at the sight of me , and stood and surveyed me with a glad amazement .
`` He wo n't . ''
`` The people here . ''
I looked about me .
`` But surely this is the most beautiful place in the whole world !
Is it indeed in the world ? ''
`` Someday we shall be different ... .
All this putting oneself round another person like a fence , against everyone else , almost against everything else ; it 's so wicked , so fierce .
`` This parting , '' said Mary , `` is the worst of the price we have to pay ... .
Now it comes to the end there seem a thousand things one hasn't said ... . ''
`` Adjacent rooms ! ''
Maxwell Hartington 's admiration gave place I think to a slight resentment at my sustained innocence .
`` And Lady Mary changed rooms with her secretary two nights before -- to be near the vacant room .
The secretary went into number 12 on the floor below , -- a larger room , at thirteen francs a day , and one not exposed to the early daylight ... . ''
You accepted my appearance when I ought to have been in Italy with the unquestioning confidence with which you still take all my comings and goings .
For you , Italy , America , any place is just round the corner .
I was kissed with affection but haste , and you got back to your sand-works as speedily as possible .
I inspected Rachel Two 's mounds , -- she was giving them the names of her various aunts and uncles -- and patted the crowing Margaret , who ignored me .
Rachel had sprung to her feet and kissed me and now hovered radiant over me as I caressed you youngsters .
It was all so warm , so real , that for an instant the dark threat that hung over us all vanished from my skies , to return with the force of a blow .
`` Rachel , '' I said taking her arm , with a desolating sense of the futility in my gesture of protection ; `` let us walk along the beach .
I want to tell you something -- -- Something rather complicated . ''
`` Is there going to be war , Stephen ? ''
`` I wish that was all . ''
She had been staying at the hotel on Engstlen Alp . ''
`` Because Justin knows and he means to divorce her -- and it may be he will succeed ... . ''
`` There 's no evidence -- you did n't ... . ''
`` And I never dreamt -- -- ! ''
`` She need not have written , '' said Rachel .
`` She need not have written .
And then if you had met -- -- ''
`` It was n't wise , '' I said .
`` But -- never mind .
You look so tired , my dear ! ''
`` I knew , '' she sobbed , `` if I came to you ... . ''
`` Get me a little cold water , Stephen , '' she said .
`` Let me have a little cold water on my face .
I 've got my courage now again .
Just then , -- I was down too low .
Yes -- cold water .
Because I want to tell you -- things you will be glad to hear . ''
`` But how ? ''
I said , still doubting .
My mind leaps from that to the moment in the afternoon , when torn by intolerable distresses and anxiety I knocked and rang , and again knocked at the door of the house she occupied in South Street , with the intention of making one last appeal to her to live -- if , indeed , it was death she had in mind .
I had let her go from me and instantly a hundred neglected things had come into my head .
I could go away with her , I could threaten to die with her ; it seemed to me that nothing in all the world mattered if only I could thrust back the dark hand of death to which she had so manifestly turned .
I knew , I knew all along that her extorted promise would not bind her .
I knew and I let the faintest shadow of uncertainty weaken and restrain me .
And I went to her too late .
I saw instantly that I was too late when the door opened and showed me the scared face of a young footman whose eyes were red with tears .
We had come to our parting , we had done our business with an affectation of emotional aloofness , and then suddenly he gripped me by the arm .
`` Stratton , '' he said , `` we two -- -- We killed her .
We tore her to pieces between us ... . ''
And it is upon this effect of sweet and beautiful possibilities , caught in the net of animal jealousies and thoughtless motives and ancient rigid institutions , that I would end this writing .
In Mary , it seems to me , I found both womanhood and fellowship , I found what many have dreamt of , love and friendship freely given , and I could do nothing but clutch at her to make her my possession .
I would not permit her to live except as a part of my life .
I see her now and understand her better than when she was alive , I recall things that she said and wrote and it is clear to me , clearer perhaps than it ever was to her , that she , with her resentment at being in any sense property , her self-reliant thought , her independence of standard , was the very prototype of that sister-lover who must replace the seductive and abject womanhood , owned , mastered and deceiving , who waste the world to-day .
And she was owned , she was mastered , she was forced into concealment .
What alternative was there for her ?
What alternative is there for any woman ?
She might perhaps have kept her freedom by some ill-paid work and at the price of every other impulse in her swift and eager nature .
She might have become one of those poor neuters , an independent woman ... .
Life was made impossible for her and she was forced to die , according to the fate of all untimely things .
She was destroyed , not merely by the unconsidered , undisciplined passions of her husband and her lover , but by the vast tradition that sustains and enforces the subjugation of her sex .
What I had from her , and what she was , is but a mere intimation of all that she and I might have made of each other and the world .
Ask your dealer for a complete list of A. L. Burt Company 's Popular Copyright Fiction
`` I _can't_ fix my attention , '' said Mr. Lewisham .
He took off the needless glasses , wiped them , and blinked his eyes .
This confounded Horace and his stimulating epithets !
`` I wo n't be beat , '' he said -- incorrectly -- replaced his glasses , brought his elbows down on either side of his box with resonant violence , and clutched the hair over his ears with both hands ... .
In five minutes ' time he found himself watching the swallows curving through the blue over the vicarage garden .
`` Did ever man have such a bother with himself as me ? ''
he asked vaguely but vehemently .
`` It 's self-indulgence does it -- sitting down 's the beginning of laziness . ''
The school door was opened by an obsequious little boy with `` lines '' to be examined .
Unreasonable emotions descended upon Mr. Lewisham -- emotions that are unaccountable on the mere hypothesis of a casual meeting .
Something was whispered ; it sounded suspiciously like `` It 's her ! ''
He advanced with his fingers in his book , ready to retreat to its pages if she looked up , and watched her over it .
_Ludibrium_ passed out of his universe .
She was clearly unaware of his nearness , he thought , intent upon her writing , whatever that might be .
He wondered what it might be .
Her face , foreshortened by her downward regard , seemed infantile .
Her fluttering skirt was short , and showed her shoes and ankles .
He noted her graceful , easy steps .
A figure of health and lightness it was , sunlit , and advancing towards him , something , as he afterwards recalled with a certain astonishment , quite outside the Schema .
She had hazel eyes , but Mr. Lewisham , being quite an amateur about eyes , could find no words for them .
She looked demurely into his face .
She seemed to find nothing there .
She glanced away from him among the trees , and passed , and nothing remained in front of him but an empty avenue , a sunlit , green-shot void .
From far away the soughing of the breeze swept towards him , and in a moment all the twigs about him were quivering and rustling and the boughs creaking with a gust of wind .
It seemed to urge him away from her .
The faded dead leaves that had once been green and young sprang up , raced one another , leapt , danced and pirouetted , and then something large struck him on the neck , stayed for a startling moment , and drove past him up the avenue .
Sharp 's the word._ ''
For my boys . ''
She raised her eyebrows , then knitted them momentarily , and looked at him .
`` Are _you_ Mr .
she asked with an affectation of entire ignorance and discovery .
She looked down and then into his face again .
`` No , '' she said .
`` I suppose I ought not to .
I 'm very sorry . ''
`` If you like -- '' he said .
She glanced over her shoulder down the vacant avenue .
This interview -- this momentous series of things unsaid was coming to an end !
She looked at him hesitatingly and smiled again .
She held out her hand .
No doubt that was the proper thing to do .
He took it , searching a void , tumultuous mind in vain .
He felt a breathless pleasure , like that of sliding down a slope of snow .
`` I would like to have it . ''
His face was flushed and his eyes bright .
Curiously enough , he was out of breath .
He stared for a long time at the vacant end of the avenue .
Then he turned his eyes to his trophy gripped against the closed and forgotten Horace in his hand .
`` Faith will van ... ish in ... to sight , Hope be emp ... tied in deli ... ight , Love in Heaven will shine more bri ... ight , There ... fore give us Love . ''
`` A ... men . ''
He was so preoccupied that he found the whole congregation subsiding into their seats , and himself still standing , rapt .
He sat down spasmodically , with an impact that seemed to him to re-echo through the church .
As they came out of the porch into the thickening night , he seemed to see her everywhere .
He fancied she had gone on in front , and he hurried up the boys in the hope of overtaking her .
They pushed through the throng of dim people going homeward .
Should he raise his hat to her again ?
But it was Susie Hopbrow in a light-coloured dress -- a raven in dove 's plumage .
He felt a curious mixture of relief and disappointment .
He would see her no more that night .
He hurried from the school to his lodging .
He wanted very urgently to be alone .
He went upstairs to his little room and sat before the upturned box on which his Butler 's Analogy was spread open .
He did not go to the formality of lighting the candle .
He leant back and gazed blissfully at the solitary planet that hung over the vicarage garden .
Mrs. Munday called him thrice to his supper .
`` Mr. Lewisham , '' she said close to him , and he turned with a quality of movement that was almost convulsive .
He raised his cap clumsily .
They stood facing one another for an expressive moment , and then by a movement she indicated her intention to walk along the avenue with him .
`` I wanted so much , '' she said , looking down at her feet , `` to thank you for letting Teddy off , you know .
That is why I wanted to see you . ''
Lewisham took his first step beside her .
`` And it 's odd , is n't it , '' she said , looking up into his face , `` that I should meet you here in just the same place .
The very same place we met before . ''
`` I 'm rather fond of reading , certainly .
Mr. Lewisham had regretfully to admit the lack of such culture and mental activity in Whortley .
It made him feel terribly her inferior .
He had only his bookishness and his certificates to set against it all -- and she had seen Carlyle 's house !
`` Down here , '' she said , `` there 's nothing to talk about but scandal . ''
It was too true .
And then Mr. Bonover passed , forehead tight reefed so to speak , and lips impressively compressed .
Mr. Lewisham raised his mortar-board , and to his astonishment Mr. Bonover responded with a markedly formal salute -- mock clerical hat sweeping circuitously -- and the regard of a searching , disapproving eye , and so passed .
Lewisham was overcome with astonishment at this improvement on the nod of their ordinary commerce .
And so this terrible incident terminated for the time .
He felt a momentary gust of indignation .
After all , why should Bonover or anyone interfere with his talking to a girl if he chose ?
And for all he knew they might have been properly introduced .
By young Frobisher , say .
Nevertheless , Lewisham 's spring-tide mood relapsed into winter .
He was , he felt , singularly stupid for the rest of their conversation , and the delightful feeling of enterprise that had hitherto inspired and astonished him when talking to her had shrivelled beyond contempt .
He was glad -- positively glad -- when things came to an end .
At the park gates she held out her hand .
`` I 'm afraid I have interrupted your reading , '' she said .
`` Yes , '' said Lewisham , `` that 's so . ''
`` You have made friends in the neighbourhood ? ''
`` Well , no .
The brightness spread from Lewisham 's ears over his face .
-- a most objectionable expression and rare with him in those days .
He had half a mind to follow the head-master and ask him if he doubted his word .
It was only too evident what the answer would be .
On Saturday morning his preoccupation with her was so vivid that it distracted him even while he was teaching that most teachable subject , algebra , and by the end of the school hours the issue was decided and the Career in headlong rout .
That afternoon he would go , whatever happened , and see her and speak to her again .
The thought of Bonover arose only to be dismissed .
Mr. Bonover 's eyebrows went up at this obvious lie , and the glow of his suavity faded , `` You see , '' he said , `` Mrs. Bonover expects a friend this afternoon , and we rather want Mr. Dunkerley to make four at croquet ... . ''
`` You do n't play croquet by any chance ? ''
As soon as school was dismissed Lewisham made a gaol-delivery of his outstanding impositions , and hurried back to his lodgings , to spend the time until his dinner was ready -- Well ?
It seems hardly fair , perhaps , to Lewisham to tell this ; it is doubtful , indeed , whether a male novelist 's duty to his sex should not restrain him , but , as the wall in the shadow by the diamond-framed window insisted , `` _Magna est veritas et prevalebit_ . ''
Mr. Lewisham brushed his hair with elaboration , and ruffled it picturesquely , tried the effect of all his ties and selected a white one , dusted his boots with an old pocket-handkerchief , changed his trousers because the week-day pair was minutely frayed at the heels , and inked the elbows of his coat where the stitches were a little white .
And , to be still more intimate , he studied his callow appearance in the glass from various points of view , and decided that his nose might have been a little smaller with advantage ... .
`` This lane , '' he said -- their talk was curiously inconsecutive -- '' some way along this lane , over the hill and down , there is a gate , and that goes -- I mean , it opens into the path that runs along the river bank .
Have you been ? ''
`` The trees are all budding , '' said Mr. Lewisham , `` the rushes are shooting , and all along the edge of the river there are millions of little white flowers floating on the water , _I_ do n't know the names of them , but they 're fine ... .
May I carry that branch of blossom ? ''
They went by the path that runs among the trees along the river bank , and she must needs repent and wish to take the lower one , the towing path , before they had gone three hundred yards .
So Lewisham had to find a place fit for her descent , where a friendly tree proffered its protruding roots as a convenient balustrade , and down she clambered with her hand in his .
They struck boldly across the meadows , which were gay with lady's smock , and he walked , by special request , between her and three matronly cows -- feeling as Perseus might have done when he fended off the sea-monster .
And so by the mill , and up a steep path to Immering Common .
Across the meadows Lewisham had broached the subject of her occupation .
`` And are you really going away from here to be an amanuensis ? ''
he said , and started her upon the theme of herself , a theme she treated with a specialist 's enthusiasm .
They dealt with it by the comparative methods and neither noticed the light was out of the sky until the soft feet of the advancing shower had stolen right upon them .
She smiled in his face -- hesitated .
`` Yes -- _Miss_ Henderson . ''
The whispering of the rain about them sank and died , and the sunlight struck vividly across the distant woods beyond Immering .
Just then they had fallen on a silence again that was full of daring thoughts for Mr. Lewisham .
He moved his arm suddenly and placed it so that it was behind her on the frame of the harrow .
`` But , four o'clock ? ''
`` Nor I , '' she said .
Thereby Dunkerley 's mind was prepared for the news that came the next morning over the exercise books .
`` That 's what I 'm sorry for . ''
`` He wo n't , '' said Lewisham shortly , and opened his first exercise book .
He found it difficult to talk .
`` He 's a greaser . ''
-- what can you expect from Durham ? ''
For Bonover had only a Durham degree , and Dunkerley , having none , inclined to be particular .
Therewith Dunkerley lapsed into a sympathetic and busy rustling over his own pile of exercises .
It was not until the heap had been reduced to a book or so that he spoke again -- an elaborate point .
`` And work those patents ? ''
It was a relief -- a definite abandonment .
He stared for a moment at the destruction he had made , and then went back to the revision of the time-table , with a mutter about `` silly spooning . ''
Yet the letters of application were wonderful compositions ; each had a new pen to itself and was for the first page at least in a handwriting far above even his usual high standard .
And day after day passed and that particular letter he hoped for still did not come .
`` Dear , I could not write before because I have no room at home now where I can write a letter , and Mrs. Frobisher told my mother falsehoods about you .
My mother has surprised me dreadfully -- I did not think it of her .
She told me nothing .
But of that I must tell you in another letter .
I am too angry to write about it now .
Even now you can not write back , for _you must not send letters here_ .
It would _never_ do .
But I think of you , dear , '' -- the `` dear '' had been erased and rewritten -- '' and I must write and tell you so , and of that nice walk we had , if I never write again .
I am very busy now .
My work is rather difficult and I am afraid I am a little stupid .
It is hard to be interested in anything just because that is how you have to live , is it not ?
I daresay you sometimes feel the same of school .
But I suppose everybody is doing things they do n't like .
I do n't know when I shall come to Whortley again , if ever , but very likely you will be coming to London .
Mrs. Frobisher said the most horrid things .
It would be nice If you could come to London , because then perhaps you might see me .
There is a big boys ' school at Chelsea , and when I go by it every morning I wish you were there .
Then you would come out in your cap and gown as I went by .
Suppose some day I was to see you there suddenly !
Reading it , and especially that opening `` dear , '' made Lewisham feel the strangest sensation in his throat and chest , almost as though he was going to cry .
So he laughed instead and read it again , and went to and fro in his little room with his eyes bright and that precious writing held in his hand .
That `` dear '' was just as if she had spoken -- a voice suddenly heard .
He thought of her farewell , clear and sweet , out of the shadow of the moonlit house .
It quite dominated all the rest of the room at first , it flaunted like a flag of triumph over `` discipline '' and the time-table and the Schema .
Once indeed it was taken down , but the day after it reappeared .
Later a list of scholastic vacancies partially obscured it , and some pencil memoranda were written on the margin .
And when at last the time came for him to pack up and leave Whortley , he took it down and used it with several other suitable papers -- the Schema and the time-table were its next-door neighbours -- to line the bottom of the yellow box in which he packed his books : chiefly books for that matriculation that had now to be postponed .
The quest of a `` crib '' had ended in the unexpected fruition of Dunkerley 's blue paper .
The green-blue certificates had , it seemed , a value beyond mural decoration , and when Lewisham was already despairing of any employment for the rest of his life , came a marvellous blue document from the Education Department promising inconceivable things .
He was to go to London and be paid a guinea a week for listening to lectures -- lectures beyond his most ambitious dreams !
Among the names that swam before his eyes was Huxley -- Huxley and then Lockyer !
What a chance to get !
Is it any wonder that for three memorable years the Career prevailed with him ?
`` _What_ colour ? ''
said the young lady at the counter , sharply .
Lewisham heard a shrill whistle , made a run for the lift and caught it just on the point of departure .
The lift was unlit and full of black shadows ; only the sapper who conducted it was distinct .
As Lewisham peered doubtfully at the dim faces near him , a girl 's voice addressed him by name .
The previous session -- their friendship was now nearly a year old -- it had never once dawned upon him that she could possibly be pretty .
The chief thing he had been able to recall with any definiteness during the vacation was , that her hair was not always tidy , and that even when it chanced to be so , she was nervous about it ; she distrusted it .
He remembered her gesture while she talked , a patting exploration that verged on the exasperating .
From that he went on to remember that its colour was , on the whole , fair , a light brown .
But he had forgotten her mouth , he had failed to name the colour of her eyes .
She wore glasses , it is true .
And her dress was indefinite in his memory -- an amorphous dinginess .
`` And have you read 'Looking Backward ' ? ''
`` I think sometimes it is greater even to fail than to succeed . ''
`` I say , '' said Lewisham quite suddenly .
`` You do put -- well -- courage into a chap .
I should n't have done that Socialism paper if it had n't been for you . ''
He turned round and stood leaning with his back to the Moses , and smiling at her .
`` You do help a fellow , '' he said .
That was one of the vivid moments of Miss Heydinger 's life .
She changed colour a little .
`` Do I ? ''
she said , standing straight and awkward and looking into his face , `` I 'm ... glad . ''
`` I have n't thanked you for your letters , '' said Lewisham , `` And I've been thinking ... ''
Her eyes were for a moment touched with the beauty of simple emotion .
`` We two , '' she said , and her lips trembled and her throat seemed to swell .
She snatched her hand back suddenly and turned her face away .
Abruptly she walked towards the end of the gallery , and he saw her fumbling for her handkerchief in the folds of the green and black dress .
She was going to cry !
It set Lewisham marvelling -- this totally inappropriate emotion .
`` You may have been deceived , '' paraphrased Lewisham .
`` I can assure you ... others can see , hear , feel .
I have tested , sir .
I have some scientific training and I have employed tests .
Scientific and exhaustive tests !
I ask you , sir -- have you given the spirits a chance ? ''
So it came about that Lewisham consented to witness a spirit-raising .
Miss Heydinger it was arranged should be there , and the sceptic Smithers , Lagune , his typewriter and the medium would complete the party .
Afterwards there was to be another party for the others .
Lewisham was glad he had the moral support of Smithers .
`` It 's an evening wasted , '' said Smithers , who had gallantly resolved to make the running for Lewisham in the contest for the Forbes medal .
`` But I 'll prove my case .
You see if I do n't . ''
They were given an address in Chelsea .
The house , when Lewisham found it at last , proved a large one , with such an air of mellowed dignity that he was abashed .
He hung his hat up for himself beside a green-trimmed hat of straw in the wide , rich-toned hall .
Through an open door he had a glimpse of a palatial study , book shelves bearing white busts , a huge writing-table lit by a green-shaded electric lamp and covered thickly with papers .
The housemaid looked , he thought , with infinite disdain at the rusty mourning and flamboyant tie , and flounced about and led him upstairs .
She rapped , and there was a discussion within .
`` They 're at it already , I believe , '' she said to Lewisham confidentially .
`` Mr. Lagune 's always at it . ''
For a space Lewisham was inattentive to all that happened .
He sat in the breathing darkness , staring at the dim elusive shape that had presented that remembered face .
His mind was astonishment mingled with annoyance .
He had settled that this girl was lost to him for ever .
The spell of the old days of longing , of the afternoons that he had spent after his arrival in London , wandering through Clapham with a fading hope of meeting her , had not returned to him .
But he was ashamed of his stupid silence , and irritated by the awkwardness of the situation .
At one moment he was on the very verge of breaking the compact and saying `` Miss Henderson '' across the table ... .
He became aware of a peculiar sensation down his back , that he tried to account for as a draught ... .
Somebody shuddered again , someone opposite him this time .
He felt Lagune 's finger quiver still more palpably , and then suddenly the raps began , abruptly , all about him .
-- making him start violently .
A swift percussive sound , tap , rap , dap , under the table , under the chair , in the air , round the cornices .
The Medium groaned again and shuddered , and his nervous agitation passed sympathetically round the circle .
The music seemed to fade to the vanishing point and grew louder again .
The raps were continued everywhere .
The ghostly hand was hovering almost directly in front of Mr. Lewisham 's eyes .
It hung with a slight quivering .
Ever and again its fingers flapped down and rose stiffly again .
`` Not so , '' cried the Medium .
`` When you turned up the light ... put my hand up ... caught tambourine ... to save head . ''
cried Smithers , leaning across the table to secure it .
`` _Good_ old Lewisham !
... Now we _have_ it .
This is better than the tambourine . ''
She became passive again .
`` I wonder what I have _done_ , '' she said , `` that I should be punished like this . ''
She certainly looked anything but a Fate-haunted soul , being indeed visibly and immediately a very pretty girl .
Her head was shapely and covered with curly dark hair , and the eyebrows above her hazel eyes were clear and dark .
Her lips were finely shaped , her mouth was not too small to be expressive , her chin small , and her neck white and full and pretty .
There is no need to lay stress upon her nose -- it sufficed .
She was of a mediocre height , sturdy rather than slender , and her dress was of a pleasant , golden-brown material with the easy sleeves and graceful line of those aesthetic days .
And she sat at her typewriter and wished she was dead and wondered what she had _done_ .
It was perhaps not so bad as dismissal , but it certainly lasted longer .
And at home was Chaffery , grimly malignant at her failure to secure that pneumatic glove .
He had no right to blame her , he really had not ; but a disturbed temper is apt to falsify the scales of justice .
The tambourine , he insisted , he could have explained by saying he put up his hand to catch it and protect his head directly Smithers moved .
But the pneumatic glove there was no explaining .
He had made a chance for her to secure it when he had pretended to faint .
It was rubbish to say anyone could have been looking on the table then -- rubbish .
She went into the hall , where her hat , transfixed by a couple of hat-pins , hung above her jacket , assumed these garments , and let herself out into the cold grey street .
`` May I -- ?
Are you expecting -- ?
Have you far to go ?
I would like to talk to you .
There is a lot ... ''
He glanced at her ; her face was downcast .
`` Why did you never write ? ''
`` I did -- in July . ''
`` I never had it . ''
`` I am very sorry , '' she said .
They went on again in silence .
`` Last night , '' said Lewisham at length .
`` I have no business to ask .
She took a long breath .
`` Mr. Lewisham , '' she said .
`` That man you saw -- the Medium -- was my stepfather . ''
He stared at her in white astonishment .
He fell behind her one step , and then in a stride came level again .
Then , a silence , a silence that seemed it would never end .
She had stopped crying , she was one huge suspense , not daring even to look at his face .
And at last he spoke .
`` It can be no good for either of us , '' she said as resolute as he .
`` But what is the good ?
`` A lot of things . ''
For three days the Laboratory at South Kensington saw nothing of Lagune , and then he came back more invincibly voluble than ever .
Everyone had expected him to return apostate , but he brought back an invigorated faith , a propaganda unashamed .
From some source he had derived strength and conviction afresh .
Even the rhetorical Smithers availed nothing .
There was a joined battle over the insufficient tea-cups , and the elderly young assistant demonstrator hovered on the verge of the discussion , rejoicing , it is supposed , over the entanglements of Smithers .
For at the outset Smithers displayed an overweening confidence and civility , and at the end his ears were red and his finer manners lost to him .
Lagune 's treatment of the exposure was light and vigorous .
`` The man Chaffery , '' he said , `` has made a clean breast of it .
His point of view -- ''
`` He forged elementary effects ... ''
`` I do n't attempt to deny it .
But , as he explained , the thing is necessary -- justifiable .
Psychic phenomena are subtle , a certain training of the observation is necessary .
A medium is a more subtle instrument than a balance or a borax bead , and see how long it is before you can get assured results with a borax bead !
In the elementary class , in the introductory phase , conditions are too crude ... . ''
`` Of course it is . ''
`` I deny that in toto , '' said Smithers , and repeated with satisfaction , `` in toto . ''
`` Wait a moment , '' said Lagune , and produced a piece of folded printed paper from his pocket .
`` Here is a review from _Nature_ of the work of no less a person than Professor Greenhill .
And see -- a convenient pin is introduced in the apparatus for the demonstration of virtual velocities !
Read it -- if you doubt me .
I suppose you doubt me . ''
`` Well , I do n't care , '' said Smithers ; `` two wrongs do n't make a right .
To rig demonstrations is wrong . ''
`` I 'm _damned_ if he overrides it , '' said Lewisham , under his breath .
Lewisham was not quite clear what course he meant to take in the high enterprise of foiling Lagune , and indeed he was anything but clear about the entire situation .
His logical processes , his emotions and his imagination seemed playing some sort of snatching game with his will .
Enormous things hung imminent , but it worked out to this , that he walked home with Ethel night after night for -- to be exact -- seven-and-sixty nights .
Every week night through November and December , save once , when he had to go into the far East to buy himself an overcoat , he was waiting to walk with her home .
A curious , inconclusive affair , that walk , to which he came nightly full of vague longings , and which ended invariably under an odd shadow of disappointment .
It began outside Lagune 's most punctually at five , and ended -- mysteriously -- at the corner of a side road in Clapham , a road of little yellow houses with sunk basements and tawdry decorations of stone .
Up that road she vanished night after night , into a grey mist and the shadow beyond a feeble yellow gas-lamp , and he would watch her vanish , and then sigh and turn back towards his lodgings .
Ethel did not like talking of Chaffery and these other things .
`` If you knew how sweet it was to forget it all , '' she would say ; `` to be just us two together for a little while . ''
And , `` What good _does_ it do to keep on ? ''
when Lewisham was pressing .
Lewisham wanted very much to keep on at times , but the good of it was a little hard to demonstrate .
So his knowledge of the situation remained imperfect and the weeks drifted by .
`` It 's silly of us , '' she said .
`` What can we do ?
And it is well that you should have the picture of them right : Lewisham in the ready-made overcoat , blue cloth and velvet collar , dirty tan gloves , red tie , and bowler hat ; and Ethel in a two-year-old jacket and hat of curly Astrachan ; both pink-cheeked from the keen air , shyly arm in arm occasionally , and very alert to miss no possible spectacle .
The shops were varied and interesting along the Brompton Road , but nothing to compare with Piccadilly .
There were windows in Piccadilly so full of costly little things , it took fifteen minutes to get them done , card shops , drapers ' shops full of foolish , entertaining attractions .
Lewisham , in spite of his old animosities , forgot to be severe on the Shopping Class , Ethel was so vastly entertained by all these pretty follies .
`` Why should he be so deceitful ?
Why should he act to me ... ? ''
`` Pretty , pretty , pretty -- that is our business .
What man hesitates in the choice ?
He goes his own way , thinks his own thoughts , does his own work ...
`` His dissection is getting behind -- one can see he takes scarcely any notes ... . ''
The next day Miss Heydinger 's place was vacant .
She was ill -- from overstudy -- and her illness lasted to within three weeks of the terminal examination .
Then she came back with a pallid face and a strenuous unavailing industry .
It was nearly three o'clock , and in the Biological Laboratory the lamps were all alight .
The class was busy with razors cutting sections of the root of a fern to examine it microscopically .
A certain silent frog-like boy , a private student who plays no further part in this story , was working intently , looking more like a frog than usual -- his expression modest with a touch of effort .
Behind Miss Heydinger , jaded and untidy in her early manner again , was a vacant seat , an abandoned microscope and scattered pencils and note-books .
And if he chose Ethel , even then , would he have his choice ?
What would come of it ?
A few walks more or less !
She was hopelessly poor , he was hopelessly poor , and this cheat of a Medium was her stepfather !
After all she was not well-educated , she did not understand his work and his aims ... .
Not only his work -- his scientific career , but the Debating Society , the political movement , all his work for Humanity ... .
Why not be resolute -- even now ?
... Why not put the thing clearly and plainly to her ?
If he wrote now he could get the advantage of the evening at the Library .
He must ask her to forgo these walks home -- at least until the next examination .
He had a qualm of doubt whether she would understand ... .
He grew angry at this possibility .
But it was no good mincing matters .
If once he began to consider her -- Why should he consider her in that way ?
Simply because she was unreasonable !
The portly museum policeman who had been watching him furtively , wondering why a student should sit in front of the `` Sacrifice of Lystra '' and gnaw lips and nails and moustache , and scowl and glare at that masterpiece , saw him rise suddenly to his feet with an air of resolution , spin on his heel , and set off with a quick step out of the gallery .
He looked neither to the right nor the left .
He passed out of sight down the staircase .
The book was a collection of Browning 's Poems , and it contained `` Sludge '' ; it also happened that it contained `` The Statue and the Bust '' -- that stimulating lecture on half-hearted constraints .
`` Sludge '' did not interest Lewisham , it was not at all his idea of a medium , but he read and re-read `` The Statue and the Bust . ''
It had the profoundest effect upon him .
He went to sleep -- he used to read his literature in bed because it was warmer there , and over literature nowadays it did not matter as it did with science if one dozed a little -- with these lines stimulating his emotion : --
No type of English student quite realises the noble ideal of plain living and high thinking nowadays .
Our admirable examination system admits of extremely little thinking at any level , high or low .
But the Kensington student 's living is at any rate insufficient , and he makes occasional signs of recognition towards the cosmic process .
They met in Parkson 's sitting-room , because Parkson was the only one of the Friends opulent enough to have a sitting-room , he being a Whitworth Scholar and in receipt of one hundred pounds a year .
The Friends were of various ages , mostly very young .
Several smoked and others held pipes which they had discontinued smoking -- but there was nothing to drink , except coffee , because that was the extent of their means .
Dunkerley , an assistant master in a suburban school , and Lewisham 's former colleague at Whortley , attended these assemblies through the introduction of Lewisham .
All the Friends wore red ties except Bletherley , who wore an orange one to show that he was aware of Art , and Dunkerley , who wore a black one with blue specks , because assistant masters in small private schools have to keep up appearances .
And their simple procedure was that each talked as much as the others would suffer .
Parkson was a man from Lancashire , and a devout Quaker ; his third and completing factor was Ruskin , with whose work and phraseology he was saturated .
He listened to Bletherley with a marked disapproval , and opened a vigorous defence of that ancient tradition of loyalty that Bletherley had called the monopolist institution of marriage .
`` The pure and simple old theory -- love and faithfulness , '' said Parkson , `` suffices for me .
If we are to smear our political movements with this sort of stuff ... ''
`` Does it work ? ''
interjected Lewisham , speaking for the first time .
`` I ca n't agree with you , Mr. Dunkerley , '' said Parkson .
`` I do n't know if you have read Sesame and Lilies , but there you have , set forth far more fairly than any words of mine could do , an ideal of a woman's place ... ''
`` On -- ? ''
`` Forty pounds a year _res_ .
A silent youngster began to speak , cleared an accumulated huskiness from his throat and said , `` Consider the girl . ''
`` Why _marry_ ? ''
asked Bletherley , unregarded .
`` I know , '' he said .
`` You talk to me as though ...
I 've marked out my destiny these three years . ''
His confidential impulse died as he relieved it .
Parkson stared in astonishment at his receding back and ran after him to ask for the grounds of this sudden offence .
Lewisham walked on for a space with Parkson trotting by his side .
Then suddenly he turned .
His face was quite white and he spoke in a tired voice .
His wish was granted .
At the corner of the street two figures passed him ; one of these , a tall man in glasses and a quasi-clerical hat , with coat collar turned up under his grey side-whiskers , he recognised as Chaffery ; the other he knew only too well .
The pair passed him without seeing him , but for an instant the lamplight fell upon her face and showed it white and tired .
And then came the interpretation .
`` She has done it because I have left her .
I might have told it from her letters .
She has done it because she thinks I am not in earnest , that my love-making was just boyishness ...
`` Was much ... pressure necessary ? ''
asked Lewisham by an effort .
Presently Miss Heydinger came out of the specimen room and addressed a remark to the young man .
He appeared to answer with considerable brevity .
He then stood up , hesitated for a moment between the three doors of the laboratory and walked out by that opening on the back staircase .
Lagune did not see him again until the afternoon .
`` That 's not it .
There are things one must not suffer anyhow , whatever happens !
Or else -- one might be made to do anything .
Just because we are poor -- Let him dismiss you !
_Let_ him dismiss you .
You can get another place -- ''
She caught at a sob , `` But to leave London -- I ca n't do it , I ca n't . ''
-- Leave London ? ''
Lewisham 's face changed .
She sat staring in front of her at the gathering night .
She spoke again in an even tone .
`` But what is the other thing I can do ? ''
She looked at him , her face perplexed with this new idea , her heart beating very fast .
`` We are so young , '' she said .
`` And how are we to live ?
You get a guinea . ''
`` But I have never thought -- ''
`` You will come ? ''
His voice sank to an inaudible whisper .
But his face was eloquent .
Two garrulous , home-going clerks passed opportunely to remind him that his emotions were in a public place .
But there was much to see to that afternoon .
First of all he had to discover the district superintendent registrar , and then to find a lodging whither he should take Ethel -- their lodging , where they were to live together .
At the thought of that new life together that was drawing so near , she came into his head , vivid and near and warm ... .
Then he went on to Chelsea and interviewed a fatherly gentleman at the Vestry offices .
The fatherly gentleman was chubby-faced and spectacled , and his manner was sympathetic but business-like .
He `` called back '' each item of the interview , `` And what can I do for you ?
You wish to be married !
On Saturday morning he absented himself from the schools , pleading by post a slight indisposition , and took all his earthly goods to the booking office at Vauxhall Station .
Chaffery 's sister lived at Tongham , near Farnham , and Ethel , dismissed a week since by Lagune , had started that morning , under her mother 's maudlin supervision , to begin her new slavery .
She was to alight either at Farnham or Woking , as opportunity arose , and to return to Vauxhall to meet him .
So that Lewisham 's vigil on the main platform was of indefinite duration .
At first he felt the exhilaration of a great adventure .
Then , as he paced the long platform , came a philosophical mood , a sense of entire detachment from the world .
He saw a bundle of uprooted plants beside the portmanteau of a fellow-passenger and it suggested a grotesque simile .
His roots , his earthly possessions , were all downstairs in the booking-office .
What a flimsy thing he was !
A box of books and a trunk of clothes , some certificates and scraps of paper , an entry here and an entry there , a body not over strong -- and the vast multitude of people about him -- against him -- the huge world in which he found himself !
Did it matter anything to one human soul save her if he ceased to exist forthwith ?
And miles away perhaps she also was feeling little and lonely ... .
A critical little girl eyed our couple curiously and made some remark to her ragamuffin friend .
The slatternly general servant reappeared with the chops and tinned salmon he had asked Madam Gadow to prepare for them .
He went and stared out of the window , heard the door close behind the girl , and turned at a sound as Ethel appeared shyly through the folding-doors .
By way of answer she extended her hand .
For some inscrutable reason it delighted them both enormously to think that they had never been introduced ... .
Mrs. Chaffery appeared in the half light of the passage as the top of a grimy cap over Ethel 's shoulder and two black sleeves about her neck .
She emerged as a small , middle-aged woman , with a thin little nose between silver-rimmed spectacles , a weak mouth and perplexed eyes , a queer little dust-lined woman with the oddest resemblance to Ethel in her face .
She was trembling visibly with nervous agitation .
said Lewisham , and Mrs. Chaffery exclaimed , `` James !
How _can_ you ? ''
`` Yes , but it is n't right -- it is n't straight . ''
He grimaced and dropped his glasses with a click against his waistcoat buttons .
`` I 'm very glad of that , '' he said , replacing them .
`` The Dissenter , the Nonconformist Conscience , the Puritan , you know , the Vegetarian and Total Abstainer , and all that sort of thing , I can not away with them .
I have cleared my mind of cant and formulae .
I 've a nature essentially Hellenic .
Have you ever read Matthew Arnold ? ''
He glanced at Lewisham , who was conscious of an unwonted opacity of mind .
He became wary , as wary as he could manage to be on the spur of the moment .
`` I see , '' said Chaffery .
`` You know , '' explained Chaffery , `` it was quite an accident you got me -- quite .
The thing slipped out of my mouth .
Or your friend with , the flat voice would n't have had a chance .
Not a chance . ''
Lewisham spoke like a man who is lifting a weight .
`` All _this_ , you know , is off the question .
I 'm not disputing your ability .
But the thing is ... it is n't right . ''
Ethel had come in again bearing an additional chair , and Mrs. Chaffery appeared behind her , crowning the preparations with a jug of small beer .
The cloth , Lewisham observed , as he turned towards it , had several undarned holes and discoloured places , and in the centre stood a tarnished cruet which contained mustard , pepper , vinegar , and three ambiguous dried-up bottles .
The bread was on an ample board with a pious rim , and an honest wedge of cheese loomed disproportionate on a little plate .
Mr. and Mrs. Lewisham were seated facing one another , and Mrs. Chaffery sat in the broken chair because she understood its ways .
Chaffery admitted the collapse of his image in very complimentary terms , and Lewisham could not avoid a glance across the table at Ethel .
He remembered that Chaffery was a slippery scoundrel whose blame was better than his praise , immediately afterwards .
For a time the Crab engaged Chaffery , and the conversation languished .
Mrs. Chaffery asked Ethel formal questions about their lodgings , and Ethel 's answers were buoyant , `` You must come and have tea one day , '' said Ethel , not waiting for Lewisham 's endorsement , `` and see it all . ''
`` And you look to them at South Kensington , to do something for you -- a hundred a year or so , when your scholarship is up ? ''
Supper finished , Chaffery poured the residuum of the beer into his glass , produced a Broseley clay of the longest sort , and invited Lewisham to smoke .
`` Honest smoking , '' said Chaffery , tapping the bowl of his clay , and added : `` In this country -- cigars -- sound cigars -- and honesty rarely meet . ''
`` You see , '' said Chaffery , opening abruptly so soon as the clay was drawing , about this cheating -- I do not find life such a simple matter as you do . ''
`` Let us thresh the matter out , '' said Chaffery , crossing his legs ; `` let us thresh the matter out .
Now '' -- he drew at his pipe -- '' I do n't think you fully appreciate the importance of Illusion in life , the Essential Nature of Lies and Deception of the body politic .
You are inclined to discredit one particular form of Imposture , because it is not generally admitted -- carries a certain discredit , and -- witness the heel edges of my trouser legs , witness yonder viands -- small rewards . ''
`` I do n't agree with that , '' said Mr. Lewisham .
`` You will as you grow older , '' said Chaffery .
`` There 's truths you have to grow into .
But about this matter of Lies -- let us look at the fabric of society , let us compare the savage .
You will discover the only essential difference between savage and civilised is this : The former has n't learnt to shirk the truth of things , and the latter has .
Take the most obvious difference -- the clothing of the civilised man , his invention of decency .
The concealment of essential facts .
I do n't argue against decency and decorum , mind you , but there they are -- essentials to civilisation and essentially '_suppressio veri_ . '
And in the pockets of his clothes our citizen carries money .
The pure savage has no money .
To him a lump of metal is a lump of metal -- possibly ornamental -- no more .
To any lucid-minded man it 's the same or different only through the gross folly of his fellows .
But to the common civilised man the universal exchangeability of this gold is a sacred and fundamental fact .
Why should it be ?
There is n't a why !
I live in perpetual amazement at the gullibility of my fellow-creatures .
Of a morning sometimes , I can assure you , I lie in bed fancying that people may have found out this swindle in the night , expect to hear a tumult downstairs and see your mother-in-law come rushing into the room with a rejected shilling from the milkman .
'What 's this ? '
'This Muck for milk ? '
But it never happens .
If it did , if people suddenly cleared their minds of this cant of money , what would happen ?
The true nature of man would appear .
I should whip out of bed , seize some weapon , and after the milkman forthwith .
It 's becoming to keep the peace , but it 's necessary to have milk .
The neighbours would come pouring out -- also after milk .
Milkman , suddenly enlightened , would start clattering up the street .
Over goes the cart !
Fight if you like , but do n't upset the can !
... Do n't you see it all ?
-- perfectly reasonable every bit of it .
I should return , bruised and bloody , with the milk-can under my arm .
Yes , _I_ should have the milk-can -- I should keep my eye on that ... .
But why go on ?
You of all men should know that life is a struggle for existence , a fight for food .
Money is just the lie that mitigates our fury . ''
`` What _is_ money ? ''
`` You agree that most respectable positions in the world are tainted with the fraud of our social conditions .
If they were not tainted with fraud they would not be respectable .
Even your own position -- Who gave you the right to marry and prosecute interesting scientific studies while other young men rot in mines ? ''
`` You ca n't help admitting .
And here is my position .
Since all ways of life are tainted with fraud , since to live and speak the truth is beyond human strength and courage -- as one finds it -- is it not better for a man that he engage in some straightforward comparatively harmless cheating , than if he risk his mental integrity in some ambiguous position and fall at last into self-deception and self-righteousness ?
That is the essential danger .
That is the thing I always guard against .
It is the master sin .
Mr. Lewisham pulled at his moustache .
At the door Mrs. Chaffery kissed Lewisham an effusive good-bye , and told Ethel she really believed it was all for the best .
That document , I take it , was the end of Mr. Lewisham 's informal honeymoon .
Its advent was the snap of that bright Prince Rupert's drop ; and in a moment -- Dust .
For a glorious week he had lived in the persuasion that life was made of love and mystery , and now he was reminded with singular clearness that it was begotten of a struggle for existence and the Will to Live .
`` Confounded imposition ! ''
fumed Mr. Lewisham , and the breakfast table was novel and ominous , mutterings towards anger on the one hand and a certain consternation on the other .
`` I must give her a talking to this afternoon , '' said Lewisham at his watch , and after he had bundled his books into the shiny black bag , he gave the first of his kisses that was not a distinct and self-subsisting ceremony .
It was usage and done in a hurry , and the door slammed as he went his way to the schools .
Ethel was not coming that morning , because by special request and because she wanted to help him she was going to copy out some of his botanical notes which had fallen into arrears .
`` Oh -- nothing , '' said Lewisham blandly , with his hand falling casually over his memoranda ; `` what 's your particular little game ? ''
Madam Gadow was quite cool even at the end .
Mr. Lewisham was flushed in the face , red-eared , and his hair slightly disordered , but that sixpence was at any rate an admission of the justice of his claim .
`` She was evidently trying it on , '' he said almost apologetically to Ethel .
`` It was absolutely necessary to present a firm front to her .
I doubt if we shall have any trouble again ... .
Lewisham 's face and gesture , were all assent .
She gave a little cry of delight , stood for a moment , and then by way of practical demonstration of her unflinching helpfulness , hurried round the table towards him with arms extended , `` You dear ! ''
Lewisham , partially embraced , pushed his chair back with his disengaged arm , so that she might sit on his knee ... .
Who could doubt that she was a help ?
`` But I do n't want a resident post , '' said Lewisham .
`` The fact is , '' said Lewisham slowly and looking at his boot toes , `` I must be doing _something_ while I am getting my degree . ''
`` No , '' said Lewisham .
`` Fad , '' said Blendershin , `` Just fad .
Newspapers talk rot about commercial education , Duke of Devonshire catches on and talks ditto -- pretends he thought it himself -- much _he_ cares -- parents get hold of it -- schoolmasters obliged to put something down , consequently assistants must .
And that 's the end of the matter ! ''
`` Well , '' said Blendershin , `` your science may pull you through .
But I tell you it 's hard .
Some grant-earning grammar school may want that .
And that 's about all , I think .
Make a note of the address ... . ''
Messrs. Danks and Wimborne inhabited a bank-like establishment near Chancery Lane , and without any conversation presented him with forms to fill up .
Lewisham paused and wrote `` Church of England . ''
Lewisham was not aware that the waterproof collar had found a sympathetic observer .
He spoke of looking ahead with an apologetic laugh as though it was an amiable weakness of his .
He turned from such abstruse matters and furnished Lewisham with the particulars of the college diplomas , and proceeded to other possibilities .
`` There 's private tuition , '' he said .
`` Would you mind a backward boy ?
Then we are occasionally asked for visiting masters .
Mostly by girls ' schools .
But that 's for older men -- married men , you know . ''
`` That 's good , '' said Lewisham .
`` Accordingly I must ask you for references . ''
`` That 's a downright nuisance , '' said Lewisham .
`` I suppose that ass , Lagune ...
But what 's this ?
'Or , failing references , for a deposit ... ' That 's reasonable , I suppose . ''
Presently she looked up from an experimental arrangement of her cornflowers , and discovered Lewisham , no longer reading , but staring blankly at the middle of the table-cloth , with an extraordinary misery in his eyes .
She forgot the cornflowers and stared at him .
`` Oh no , '' said Mrs. Lewisham .
Lewisham was out , but Ethel opened the door , so this indorsement was unnecessary , `` He 's really only a boy , '' said Ethel , describing the interview to Lewisham , who was curious .
They both felt that the youthfulness of Edwin Peak Baynes detracted something from the reality of this employment .
Miss Heydinger stood with her hat in her hand and looked at Lewisham's hot eyes .
He was for walking past her , but something in her face penetrated even his disturbance .
`` No , '' said Lewisham .
`` No , I shall not come here again .
`` I thought -- '' She stopped .
`` Will you go down to your uncle 's again ? ''
I shall stop in London .
It 's no good going out of things into the country .
And besides -- I 've quarrelled rather with my uncle . ''
`` I suppose you will come up again ? ''
`` These things are everywhere , '' he said after a gust of vehement handling , `` I _wish_ you 'd tidy them up sometimes . ''
`` They were tidy enough till you began to throw them about , '' Ethel pointed out .
He stared hostility for a space .
`` Well , the things make a beastly litter anyhow ; there is n't a tidy corner anywhere in the room .
There never is . ''
Ethel 's cheeks glowed and her eyes were bright with unshed tears .
Abruptly she abandoned the defensive and blurted out the thing that had been latent so long between them .
Her voice took a note of passion .
`` Nothing I can do ever does please you , since that Miss Heydinger began to write to you . ''
Ethel 's voice took upon itself the quality of tears .
`` I wasn't _meant_ to know , was I ? ''
-- At first I was always trying .
Socialism , religion -- all those things .
But you do n't care -- you wo n't care .
You wo n't have that I've thought over these things at all , that I care for these things !
It was n't any _good_ to argue .
You just care for me in a way -- and all the rest of me -- does n't matter !
And because I 've got a friend ... ''
`` Yes -- _friend !
He stared at her as if he found the question hard to see .
The theme was difficult -- invincibly difficult .
He surveyed the room for a diversion .
The note-book he had disinterred from her novelettes lay upon the table and reminded him of his grievance of rained hours .
He struck out abruptly towards fundamental things .
`` This ca n't go on ! ''
he cried , `` this ca n't go on !
How can I work ?
How can I do anything ? ''
The only response to this was to shout , and Lewisham shouted .
`` You start a quarrel ! ''
`` You make a shindy !
You spring a dispute -- jealousy !
How can I do anything ?
How can one stop in a house like this ?
I shall go out .
-- I shall go out .
I shall go to Kensington and work there ! ''
How in the name of destiny had he come to marry her ?
The quality of his surroundings mingled in some way with the quality of his thoughts .
The huge distended buildings of corrugated iron in which the Art Museum ( of all places ! )
culminates , the truncated Oratory all askew to the street , seemed to have a similar quarrel with fate .
How in the name of destiny ?
After such high prolusions !
But the tune and the memory had won their footing , they were with him through his meagre lunch of milk and scones -- he had resolved at the outset he would not go back to her for the midday meal -- and on his way to Vigours ' they insisted on attention .
It may be that lunching on scone and milk does in itself make for milder ways of thinking .
A sense of extraordinary contradiction , of infinite perplexity , came to him .
But how to get back to the old footing ?
how to efface the things he had said , the things that had been done ?
THE COMING OF THE ROSES .
`` I am talking wisdom .
To-night I am talking a particular brand of wisdom .
I am broaching some of my oldest and finest , because -- as you will find one day -- this is a special occasion .
And you are distrait ! ''
I will explain all that .
But let me tell you the happy life .
Let me give you that , as if I lay on my deathbed and this was a parting gift .
In the first place , mental integrity .
Prove all things , hold fast to that which is right .
Let the world have no illusions for you , no surprises .
Nature is full of cruel catastrophes , man is a physically degenerate ape , every appetite , every instinct , needs the curb ; salvation is not in the nature of things , but whatever salvation there may be is in the nature of man ; face all these painful things .
I hope you follow that ? ''
Chaffery paused on the repetition .
At any other time Lewisham might have been propitiatory , but now he offered no apology .
Chaffery turned to Ethel and looked at her curiously for a moment .
`` Good-bye , '' he said , holding out his hand to her .
He gasped like a man who plunges suddenly into cold water .
He remained stooping with the valence raised .
Ethel appeared in the half doorway and her , expression was unfamiliar .
He stared at her white face .
`` Why on earth did you put my roses here ? ''
`` You thought these came from someone else ? ''
he said , trying to grasp this inversion of the universe .
Lewisham looked about him -- a man in the presence of the inconceivable .
`` You mean to say you have been carrying on with that youngster behind my back ? ''
They sat for perhaps two minutes , and when he spoke again his voice was hoarse .
He reverted to a former formula .
`` Look here , '' he said , and cleared his throat .
`` I do n't know whether you think I 'm going to stand this , but I 'm not . ''
`` Of all dreams and illusions !
Think what I have lost in this accursed marriage .
And _now_ ... You do n't understand -- you won't understand . ''
Ethel stirred and he turned his eyes to watch what she was about to do .
She produced her handkerchief and began to wipe her dry eyes rapidly , first one and then the other .
Then she began sobbing .
`` I 'm ... as loyal as you ... anyhow , '' she said .
`` I _didn't_ take them , '' said Ethel .
`` I could n't help it if they were sent . ''
He looked at her and repeated with bitter satisfaction , `` At an end . ''
There were no matches on the mantel .
Going to the chest of drawers he almost fell over his open portmanteau .
He had a silent ecstasy of rage .
Then he kicked against the basket in which the roses had come .
He could find no matches on the chest of drawers .
The question , `` What will become of Ethel ? ''
rose to the surface again .
He struggled against its possibilities .
That was not it !
That was her affair .
He felt inexorably kept to the path he had chosen , for all the waning of his rage .
He had put his hand to the plough .
`` If you condone this , '' he told himself , `` you might condone anything .
There are things one _must_ not stand . ''
He tried to keep to that point of view -- assuming for the most part out of his imagination what it was he was not standing .
A dim sense came to him of how much he was assuming .
At any rate she must have flirted !
He resisted this reviving perception of justice as though it was some unspeakably disgraceful craving .
He tried to imagine her with Baynes .
He determined he would go to sleep .
He stood watching her , fearing to move .
He listened hard and his face was very white .
Even now he could not hear her breathing .
He looked at her again .
There was something in her face --
His arms tightened about her .
`` Dear , '' he said , `` I knew it was nothing .
`` Dear , '' whispered Lewisham .
He drew her closer to him .
`` Who 's gone ?
Lewisham growled , went from page 1 to page 3 -- conscious of their both looking to him now -- even intensely -- and discovered Chaffery in a practical vein .
The next day Lewisham was too full of engagements to communicate with Lagune , but the following morning he called and found the psychic investigator busy with the proofs of _Hesperus_ .
He welcomed the young man cordially nevertheless , conceiving him charged with the questions that had been promised long ago -- it was evident he knew nothing of Lewisham 's marriage .
Lewisham stated his case with some bluntness .
`` He was last here on Saturday , '' said Lagune .
`` You have always been inclined to suspicion about him .
Have you any grounds ? ''
When Lagune came to the question of his real identity he blew out his cheeks in the most astonishing way , but made no other sign .
He handed back the book to Lagune , open at the blank counterfoil of a cheque that had been removed .
Lagune stared and passed his hand over his forehead in a confused way .
`` I ca n't see this , '' he said .
`` I 'm afraid , '' said Lagune , `` that I have been shabbily treated .
Mr. Chaffery is a man of indisputable powers -- indisputable powers ; but I am afraid -- I am very much afraid he has abused the conditions of the experiment .
All this -- and his insults -- touch me rather nearly . ''
`` You have something to tell me ? ''
said Miss Heydinger abruptly .
`` Now , '' said Miss Heydinger , quietly .
`` Tell me whom you have married . ''
She asked him another question and another .
He felt stupid and answered with a halting truthfulness .
`` I might have known , '' she said , `` I might have known .
Only I would not know .
Tell me some more .
Tell me about her . ''
`` You love her .
You can sacrifice -- ''
`` To think of this end to it all !
That all your promise ... What is it she gives that I could not have given ?
`` The thing is , I must simplify my life .
I shall do nothing unless I simplify my life .
Only people who are well off can be -- complex .
It is one thing or the other -- ''
He took her hand .
`` I hope I did n't -- ''
`` Good-bye , '' she said impatiently , and suddenly disengaged her hand and turned away from him .
He made a step after her .
That night about seven Ethel came into their room with a waste-paper basket she had bought for him , and found him sitting at the little toilet table at which he was to `` write . ''
The outlook was , for a London outlook , spacious , down a long slope of roofs towards the Junction , a huge sky of blue passing upward to the darkling zenith and downward into a hazy bristling mystery of roofs and chimneys , from which emerged signal lights and steam puffs , gliding chains of lit window carriages and the vague vistas of streets .
She showed him the basket and put it beside him , and then her eye caught the yellow document in his hand .
`` What is that you have there ? ''
`` Has n't it got yellow ? ''
`` I 'm glad , '' he proclaimed .
He listened to her footsteps until the kitchen had swallowed them up .
Then he turned his eyes to the Schema again and for a moment it seemed but a little thing .
He picked it up in both hands and looked at it as if it was the writing of another man , and indeed it was the writing of another man .
`` Pamphlets in the Liberal Interest , '' he read , and smiled .
`` We must perish in the wilderness.
But not for us ... .
His eyes came back to the Schema .
His hands shifted to the opposite corner and he hesitated .
The vision of that arranged Career , that ordered sequence of work and successes , distinctions and yet further distinctions , rose brightly from the symbol .
Then he compressed his lips and tore the yellow sheet in half , tearing very deliberately .
He doubled the halves and tore again , doubled again very carefully and neatly until the Schema was torn into numberless little pieces .
With it he seemed to be tearing his past self .
Certain liberties , however , following the best Utopian precedents , we may take with existing fact .
We assume that the tone of public thought may be entirely different from what it is in the present world .
We permit ourselves a free hand with the mental conflict of life , within the possibilities of the human mind as we know it .
We permit ourselves also a free hand with all the apparatus of existence that man has , so to speak , made for himself , with houses , roads , clothing , canals , machinery , with laws , boundaries , conventions , and traditions , with schools , with literature and religious organisation , with creeds and customs , with everything , in fact , that it lies within man 's power to alter .
That , indeed , is the cardinal assumption of all Utopian speculations old and new ; the Republic and Laws of Plato , and More 's Utopia , Howells ' implicit Altruria , and Bellamy 's future Boston , Comte 's great Western Republic , Hertzka 's Freeland , Cabet 's Icaria , and Campanella 's City of the Sun , are built , just as we shall build , upon that , upon the hypothesis of the complete emancipation of a community of men from tradition , from habits , from legal bonds , and that subtler servitude possessions entail .
And much of the essential value of all such speculations lies in this assumption of emancipation , lies in that regard towards human freedom , in the undying interest of the human power of self-escape , the power to resist the causation of the past , and to evade , initiate , endeavour , and overcome .
There is no help for it , there it is !
The Master suffers with the last and least of his successors .
For all the humanity he wins to , through his dramatic device of dialogue , I doubt if anyone has ever been warmed to desire himself a citizen in the Republic of Plato ; I doubt if anyone could stand a month of the relentless publicity of virtue planned by More ... .
No one wants to live in any community of intercourse really , save for the sake of the individualities he would meet there .
The fertilising conflict of individualities is the ultimate meaning of the personal life , and all our Utopias no more than schemes for bettering that interplay .
At least , that is how life shapes itself more and more to modern perceptions .
Until you bring in individualities , nothing comes into being , and a Universe ceases when you shiver the mirror of the least of individual minds .
Out beyond Sirius , far in the deeps of space , beyond the flight of a cannon-ball flying for a billion years , beyond the range of unaided vision , blazes the star that is _our_ Utopia 's sun .
To those who know where to look , with a good opera-glass aiding good eyes , it and three fellows that seem in a cluster with it -- though they are incredible billions of miles nearer -- make just the faintest speck of light .
About it go planets , even as our planets , but weaving a different fate , and in its place among them is Utopia , with its sister mate , the Moon .
It is a planet like our planet , the same continents , the same islands , the same oceans and seas , another Fuji-Yama is beautiful there dominating another Yokohama -- and another Matterhorn overlooks the icy disorder of another Theodule .
It is so like our planet that a terrestrial botanist might find his every species there , even to the meanest pondweed or the remotest Alpine blossom ... .
Suppose now that two of us were actually to turn about in just that fashion .
Two , I think , for to face a strange planet , even though it be a wholly civilised one , without some other familiar backing , dashes the courage overmuch .
Suppose that we were indeed so translated even as we stood .
You figure us upon some high pass in the Alps , and though I -- being one easily made giddy by stooping -- am no botanist myself , if my companion were to have a specimen tin under his arm -- so long as it is not painted that abominable popular Swiss apple green -- I would make it no occasion for quarrel !
We have tramped and botanised and come to a rest , and , sitting among rocks , we have eaten our lunch and finished our bottle of Yvorne , and fallen into a talk of Utopias , and said such things as I have been saying .
I could figure it myself upon that little neck of the Lucendro Pass , upon the shoulder of the Piz Lucendro , for there once I lunched and talked very pleasantly , and we are looking down upon the Val Bedretto , and Villa and Fontana and Airolo try to hide from us under the mountain side -- three-quarters of a mile they are vertically below .
With that absurd nearness of effect one gets in the Alps , we see the little train a dozen miles away , running down the Biaschina to Italy , and the Lukmanier Pass beyond Piora left of us , and the San Giacomo right , mere footpaths under our feet ... .
Before nightfall we should be drenched in wonders , but still we should have wonder left for the thing my companion , with his scientific training , would no doubt be the first to see .
He would glance up , with that proprietary eye of the man who knows his constellations down to the little Greek letters .
I imagine his exclamation .
He would at first doubt his eyes .
I should inquire the cause of his consternation , and it would be hard to explain .
He would ask me with a certain singularity of manner for `` Orion , '' and I should not find him ; for the Great Bear , and it would have vanished .
I should ask , and `` where ? ''
seeking among that scattered starriness , and slowly I should acquire the wonder that possessed him .
If I may take a daring image , a mediaeval liberty , I would suppose that in this lonely place the Spirit of Creation spoke to us on this matter .
`` You are wise men , '' that Spirit might say -- and I , being a suspicious , touchy , over-earnest man for all my predisposition to plumpness , would instantly scent the irony ( while my companion , I fancy , might even plume himself ) , `` and to beget your wisdom is chiefly why the world was made .
You are so good as to propose an acceleration of that tedious multitudinous evolution upon which I am engaged .
I gather , a universal tongue would serve you there .
While I sit here among these mountains -- I have been filing away at them for this last aeon or so , just to attract your hotels , you know -- will you be so kind -- -- ?
A few hints -- -- ? ''
Now you as a botanist would , I suppose , incline to something as they say , `` scientific . ''
You wince under that most offensive epithet -- and I am able to give you my intelligent sympathy -- though `` pseudo-scientific '' and `` quasi-scientific '' are worse by far for the skin .
You would begin to talk of scientific languages , of Esperanto , La Langue Bleue , New Latin , Volapuk , and Lord Lytton , of the philosophical language of Archbishop Whateley , Lady Welby 's work upon Significs and the like .
You would tell me of the remarkable precisions , the encyclopaedic quality of chemical terminology , and at the word terminology I should insinuate a comment on that eminent American biologist , Professor Mark Baldwin , who has carried the language biological to such heights of expressive clearness as to be triumphantly and invincibly unreadable .
( Which foreshadows the line of my defence . )
I protest , even warmly , that neither he nor his sorrows were in my intention .
He is a man , I should think , of thirty-nine , a man whose life has been neither tragedy nor a joyous adventure , a man with one of those faces that have gained interest rather than force or nobility from their commerce with life .
He is something refined , with some knowledge , perhaps , of the minor pains and all the civil self-controls ; he has read more than he has suffered , and suffered rather than done .
He regards me with his blue-grey eye , from which all interest in this Utopia has faded .
Have I come to Utopia to hear this sort of thing ?
It is necessary to turn the botanist 's thoughts into a worthier channel .
It is necessary to override these modest regrets , this intrusive , petty love story .
Does he realise this is indeed Utopia ?
Turn your mind , I insist , to this Utopia of mine , and leave these earthly troubles to their proper planet .
Do you realise just where the propositions necessary to a modern Utopia are taking us ?
Everyone on earth will have to be here ; -- themselves , but with a difference .
Somewhere here in this world is , for example , Mr. Chamberlain , and the King is here ( no doubt incognito ) , and all the Royal Academy , and Sandow , and Mr. Arnold White .
But my botanist obtrudes his personality again .
His thoughts have travelled by a different route .
And yet , just as civil liberty itself is a compromise defended by prohibitions , so this particular sort of liberty must also have its qualifications .
Carried to the absolute pitch the right of free movement ceases to be distinguishable from the right of free intrusion .
We have already , in a comment on More 's Utopia , hinted at an agreement with Aristotle 's argument against communism , that it flings people into an intolerable continuity of contact .
Schopenhauer carried out Aristotle in the vein of his own bitterness and with the truest of images when he likened human society to hedgehogs clustering for warmth , and unhappy when either too closely packed or too widely separated .
Empedocles found no significance in life whatever except as an unsteady play of love and hate , of attraction and repulsion , of assimilation and the assertion of difference .
So long as we ignore difference , so long as we ignore individuality , and that I hold has been the common sin of all Utopias hitherto , we can make absolute statements , prescribe communisms or individualisms , and all sorts of hard theoretic arrangements .
But in the world of reality , which -- to modernise Heraclitus and Empedocles -- is nothing more nor less than the world of individuality , there are no absolute rights and wrongs , there are no qualitative questions at all , but only quantitative adjustments .
Equally strong in the normal civilised man is the desire for freedom of movement and the desire for a certain privacy , for a corner definitely his , and we have to consider where the line of reconciliation comes .
The desire for absolute personal privacy is perhaps never a very strong or persistent craving .
In the great majority of human beings , the gregarious instinct is sufficiently powerful to render any but the most temporary isolations not simply disagreeable , but painful .
The savage has all the privacy he needs within the compass of his skull ; like dogs and timid women , he prefers ill-treatment to desertion , and it is only a scarce and complex modern type that finds comfort and refreshment in quite lonely places and quite solitary occupations .
Yet such there are , men who can neither sleep well nor think well , nor attain to a full perception of beautiful objects , who do not savour the best of existence until they are securely alone , and for the sake of these even it would be reasonable to draw some limits to the general right of free movement .
But their particular need is only a special and exceptional aspect of an almost universal claim to privacy among modern people , not so much for the sake of isolation as for congenial companionship .
We want to go apart from the great crowd , not so much to be alone as to be with those who appeal to us particularly and to whom we particularly appeal ; we want to form households and societies with them , to give our individualities play in intercourse with them , and in the appointments and furnishings of that intercourse .
We want gardens and enclosures and exclusive freedoms for our like and our choice , just as spacious as we can get them -- and it is only the multitudinous uncongenial , anxious also for similar developments in some opposite direction , that checks this expansive movement of personal selection and necessitates a compromise on privacy .
One figures one of the more urban highways , one of those along which the light railways of the second order run , such as that in the valley of Urseren , into which we should presently come .
I figure it as one would see it at night , a band a hundred yards perhaps in width , the footpath on either side shaded with high trees and lit softly with orange glowlights ; while down the centre the tramway of the road will go , with sometimes a nocturnal tram-car gliding , lit and gay but almost noiselessly , past .
Lantern-lit cyclists will flit along the track like fireflies , and ever and again some humming motor-car will hurry by , to or from the Rhoneland or the Rhineland or Switzerland or Italy .
Away on either side the lights of the little country homes up the mountain slopes will glow .
My companion leans upon the bridge and looks down into the dim river below .
I become aware of the keen edge of the moon like a needle of incandescent silver creeping over the crest , and suddenly the river is alive with flashes .
The stranger who had come in got what he wanted ; the girl considered that she thought she had never loved the botanist , had had only friendship for him -- though little she knew of the meaning of those fine words -- they parted a little incoherently and in tears , and it had not occurred to the young man to imagine she was not going off to conventional life in some other of the endless Frognals he imagined as the cellular tissue of the world .
Besides roadways and railways and tramways , for those who go to and fro in the earth the Modern Utopians will have very many other ways of travelling .
There will be rivers , for example , with a vast variety of boats ; canals with diverse sorts of haulage ; there will be lakes and lagoons ; and when one comes at last to the borders of the land , the pleasure craft will be there , coming and going , and the swift great passenger vessels , very big and steady , doing thirty knots an hour or more , will trace long wakes as they go dwindling out athwart the restless vastness of the sea .
It dates -- so much of this present Utopia of ours dates .
Those former Utopists were bitterly against gold .
You will recall the undignified use Sir Thomas More would have us put it to , and how there was no money at all in the Republic of Plato , and in that later community for which he wrote his Laws an iron coinage of austere appearance and doubtful efficacy ... .
It may be these great gentlemen were a little hasty with a complicated difficulty , and not a little unjust to a highly respectable element .
In Utopia there is no distinct and separate science of economics .
Many problems that we should regard as economic come within the scope of Utopian psychology .
My Utopians make two divisions of the science of psychology , first , the general psychology of individuals , a sort of mental physiology separated by no definite line from physiology proper , and secondly , the psychology of relationship between individuals .
This second is an exhaustive study of the reaction of people upon each other and of all possible relationships .
It is a science of human aggregations , of all possible family groupings , of neighbours and neighbourhood , of companies , associations , unions , secret and public societies , religious groupings , of common ends and intercourse , and of the methods of intercourse and collective decision that hold human groups together , and finally of government and the State .
The elucidation of economic relationships , depending as it does on the nature of the hypothesis of human aggregation actually in operation at any time , is considered to be subordinate and subsequent to this general science of Sociology .
Political economy and economics , in our world now , consist of a hopeless muddle of social assumptions and preposterous psychology , and a few geographical and physical generalisations .
Its ingredients will be classified out and widely separated in Utopian thought .
On the one hand there will be the study of physical economies , ending in the descriptive treatment of society as an organisation for the conversion of all the available energy in nature to the material ends of mankind -- a physical sociology which will be already at such a stage of practical development as to be giving the world this token coinage representing energy -- and on the other there will be the study of economic problems as problems in the division of labour , having regard to a social organisation whose main ends are reproduction and education in an atmosphere of personal freedom .
Each of these inquiries , working unencumbered by the other , will be continually contributing fresh valid conclusions for the use of the practical administrator .
A Utopia such as this present one , written in the opening of the Twentieth Century , and after the most exhaustive discussion -- nearly a century long -- between Communistic and Socialistic ideas on the one hand , and Individualism on the other , emerges upon a sort of effectual conclusion to those controversies .
The two parties have so chipped and amended each other 's initial propositions that , indeed , except for the labels still flutteringly adhesive to the implicated men , it is hard to choose between them .
Each side established a good many propositions , and we profit by them all .
We of the succeeding generation can see quite clearly that for the most part the heat and zeal of these discussions arose in the confusion of a quantitative for a qualitative question .
To the onlooker , both Individualism and Socialism are , in the absolute , absurdities ; the one would make men the slaves of the violent or rich , the other the slaves of the State official , and the way of sanity runs , perhaps even sinuously , down the intervening valley .
Happily the dead past buries its dead , and it is not our function now to adjudicate the preponderance of victory .
In the very days when our political and economic order is becoming steadily more Socialistic , our ideals of intercourse turn more and more to a fuller recognition of the claims of individuality .
The State is to be progressive , it is no longer to be static , and this alters the general condition of the Utopian problem profoundly ; we have to provide not only for food and clothing , for order and health , but for initiative .
The factor that leads the World State on from one phase of development to the next is the interplay of individualities ; to speak teleologically , the world exists for the sake of and through initiative , and individuality is the method of initiative .
Each man and woman , to the extent that his or her individuality is marked , breaks the law of precedent , transgresses the general formula , and makes a new experiment for the direction of the life force .
It is impossible , therefore , for the State , which represents all and is preoccupied by the average , to make effectual experiments and intelligent innovations , and so supply the essential substance of life .
As against the individual the state represents the species , in the case of the Utopian World State it absolutely represents the species .
The individual emerges from the species , makes his experiment , and either fails , dies , and comes to an end , or succeeds and impresses himself in offspring , in consequences and results , intellectual , material and moral , upon the world .
A modern Utopian most assuredly must have a practically unqualified property in all those things that become , as it were , by possession , extensions and expressions of his personality ; his clothing , his jewels , the tools of his employment , his books , the objects of art he may have bought or made , his personal weapons ( if Utopia have need of such things ) , insignia , and so forth .
All such things that he has bought with his money or acquired -- provided he is not a professional or habitual dealer in such property -- will be inalienably his , his to give or lend or keep , free even from taxation .
So intimate is this sort of property that I have no doubt Utopia will give a man posthumous rights over it -- will permit him to assign it to a successor with at the utmost the payment of a small redemption .
A horse , perhaps , in certain districts , or a bicycle , or any such mechanical conveyance personally used , the Utopians might find it well to rank with these possessions .
No doubt , too , a house and privacy owned and occupied by a man , and even a man 's own household furniture , might be held to stand as high or almost as high in the property scale , might be taxed as lightly and transferred under only a slightly heavier redemption , provided he had not let these things on hire , or otherwise alienated them from his intimate self .
A thorough-going , Democratic Socialist will no doubt be inclined at first to object that if the Utopians make these things a specially free sort of property in this way , men would spend much more upon them than they would otherwise do , but indeed that will be an excellent thing .
We are too much affected by the needy atmosphere of our own mismanaged world .
In Utopia no one will have to hunger because some love to make and have made and own and cherish beautiful things .
To give this much of property to individuals will tend to make clothing , ornamentation , implements , books , and all the arts finer and more beautiful , because by buying such things a man will secure something inalienable -- save in the case of bankruptcy -- for himself and for those who belong to him .
Moreover , a man may in his lifetime set aside sums to ensure special advantages of education and care for the immature children of himself and others , and in this manner also exercise a posthumous right .
[ Footnote : But a Statute of Mortmain will set a distinct time limit to the continuance of such benefactions .
A periodic revision of endowments is a necessary feature in any modern Utopia . ]
Besides strictly personal possessions and shares in business adventures , Utopia will no doubt permit associations of its citizens to have a property in various sorts of contracts and concessions , in leases of agricultural and other land , for example ; in houses they may have built , factories and machinery they may have made , and the like .
And if a citizen prefer to adventure into business single-handed , he will have all the freedoms of enterprise enjoyed by a company ; in business affairs he will be a company of one , and his single share will be dealt with at his death like any other shares ... .
So much for the second kind of property .
And these two kinds of property will probably exhaust the sorts of property a Utopian may possess .
And you must not imagine this dustless , spotless , sweet apartment as anything but beautiful .
Its appearance is a little unfamiliar of course , but all the muddle of dust-collecting hangings and witless ornament that cover the earthly bedroom , the valances , the curtains to check the draught from the ill-fitting wood windows , the worthless irrelevant pictures , usually a little askew , the dusty carpets , and all the paraphernalia about the dirty , black-leaded fireplace are gone .
But the faintly tinted walls are framed with just one clear coloured line , as finely placed as the member of a Greek capital ; the door handles and the lines of the panels of the door , the two chairs , the framework of the bed , the writing table , have all that final simplicity , that exquisite finish of contour that is begotten of sustained artistic effort .
The graciously shaped windows each frame a picture -- since they are draughtless the window seats are no mere mockeries as are the window seats of earth -- and on the sill , the sole thing to need attention in the room , is one little bowl of blue Alpine flowers .
The same exquisite simplicity meets one downstairs .
`` Not up from the lake ? ''
He is displaying more readiness than I should have expected .
The book is ruled in broad transverse lines , and has a space for a name , for a number , and a thumbmark .
He puts his thumb upon the slab and makes the thumbmark first with the utmost deliberation .
Meanwhile he studies the other two entries .
The `` numbers '' of the previous guests above are complex muddles of letters and figures .
He writes his name , then with a calm assurance writes down his number , A.M.a.1607.2.ab+ .
I am wrung with momentary admiration .
I follow his example , and fabricate an equally imposing signature .
We think ourselves very clever .
The landlord proffers finger bowls for our thumbs , and his eye goes , just a little curiously , to our entries .
Presently we recognise the fellow of the earthly Devil 's Bridge , still intact as a footway , spanning the gorge , and old memories turn us off the road down the steep ruin of an ancient mule track towards it .
It is our first reminder that Utopia too must have a history .
We cross it and find the Reuss , for all that it has already lit and warmed and ventilated and cleaned several thousands of houses in the dale above , and for all that it drives those easy trams in the gallery overhead , is yet capable of as fine a cascade as ever it flung on earth .
So we come to a rocky path , wild as one could wish , and descend , discoursing how good and fair an ordered world may be , but with a certain unformulated qualification in our minds about those thumb marks we have left behind .
He seems sent by Providence , for just now we had been discussing how we should broach our remarkable situation to these Utopians before our money is spent .
He ate great quantities of grapes and finished with a cigarette .
He demanded and drank a great horn of unfermented grape juice , and it seemed to suit him well .
He whirled on to an attack on science , that stirred the botanist to controversy .
He denounced with great bitterness all specialists whatever , and particularly doctors and engineers .
`` Voluntary noblemen ! ''
he said , `` voluntary Gods I fancy they think themselves , '' and I was left behind for a space in the perplexed examination of this parenthesis , while he and the botanist -- who is sedulous to keep his digestion up to date with all the newest devices -- argued about the good of medicine men .
I was recalled from my meditations by the hand of the blond-haired man upon my arm .
`` You play at that and have your fun .
But there 's no limit to the extent to which a world of men may get out of gear .
In our world -- -- ''
When I see you dandering through this excellent and hopeful world , objecting , obstructing , and breaking the law , displaying your wit on science and order , on the men who toil so ingloriously to swell and use the knowledge that is salvation , this salvation for which _our_ poor world cries to heaven -- -- ''
`` And you want to talk to me about it instead of listening to me ? ''
He spun round upon his chair , got up , glanced at me over his shoulder , and walked out of the arbour .
He stepped aside hastily to avoid too close an approach to the returning botanist .
`` Impossible , '' I heard him say .
He was evidently deeply aggrieved by us .
I saw him presently a little way off in the garden , talking to the landlord of our inn , and looking towards us as he talked -- they both looked towards us -- and after that , without the ceremony of a farewell , he disappeared , and we saw him no more .
We waited for him a little while , and then I expounded the situation to the botanist ... .
`` Unless we can get some work . ''
The way of Nature in this process is to kill the weaker and the sillier , to crush them , to starve them , to overwhelm them , using the stronger and more cunning as her weapon .
But man is the unnatural animal , the rebel child of Nature , and more and more does he turn himself against the harsh and fitful hand that reared him .
He sees with a growing resentment the multitude of suffering ineffectual lives over which his species tramples in its ascent .
In the Modern Utopia he will have set himself to change the ancient law .
No longer will it be that failures must suffer and perish lest their breed increase , but the breed of failure must not increase , lest they suffer and perish , and the race with them .
Will a Utopian be free to be idle ?
There will need to be , in the place of the British casual wards , simple but comfortable inns with a low tariff -- controlled to a certain extent no doubt , and even in some cases maintained , by the State .
This tariff will have such a definite relation to the minimum permissible wage , that a man who has incurred no liabilities through marriage or the like relationship , will be able to live in comfort and decency upon that minimum wage , pay his small insurance premium against disease , death , disablement , or ripening years , and have a margin for clothing and other personal expenses .
But he will get neither shelter nor food , except at the price of his freedom , unless he can produce money .
Before we suppose that , we must take into consideration the general assumption one is permitted to make in all Utopian speculations .
All Utopians will be reasonably well educated upon Utopian lines ; there will be no illiterates unless they are unteachable imbeciles , no rule-of-thumb toilers as inadaptable as trained beasts .
The Utopian worker will be as versatile as any well-educated man is on earth to-day , and no Trade Union will impose a limit to his activities .
The world will be his Union .
If the work he does best and likes best is not to be found , there is still the work he likes second best .
Lacking his proper employment , he will turn to some kindred trade .
But the first cause may be anticipated by wise marriage laws ... .
The full discussion of these laws will come later , but here one may insist that Utopia will control the increase of its population .
Without the determination and ability to limit that increase as well as to stimulate it whenever it is necessary , no Utopia is possible .
That was clearly demonstrated by Malthus for all time .
The second cause is not so easily anticipated , but then , though its immediate result in glutting the labour market is similar , its final consequences are entirely different from those of the first .
The whole trend of a scientific mechanical civilisation is continually to replace labour by machinery and to increase it in its effectiveness by organisation , and so quite independently of any increase in population labour must either fall in value until it can compete against and check the cheapening process , or if that is prevented , as it will be in Utopia , by a minimum wage , come out of employment .
There is no apparent limit to this process .
But a surplus of efficient labour at the minimum wage is exactly the condition that should stimulate new enterprises , and that in a State saturated with science and prolific in invention will stimulate new enterprises .
An increasing surplus of available labour without an absolute increase of population , an increasing surplus of labour due to increasing economy and not to proliferation , and which , therefore , does not press on and disarrange the food supply , is surely the ideal condition for a progressive civilisation .
I am inclined to think that , since labour will be regarded as a delocalised and fluid force , it will be the World State and not the big municipalities ruling the force areas that will be the reserve employer of labour .
Very probably it will be convenient for the State to hand over the surplus labour for municipal purposes , but that is another question .
All over the world the labour exchanges will be reporting the fluctuating pressure of economic demand and transferring workers from this region of excess to that of scarcity ; and whenever the excess is universal , the World State -- failing an adequate development of private enterprise -- will either reduce the working day and so absorb the excess , or set on foot some permanent special works of its own , paying the minimum wage and allowing them to progress just as slowly or just as rapidly as the ebb and flow of labour dictated .
But with sane marriage and birth laws there is no reason to suppose such calls upon the resources and initiative of the world more than temporary and exceptional occasions .
The existence of our blond bare-footed friend was evidence enough that in a modern Utopia a man will be free to be just as idle or uselessly busy as it pleases him , after he has earned the minimum wage .
He must do that , of course , to pay for his keep , to pay his assurance tax against ill-health or old age , and any charge or debt paternity may have brought upon him .
The World State of the modern Utopist is no state of moral compulsions .
If , for example , under the restricted Utopian scheme of inheritance , a man inherited sufficient money to release him from the need to toil , he would be free to go where he pleased and do what he liked .
A certain proportion of men at ease is good for the world ; work as a moral obligation is the morality of slaves , and so long as no one is overworked there is no need to worry because some few are underworked .
Utopia does not exist as a solace for envy .
From leisure , in a good moral and intellectual atmosphere , come experiments , come philosophy and the new departures .
After we have paid for our lunch in the little inn that corresponds to Wassen , the botanist and I would no doubt spend the rest of the forenoon in the discussion of various aspects and possibilities of Utopian labour laws .
We should examine our remaining change , copper coins of an appearance ornamental rather than reassuring , and we should decide that after what we had gathered from the man with the blond hair , it would , on the whole , be advisable to come to the point with the labour question forthwith .
At last we should draw the deep breath of resolution and arise and ask for the Public Office .
We should know by this time that the labour bureau sheltered with the post-office and other public services in one building .
A vision of that confounded visitors ' book at the inn above comes into my mind .
`` Let me _see_ , '' I say , and pat my forehead and reflect , refraining from the official eye before me .
`` Let me _see_ . ''
`` Do n't you know ? ''
`` Do you mean to say neither of you know your own numbers ? ''
says the little post-mistress , with a rising note .
He looks from her to us gravely , and his eye lights to curiosity at our dress .
`` What is the matter , madam ? ''
he asks , in a courteous voice .
He looks down at his feet .
`` Go on , '' he says .
His expression has changed .
He takes the document and examines it , turns it over , looks at me , and smiles that faint smile of his again .
I perceive I shall cut a queer figure in that focus .
I shall affect a certain spurious ease of carriage no doubt .
`` The fact is , I shall begin ... . ''
I make my way to the desk of the man who has dealt with us before .
I say , cheerfully , `` have you heard ? ''
`` You , '' says the official , addressing the botanist , `` are -- -- ! ''
`` By Jove ! ''
I say in English .
`` They 've got our doubles ! ''
`` The queer thing , '' he remarks , `` is that you were in Norway only three days ago . ''
`` Vanished by hypothesis . ''
That seems to give him a sort of satisfaction even in the reminiscence .
`` She said , quite abruptly , 'I am not happy , ' and I told her , 'I knew that the instant I saw you . '
Then , you know , she began to talk to me very quietly , very frankly , about everything .
It was only afterwards I began to feel just what it meant , her talking to me like that . ''
`` Do n't you understand , '' I cry , `` that we are in Utopia .
She may be bound unhappily upon earth and you may be bound , but not here .
Here I think it will be different .
Here the laws that control all these things will be humane and just .
So that all you said and did , over there , does not signify here -- does not signify here ! ''
`` Yes , '' he says , without interest , with something of the tone of an abstracted elder speaking to a child , `` I dare say it will be all very fine here . ''
And he lapses , thwarted from his confidences , into musing .
I regard the facade of the Utopian public offices of Lucerne -- I had meant to call his attention to some of the architectural features of these -- with a changed eye , with all the spirit gone out of my vision .
I wish I had never brought this introspective carcass , this mental ingrate , with me .
But it is a conceivable and possible thing that this margin of futile struggling , pain and discomfort and death might be reduced to nearly nothing without checking physical and mental evolution , with indeed an acceleration of physical and mental evolution , by preventing the birth of those who would in the unrestricted interplay of natural forces be born to suffer and fail .
The method of Nature `` red in tooth and claw '' is to degrade , thwart , torture , and kill the weakest and least adapted members of every species in existence in each generation , and so keep the specific average rising ; the ideal of a scientific civilisation is to prevent those weaklings being born .
There is no other way of evading Nature's punishment of sorrow .
The struggle for life among the beasts and uncivilised men means misery and death for the inferior individuals , misery and death in order that they may not increase and multiply ; in the civilised State it is now clearly possible to make the conditions of life tolerable for every living creature , provided the inferiors can be prevented from increasing and multiplying .
But this latter condition must be respected .
Instead of competing to escape death and wretchedness , we may compete to give birth and we may heap every sort of consolation prize upon the losers in that competition .
The modern State tends to qualify inheritance , to insist upon education and nurture for children , to come in more and more in the interests of the future between father and child .
It is taking over the responsibility of the general welfare of the children more and more , and as it does so , its right to decide which children it will shelter becomes more and more reasonable .
How far will such conditions be prescribed ?
how far can they be prescribed in a Modern Utopia ?
Up to the beginning of this chapter , our Utopian speculations , like many Acts of Parliament , have ignored the difference of sex .
`` He '' indeed is to be read as `` He and She '' in all that goes before .
But we may now come to the sexual aspects of the modern ideal of a constitution of society in which , for all purposes of the individual , women are to be as free as men .
This will certainly be realised in the Modern Utopia , if it can be realised at all -- not only for woman 's sake , but for man 's .
It is very easy to repeat our initial propositions , to recall that we are on another planet , and that all the customs and traditions of the earth are set aside , but the faintest realisation of that demands a feat of psychological insight .
We have all grown up into an invincible mould of suggestion about sexual things ; we regard this with approval , that with horror , and this again with contempt , very largely because the thing has always been put to us in this light or that .
The more emancipated we think ourselves the more subtle are our bonds .
The disentanglement of what is inherent in these feelings from what is acquired is an extraordinary complex undertaking .
Probably all men and women have a more or less powerful disposition to jealousy , but what exactly they will be jealous about and what exactly they will suffer seems part of the superposed factor .
Probably all men and women are capable of ideal emotions and wishes beyond merely physical desires , but the shape these take are almost entirely a reaction to external images .
And you really can not strip the external off ; you can not get your stark natural man , jealous , but not jealous about anything in particular , imaginative without any imaginings , proud at large .
Emotional dispositions can no more exist without form than a man without air .
Only a very observant man who had lived all over the planet Earth , in all sorts of social strata , and with every race and tongue , and who was endowed with great imaginative insight , could hope to understand the possibilities and the limitations of human plasticity in this matter , and say what any men and any women could be induced to do willingly , and just exactly what no man and no woman could stand , provided one had the training of them .
Though very young men will tell you readily enough .
The proceedings of other races and other ages do not seem to carry conviction ; what our ancestors did , or what the Greeks or Egyptians did , though it is the direct physical cause of the modern young man or the modern young lady , is apt to impress these remarkable consequences merely as an arrangement of quaint , comical or repulsive proceedings .
The sound birth being assured , does there exist any valid reason for the persistence of the Utopian marriage union ?
If one looks closely into the various practical expansions of these ideas , we find their inherent falsity works itself out in a very natural way so soon as reality is touched .
Those who insist upon equality work in effect for assimilation , for a similar treatment of the sexes .
Plato 's women of the governing class , for example , were to strip for gymnastics like men , to bear arms and go to war , and follow most of the masculine occupations of their class .
They were to have the same education and to be assimilated to men at every doubtful point .
The Aristotelian attitude , on the other hand , insists upon specialisation .
The men are to rule and fight and toil ; the women are to support motherhood in a state of natural inferiority .
The trend of evolutionary forces through long centuries of human development has been on the whole in this second direction , has been towards differentiation .
[ Footnote : See Havelock Ellis's Man and Woman . ]
An adult white woman differs far more from a white man than a negress or pigmy woman from her equivalent male .
The education , the mental disposition , of a white or Asiatic woman , reeks of sex ; her modesty , her decorum is not to ignore sex but to refine and put a point to it ; her costume is clamorous with the distinctive elements of her form .
The white woman in the materially prosperous nations is more of a sexual specialist than her sister of the poor and austere peoples , of the prosperous classes more so than the peasant woman .
The contemporary woman of fashion who sets the tone of occidental intercourse is a stimulant rather than a companion for a man .
Too commonly she is an unwholesome stimulant turning a man from wisdom to appearance , from beauty to beautiful pleasures , from form to colour , from persistent aims to belief and stirring triumphs .
Arrayed in what she calls distinctly `` dress , '' scented , adorned , displayed , she achieves by artifice a sexual differentiation profounder than that of any other vertebrated animal .
She outshines the peacock 's excess above his mate , one must probe among the domestic secrets of the insects and crustacea to find her living parallel .
And it is a question by no means easy and yet of the utmost importance , to determine how far the wide and widening differences between the human sexes is inherent and inevitable , and how far it is an accident of social development that may be converted and reduced under a different social regimen .
Are we going to recognise and accentuate this difference and to arrange our Utopian organisation to play upon it , are we to have two primary classes of human being , harmonising indeed and reacting , but following essentially different lives , or are we going to minimise this difference in every possible way ?
But to any further definition of the marriage relation the World State of Utopia will not commit itself .
The wide range of relationships that are left possible , within and without the marriage code , are entirely a matter for the individual choice and imagination .
Whether a man treat his wife in private as a goddess to be propitiated , as a `` mystery '' to be adored , as an agreeable auxiliary , as a particularly intimate friend , or as the wholesome mother of his children , is entirely a matter for their private intercourse : whether he keep her in Oriental idleness or active co-operation , or leave her to live her independent life , rests with the couple alone , and all the possible friendship and intimacies outside marriage also lie quite beyond the organisation of the modern State .
Religious teaching and literature may affect these ; customs may arise ; certain types of relationship may involve social isolation ; the justice of the statesman is blind to such things .
It may be urged that according to Atkinson 's illuminating analysis [ Footnote : See Lang and Atkinson 's Social Origins and Primal Law . ]
the control of love-making was the very origin of the human community .
In Utopia , nevertheless , love-making is no concern of the State 's beyond the province that the protection of children covers .
[ Footnote : It can not be made too clear that though the control of morality is outside the law the State must maintain a general decorum , a systematic suppression of powerful and moving examples , and of incitations and temptations of the young and inexperienced , and to that extent it will , of course , in a sense , exercise a control over morals .
But this will be only part of a wider law to safeguard the tender mind .
For example , lying advertisements , and the like , when they lean towards adolescent interests , will encounter a specially disagreeable disposition in the law , over and above the treatment of their general dishonesty . ]
Change of function is one of the ruling facts in life , the sac that was in our remotest ancestors a swimming bladder is now a lung , and the State which was once , perhaps , no more than the jealous and tyrannous will of the strongest male in the herd , the instrument of justice and equality .
The State intervenes now only where there is want of harmony between individuals -- individuals who exist or who may presently come into existence .
The cessation of the second and last spell of work comes about midday , and then we walk home , through this beautiful intricacy of a town to our cheap hotel beside the lake .
My sense of loneliness is increased during this interlude by the better social success of the botanist .
I find him presently falling into conversation with two women who are accustomed to sit at a table near our own .
They wear the loose , coloured robes of soft material that are the usual wear of common adult Utopian women ; they are both dark and sallow , and they affect amber and crimson in their garments .
Their faces strike me as a little unintelligent , and there is a faint touch of middle-aged coquetry in their bearing that I do not like .
Yet on earth we should consider them women of exceptional refinement .
But the botanist evidently sees in this direction scope for the feelings that have wilted a little under my inattention , and he begins that petty intercourse of a word , of a slight civility , of vague enquiries and comparisons that leads at last to associations and confidences .
Such superficial confidences , that is to say , as he finds satisfactory .
I shall find a quality of dissatisfaction throughout all these days .
I shall come to see this period more and more distinctly as a pause , as a waiting interlude , and the idea of an encounter with my double , which came at first as if it were a witticism , as something verbal and surprising , begins to take substance .
The idea grows in my mind that after all this is the `` someone '' I am seeking , this Utopian self of mine .
I had at first an idea of a grotesque encounter , as of something happening in a looking glass , but presently it dawns on me that my Utopian self must be a very different person from me .
His training will be different , his mental content different .
But between us there will be a strange link of essential identity , a sympathy , an understanding .
I find the thing rising suddenly to a preponderance in my mind .
I find the interest of details dwindling to the vanishing point .
That I have come to Utopia is the lesser thing now ; the greater is that I have come to meet myself .
Wrapped up in these preoccupations as I am , it will certainly be the botanist who will notice the comparative absence of animals about us .
`` Very remarkable , '' I say , discovering that the botanist has come to an end with his story of that Frognal dog .
`` You 'd wonder how he knew , '' he says .
I nibble a green blade .
The botanist blesses his heart .
The resemblance to a club will strike us both .
`` A _good_ club , '' the botanist will correct me .
The train has been in London some time when I awake , for these marvellous Utopians have discovered that it is not necessary to bundle out passengers from a train in the small hours , simply because they have arrived .
A Utopian train is just a peculiar kind of hotel corridor that flies about the earth while one sleeps .
I wonder if my own voice sounds like that .
`` You have n't any doubt left ? ''
But I should go back to my botanist in a state of emotional relaxation .
At first I should not heed the fact that he , too , had been in some manner stirred .
`` I have seen him , '' I should say , needlessly , and seem to be on the verge of telling the untellable .
Then I should fade off into : `` It 's the strangest thing . ''
`` But you spoke ? ''
He looks at it critically .
`` There 's a lot of metal in it , '' he objects .
`` No , no !
She could n't be .
I was wrong there .
But she will be different .
Grant that at any rate .
When you go forward to speak to her , she may not remember -- very many things _you_ may remember .
Things that happened at Frognal -- dear romantic walks through the Sunday summer evenings , practically you two alone , you in your adolescent silk hat and your nice gentlemanly gloves ... .
Perhaps that did not happen here !
And she may have other memories -- of things -- that down there have n't happened .
You noted her costume .
She was n't by any chance one of the samurai ? ''
The botanist beside me dreams , I know , of vindications for that woman .
I wonder if that man _was_ a scoundrel .
He has gone wrong on earth , no doubt , has failed and degenerated , but what was it sent him wrong ?
Was his failure inherent , or did some net of cross purposes tangle about his feet ?
Suppose he is not a failure in Utopia !
I wonder that this has never entered the botanist 's head .
Neither my Utopian double nor I love emotion sufficiently to cultivate it , and my feelings are in a state of seemly subordination when we meet again .
He is now in possession of some clear , general ideas about my own world , and I can broach almost at once the thoughts that have been growing and accumulating since my arrival in this planet of my dreams .
We find our interest in a humanised state-craft , makes us , in spite of our vast difference in training and habits , curiously akin .
This organisation of the samurai was a quite deliberate invention .
It arose in the course of social and political troubles and complications , analogous to those of our own time on earth , and was , indeed , the last of a number of political and religious experiments dating back to the first dawn of philosophical state-craft in Greece .
That hasty despair of specialisation for government that gave our poor world individualism , democratic liberalism , and anarchism , and that curious disregard of the fund of enthusiasm and self-sacrifice in men , which is the fundamental weakness of worldly economics , do not appear in the history of Utopian thought .
All that history is pervaded with the recognition of the fact that self-seeking is no more the whole of human life than the satisfaction of hunger ; that it is an essential of a man 's existence no doubt , and that under stress of evil circumstances it may as entirely obsess him as would the food hunt during famine , but that life may pass beyond to an illimitable world of emotions and effort .
Every sane person consists of possibilities beyond the unavoidable needs , is capable of disinterested feeling , even if it amounts only to enthusiasm for a sport or an industrial employment well done , for an art , or for a locality or class .
In our world now , as in the Utopian past , this impersonal energy of a man goes out into religious emotion and work , into patriotic effort , into artistic enthusiasms , into games and amateur employments , and an enormous proportion of the whole world 's fund of effort wastes itself in religious and political misunderstandings and conflicts , and in unsatisfying amusements and unproductive occupations .
In a modern Utopia there will , indeed , be no perfection ; in Utopia there must also be friction , conflicts and waste , but the waste will be enormously less than in our world .
And the co-ordination of activities this relatively smaller waste will measure , will be the achieved end for which the order of the samurai was first devised .
`` Something of this kind , '' I should tell my double , `` had arisen in our thought '' -- I jerk my head back to indicate an infinitely distant planet -- '' just before I came upon these explorations .
The idea had reached me , for example , of something to be called a New Republic , which was to be in fact an organisation for revolution something after the fashion of your samurai , as I understand them -- only most of the organisation and the rule of life still remained to be invented .
All sorts of people were thinking of something in that way about the time of my coming .
The idea , as it reached me , was pretty crude in several respects .
It ignored the high possibility of a synthesis of languages in the future ; it came from a literary man , who wrote only English , and , as I read him -- he was a little vague in his proposals -- it was to be a purely English-speaking movement .
And his ideas were coloured too much by the peculiar opportunism of his time ; he seemed to have more than half an eye for a prince or a millionaire of genius ; he seemed looking here and there for support and the structural elements of a party .
Still , the idea of a comprehensive movement of disillusioned and illuminated men behind the shams and patriotisms , the spites and personalities of the ostensible world was there . ''
The social theorists of Utopia , my double explained , did not base their schemes upon the classification of men into labour and capital , the landed interest , the liquor trade , and the like .
They esteemed these as accidental categories , indefinitely amenable to statesmanship , and they looked for some practical and real classification upon which to base organisation .
[ Footnote : In that they seem to have profited by a more searching criticism of early social and political speculations than our earth has yet undertaken .
The social speculations of the Greeks , for example , had just the same primary defect as the economic speculations of the eighteenth century -- they began with the assumption that the general conditions of the prevalent state of affairs were permanent . ]
But , on the other hand , the assumption that men are unclassifiable , because practically homogeneous , which underlies modern democratic methods and all the fallacies of our equal justice , is even more alien to the Utopian mind .
Throughout Utopia there is , of course , no other than provisional classifications , since every being is regarded as finally unique , but for political and social purposes things have long rested upon a classification of temperaments , which attends mainly to differences in the range and quality and character of the individual imagination .
`` Precisely -- provided he follows the Rule . ''
`` I have heard the phrase , 'voluntary nobility . '
`` That was the idea of our Founders .
They made a noble and privileged order -- open to the whole world .
No one could complain of an unjust exclusion , for the only thing that could exclude from the order was unwillingness or inability to follow the Rule . ''
`` That was n't their intention .
The Rule was planned to exclude the dull , to be unattractive to the base , and to direct and co-ordinate all sound citizens of good intent . ''
`` And it has succeeded ? ''
`` I would like to have that history , '' I said .
`` I expect there was fighting ? ''
`` But first -- tell me about the Rule . ''
`` As a matter of fact , we have such people !
There are rich traders , men who have made discoveries in the economy of distribution , or who have called attention by intelligent , truthful advertisement to the possibilities of neglected commodities , for example . ''
`` Wealth _is_ power . ''
`` He must leave either her or the order . ''
`` There are such women .
But for all that the Rule sets the key of everyday dress .
If a woman is possessed by the passion for gorgeous raiment she usually satisfies it in her own private circle , or with rare occasional onslaughts upon the public eye .
Her everyday mood and the disposition of most people is against being conspicuous abroad .
And I should say there are little liberties under the Lesser Rule ; a discreet use of fine needlework and embroidery , a wider choice of materials . ''
`` My dear man !
What is all my world after ? ''
He tried to make his religion clear to me .
`` One becomes a personification up there , '' he said .
`` One becomes the ambassador of mankind to the outer world .
My double lived in an apartment in a great building -- I should judge about where , in our London , the Tate Gallery squats , and , as the day was fine , and I had no reason for hurry , I went not by the covered mechanical way , but on foot along the broad , tree-set terraces that follow the river on either side .
Amidst the men whose faces have been made fine by thought and steadfast living , among the serene-eyed women , comes youth , gaily-coloured , buoyantly healthy , with challenging eyes , with fresh and eager face ... .
The statesman , both for himself and others , must recognise this inadequacy of grasp , and the necessity for real and imaginary aggregations to sustain men in their practical service of the order of the world .
He must be a sociologist ; he must study the whole science of aggregations in relation to that World State to which his reason and his maturest thought direct him .
He must lend himself to the development of aggregatory ideas that favour the civilising process , and he must do his best to promote the disintegration of aggregations and the effacement of aggregatory ideas , that keep men narrow and unreasonably prejudiced one against another .
`` Insult is n't argument , '' said the botanist .
I turned a thumb earthward .
So the argument must pass into a direct address to the reader .
I say , standing before him .
He makes no answer , but his expression startles me .
He makes no answer , but he looks at me with eyes that are positively baleful , and in the instant I read his mute but mulish resolve that Utopia must end .
`` Do n't let that old quarrel poison all this , '' I say almost entreatingly .
`` It happened all differently here -- everything is different here .
Your double will be back to-morrow .
Perhaps then you will understand -- -- ''
He buys almost mechanically , and turns back to me .
SHOCKING LYNCHING OUTRAGE IN NEW YORK STATE .
I am stunned beyond the possibility of discussion for a space .
In this very place it must have been that the high terrace ran with the gardens below it , along which I came from my double to our hotel .
I am going back , but now through reality , along the path I passed so happily in my dream .
And the people I saw then are the people I am looking at now -- with a difference .
`` I 've been living in Utopia , '' I answer , tacitly adopting his tacit proposal to drop the lady out of the question .
`` It spoils the world of everyday to let your mind run on impossible perfections . ''
I perceive quite abruptly that the botanist and I have reached the limits of our intercourse .
His low-toned self-complacency , like the faded banner of an obstinate fort , still flies unconquered .
And you know , he 's not even a happy man with it all !
But I am back in the world for all that , and my Utopia is done .
There are moments in the life of every philosopher and dreamer when he feels himself the flimsiest of absurdities , when the Thing in Being has its way with him , its triumphant way , when it asks in a roar , unanswerably , with a fine solid use of the current vernacular , `` What Good is all this -- Rot about Utopias ? ''
This infinite world must needs be flattened to get it on one retina .
The picture of a solid thing , although it is flattened and simplified , is not necessarily a lie .
Surely , surely , in the end , by degrees , and steps , something of this sort , some such understanding , as this Utopia must come .
First here , then there , single men and then groups of men will fall into line -- not indeed with my poor faulty hesitating suggestions -- but with a great and comprehensive plan wrought out by many minds and in many tongues .
It is just because my plan is faulty , because it mis-states so much , and omits so much , that they do not now fall in .
It will not be like _my_ dream , the world that is coming .
My dream is just my own poor dream , the thing sufficient for me .
We fail in comprehension , we fail so variously and abundantly .
We see as much as it is serviceable for us to see , and we see no further .
But the fresh undaunted generations come to take on our work beyond our utmost effort , beyond the range of our ideas .
They will learn with certainty things that to us are guesses and riddles ... .
He passes , and for a little space we are left with his egoisms and idiosyncrasies more or less in suspense .
A Portion of a Paper read to the Oxford Philosophical Society , November 8 , 1903 , and reprinted , with some Revision , from the Version given in Mind , vol .
You must be prepared for things that will strike you as crude , for a certain difference of accent and dialect that you may not like , and you must be prepared too to hear what may strike you as the clumsy statement of my ignorant rediscovery of things already beautifully thought out and said .
But in the end you may incline to forgive me some of this first offence ... .
It is quite unavoidable that , in setting out these intellectual foundations of mine , I should lapse for a moment or so towards autobiography .
A convergence of circumstances led to my having my knowledge of concrete things quite extensively developed before I came to philosophical examination at all .
I have heard someone say that a savage or an animal is mentally a purely objective being , and in that respect I was like a savage or an animal until I was well over twenty .
I was extremely unaware of the subjective or introverted element in my being .
I was a Positivist without knowing it .
My early education was a feeble one ; it was one in which my private observation , inquiry and experiment were far more important factors than any instruction , or rather perhaps the instruction I received was less even than what I learnt for myself , and it terminated at thirteen .
I had come into pretty intimate contact with the harder realities of life , with hunger in various forms , and many base and disagreeable necessities , before I was fifteen .
About that age , following the indication of certain theological and speculative curiosities , I began to learn something of what I will call deliberately and justly , Elementary Science -- stuff I got out of Cassell 's Popular Educator and cheap text-books -- and then , through accidents and ambitions that do not matter in the least to us now , I came to three years of illuminating and good scientific work .
The central fact of those three years was Huxley 's course in Comparative Anatomy at the school in Exhibition Road .
About that as a nucleus I arranged a spacious digest of facts .
At the end of that time I had acquired what I still think to be a fairly clear , and complete and ordered view of the ostensibly real universe .
Let me try to give you the chief things I had .
I had man definitely placed in the great scheme of space and time .
I knew him incurably for what he was , finite and not final , a being of compromises and adaptations .
I had traced his lungs , for example , from a swimming bladder , step by step , with scalpel and probe , through a dozen types or more , I had seen the ancestral caecum shrink to that disease nest , the appendix of to-day , I had watched the gill slit patched slowly to the purposes of the ear and the reptile jaw suspension utilised to eke out the needs of a sense organ taken from its native and natural water .
I had worked out the development of those extraordinarily unsatisfactory and untrustworthy instruments , man 's teeth , from the skin scutes of the shark to their present function as a basis for gold stoppings , and followed the slow unfolding of the complex and painful process of gestation through which man comes into the world .
I had followed all these things and many kindred things by dissection and in embryology -- I had checked the whole theory of development again in a year 's course of palaeontology , and I had taken the dimensions of the whole process , by the scale of the stars , in a course of astronomical physics .
And all that amount of objective elucidation came before I had reached the beginnings of any philosophical or metaphysical inquiry , any inquiry as to why I believed , how I believed , what I believed , or what the fundamental stuff of things was .
I have it in my mind that classification is a necessary condition of the working of the mental implement , but that it is a departure from the objective truth of things , that classification is very serviceable for the practical purposes of life but a very doubtful preliminary to those fine penetrations the philosophical purpose , in its more arrogant moods , demands .
All the peculiarities of my way of thinking derive from that .
You will think perhaps of atoms of the elements as instances of identically similar things , but these are things not of experience but of theory , and there is not a phenomenon in chemistry that is not equally well explained on the supposition that it is merely the immense quantities of atoms necessarily taken in any experiment that mask by the operation of the law of averages the fact that each atom also has its unique quality , its special individual difference .
This idea of uniqueness in all individuals is not only true of the classifications of material science ; it is true , and still more evidently true , of the species of common thought , it is true of common terms .
Take the word chair .
When one says chair , one thinks vaguely of an average chair .
But collect individual instances , think of armchairs and reading chairs , and dining-room chairs and kitchen chairs , chairs that pass into benches , chairs that cross the boundary and become settees , dentists ' chairs , thrones , opera stalls , seats of all sorts , those miraculous fungoid growths that cumber the floor of the Arts and Crafts Exhibition , and you will perceive what a lax bundle in fact is this simple straightforward term .
In co-operation with an intelligent joiner I would undertake to defeat any definition of chair or chairishness that you gave me .
Chairs just as much as individual organisms , just as much as mineral and rock specimens , are unique things -- if you know them well enough you will find an individual difference even in a set of machine-made chairs -- and it is only because we do not possess minds of unlimited capacity , because our brain has only a limited number of pigeon-holes for our correspondence with an unlimited universe of objective uniques , that we have to delude ourselves into the belief that there is a chairishness in this species common to and distinctive of all chairs .
You see , I hope , what I mean , when I say that the universe of molecular physics is at a different level from the universe of common experience ; -- what we call stable and solid is in that world a freely moving system of interlacing centres of force , what we call colour and sound is there no more than this length of vibration or that .
We have reached to a conception of that universe of molecular physics by a great enterprise of organised analysis , and our universe of daily experiences stands in relation to that elemental world as if it were a synthesis of those elemental things .
It is upon these three objections , and upon an extreme suspicion of abstract terms which arises materially out of my first and second objections , that I chiefly rest my case for a profound scepticism of the remoter possibilities of the Instrument of Thought .
It is a thing no more perfect than the human eye or the human ear , though like those other instruments it may have undefined possibilities of evolution towards increased range , and increased power .
So frankly I spread my little equipment of fundamental assumptions before you , heartily glad of the opportunity you have given me of taking them out , of looking at them with the particularity the presence of hearers ensures , and of hearing the impression they make upon you .
Of course , such a sketch must have an inevitable crudity of effect .
The time I had for it -- I mean the time I was able to give in preparation -- was altogether too limited for any exhaustive finish of presentation ; but I think on the whole I have got the main lines of this sketch map of my mental basis true .
Whether I have made myself comprehensible is a different question altogether .
It is for you rather than me to say how this sketch map of mine lies with regard to your own more systematic cartography ... .
Now , the Vicar of Siddermorton had two rivals in his scientific pursuits ; Gully of Sidderton , who had actually seen the glare , and who it was sent the drawing to _Nature_ , and Borland the natural history dealer , who kept the marine laboratory at Portburdock .
Borland , the Vicar thought , should have stuck to his copepods , but instead he kept a taxidermist , and took advantage of his littoral position to pick up rare sea birds .
It was evident to anyone who knew anything of collecting that both these men would be scouring the country after the strange visitant , before twenty-four hours were out .
He would have gone out by the glass doors and verandah , and down the garden into the hill road , in order to avoid his housekeeper 's eye .
He knew his gun expeditions were not approved of .
But advancing towards him up the garden , he saw the curate 's wife and her two daughters , carrying tennis rackets .
His curate 's wife was a young woman of immense will , who used to play tennis on his lawn , and cut his roses , differ from him on doctrinal points , and criticise his personal behaviour all over the parish .
He went in abject fear of her , was always trying to propitiate her .
But so far he had clung to his ornithology ... .
THE VICAR AND THE ANGEL .
`` Is all so _very_ dream like , '' said the Angel .
`` Just exactly what one dreams of -- or artists imagine . ''
`` Thank you , '' said the Vicar as the Angel appeared to be warming to his work ; `` thank you .
That is _quite_ enough .
I begin to understand . ''
`` I do n't see them , '' said the Angel .
`` No , the whole point is they are not to be seen in this world .
But our men with imaginations have told us all about them , you know .
And even I at times ... there are places in this village where you must simply take what they set before you , or give offence -- I , I say , have seen in my dreams Jabberwocks , Bogle brutes , Mandrakes ... .
From our point of view , you know , they are Dream Creatures ... . ''
`` Yes , '' said the Angel thoughtfully .
`` It must be something of the sort .
And that reminds me .
Sometimes when I have been dropping asleep , or drowsing under the noon-tide sun , I have seen strange corrugated faces just like yours , going by me , and trees with green leaves upon them , and such queer uneven ground as this ... .
It must be so .
I have fallen into another world . ''
`` And in some incomprehensible manner I have fallen into this world of yours out of my own ! ''
said the Angel , `` into the world of my dreams , grown real . ''
The half-dozen of dappled deer came in Indian file obliquely through the trees and halted , watching .
`` It 's no dream -- I am really a solid concrete Angel , in Dream Land , '' said the Angel .
The Vicar stood surveying him .
The Reverend gentleman was pulling his mouth askew after a habit he had , and slowly stroking his chin .
He was asking himself whether he too was not in the Land of Dreams .
`` That 's another strange word ! ''
`` Pardon me , '' said the Vicar , and offered an elbow .
`` If I may have the pleasure of entertaining you .
My house lies yonder -- not a couple of miles from here . ''
But this Angel the Vicar shot is , we say , no such angel at all , but the Angel of Italian art , polychromatic and gay .
He comes from the land of beautiful dreams and not from any holier place .
At best he is a popish creature .
Bear patiently , therefore , with his scattered remiges , and be not hasty with your charge of irreverence before the story is read .
They saw the Vicar 's hat above the rhododendrons , and a bare curly head beside him .
`` I must ask him about Susan Wiggin , '' said the Curate 's wife .
She was about to serve , and stood with a racket in one hand and a ball between the fingers of the other .
`` _He_ really ought to have gone to see her -- being the Vicar .
I -- -- _Ah !
For the two figures suddenly turned the corner and were visible .
The Vicar , arm in arm with -- --
You see , it came on the Curate 's wife suddenly .
The Angel 's face being towards her she saw nothing of the wings .
Only a face of unearthly beauty in a halo of chestnut hair , and a graceful figure clothed in a saffron garment that barely reached the knees .
The thought of those knees flashed upon the Vicar at once .
He too was horrorstruck .
So were the two girls and Mrs Jehoram .
The Angel stared in astonishment at the horrorstruck group .
You see , he had never seen anyone horrorstruck before .
_ '' they all said again .
`` Possibly , '' said the Vicar .
`` Did you , _ahem_ , notice how they behaved ? ''
`` You see , '' said the Vicar , stroking his chin , `` our ladies , _ahem_ , have peculiar views -- rather inartistic views -- about , _ahem_ , clothing .
Dressed as you are , I am afraid , I am really afraid that -- beautiful as your costume certainly is -- you will find yourself somewhat , _ahem_ , somewhat isolated in society .
We have a little proverb , 'When in Rome , _ahem_ , one must do as the Romans do . '
I can assure you that , assuming you are desirous to , _ahem_ , associate with us -- during your involuntary stay -- -- ''
he said , clapping his hands together .
`` What a mad , quaint dream this is !
Where are they ? ''
He caught at the neck of the saffron robe .
He was charmingly affable and quite ignorant of the most elementary facts of civilization .
Eating came without much difficulty , and the Vicar had an entertaining time teaching him how to take tea .
`` What a mess it is !
What a dear grotesque ugly world you live in ! ''
`` Fancy stuffing things into your mouth !
We use our mouths just to talk and sing with .
Our world , you know , is almost incurably beautiful .
We get so very little ugliness , that I find all this ... delightful . ''
`` Shot it , '' said the Vicar , `` with a gun . ''
`` That is dead ; it died . ''
`` You see , '' said the Vicar , `` I take an interest in birds , and I ( _ahem_ ) collect them .
I wanted the specimen -- -- ''
He thought for a minute .
`` Do you often kill ? ''
he asked the Vicar .
`` This -- _ahem_ -- gentleman , '' said the Vicar , `` or -- _ah_ -- Angel '' -- the Angel bowed -- '' is suffering from a gunshot wound . ''
`` As you will , '' said the Doctor .
He detested people who laughed .
`` The things are curious , '' he said , turning to the Vicar .
`` If inconvenient '' -- to the Angel .
`` I never heard of such complete reduplication before -- at least among animals .
In plants it 's common enough .
Were you the only one in your family ? ''
He did not wait for a reply .
`` Partial cases of the fission of limbs are not at all uncommon , of course , Vicar -- six-fingered children , calves with six feet , and cats with double toes , you know .
May I assist you ? ''
he said , turning to the Angel who was struggling with the coat .
`` But such a complete reduplication , and so avian , too !
It would be much less remarkable if it was simply another pair of arms . ''
`` Really , '' said the Doctor , `` one begins to understand how that beautiful myth of the angels arose .
You look a little hectic , Mr Angel -- feverish .
Excessive brilliance is almost worse as a symptom than excessive pallor .
Curious your name should be Angel .
I must send you a cooling draught , if you should feel thirsty in the night ... . ''
`` That _is_ an Angel , '' whispered the Vicar .
`` You do n't understand . ''
When the Vicar had finished , the Doctor pressed his lips together tighter than ever , smiled faintly , and looked significantly into the Vicar 's eyes .
`` But he says he _is_ an Angel ! ''
said the Vicar , staring out of his little round eyes , his plump hands in his pockets .
`` A what ? ''
`` No doubt he 's slipped away from confinement . ''
`` I do not altogether accept ... . ''
`` Come in , '' said the Vicar ; `` come in .
Come into the study .
I 'm really dreadfully sorry .
But when I explain ... . ''
`` The world is getting so matter-of-fact , '' said the Vicar .
`` The world , '' roared the Curate , `` grows blacker every day .
But to find a man in your position , shamelessly , openly ... . ''
_ '' said the Vicar aside .
`` Look here , Mendham , you really misunderstand .
I can assure you ... . ''
The Vicar 's hand fluttered about his chin .
`` It 's such a round-about story , '' he said .
`` We teach the people differently , '' said the Vicar .
`` My dear Mendham , '' said the Vicar , `` a few words from me ... . ''
_ '' said the Curate again .
And then turning suddenly on the Vicar , `` Where does he come from ? ''
`` He _says_ he is an Angel ! ''
`` Why do n't you listen to him ? ''
`` But stop and look at his wings ! ''
`` I can assure you he has wings ! ''
Mendham had his fingers on the door-handle .
`` I have seen quite enough , '' he said .
`` It may be this is simply a foolish attempt at a hoax , Hilyer . ''
The Curate halted in the doorway and looked at the Vicar over his shoulder .
The accumulating judgment of months found vent .
`` I can not understand , Hilyer , why you are in the Church .
For the life of me I can not .
The air is full of Social Movements , of Economic change , the Woman Movement , Rational Dress , The Reunion of Christendom , Socialism , Individualism -- all the great and moving Questions of the Hour !
Surely , we who follow the Great Reformer ... .
And here you are stuffing birds , and startling ladies with your callous disregard ... . ''
`` Nobody here , you know , has ever seen an Angel , or heard of one -- except in church .
If you had made your _debut_ in the chancel -- on Sunday -- it might have been different .
But that 's too late now ... .
_ ) Nobody , absolutely nobody , will believe in you . ''
`` Not at all , '' said the Vicar ; `` not at all .
Naturally it may be inconvenient if you tell a too incredible story .
If I might suggest ( _ahem_ ) -- -- . ''
`` A convenient view , at any rate , '' said the Vicar .
`` We always do ours , '' said the Angel .
`` Well , '' said the Vicar ( _crack_ ) .
`` No -- she is not a lady .
She is a servant . ''
`` Pain comes into their lives more and more .
And then they go .
They do not like to go , but they have to -- out of this world , very reluctantly , clutching its pain at last in their eagerness to stop ... . ''
`` A little while ago I was a little pink baby . ''
`` And then you were a little boy ? ''
`` And you have your little pink babies ? ''
`` And you have to eat like this every day ? ''
`` Yah -- -- oh ! ''
said the Angel suddenly .
A higher power seemed suddenly to stretch my mouth open and a great breath of air went rushing down my throat . ''
`` You yawned , '' said the Vicar .
`` Do you never yawn in the angelic country ? ''
So the Vicar explained darkness to him and the art of going to bed .
( The Angels , it seems sleep only in order to dream , and dream , like primitive man , with their foreheads on their knees .
And they sleep among the white poppy meadows in the heat of the day . )
The Angel found the bedroom arrangements quaint enough .
`` It 's a perfect mystery to me , my dear . ''
( Flick , flick of laces . )
`` Hallucination is the only charitable -- -- ''
`` I know what men are , of course . ''
`` It was a young man of nineteen or twenty , '' said the Curate .
The Curate came and stood by the fire , fumbling with his braces .
Mrs Mendham liked a fire even in the summer .
`` He shirks all the serious problems in life and is always trifling with some new foolishness , '' said the Curate .
`` Angel indeed ! ''
`` Hilyer _must_ be mad , '' he said .
`` I shall write to Austin .
He will be sure to tell the Bishop , you know .
And you must remember , my dear -- -- ''
And thus in the little bedroom over the gable we reach a first resting place in this story .
And as we have been hard at it , getting our story spread out before you , it may be perhaps well to recapitulate a little .
The Vicar going to call the Angel , found him dressed and leaning out of his window .
It was a glorious morning , still dewy , and the rising sunlight slanting round the corner of the house , struck warm and yellow upon the hillside .
The birds were astir in the hedges and shrubbery .
Up the hillside -- for it was late in August -- a plough drove slowly .
The Angel 's chin rested upon his hands and he did not turn as the Vicar came up to him .
`` It is , '' admitted the Vicar .
`` But he has to do it to get a living , you know .
To get food to eat and all that kind of thing . ''
`` That seems an easy question to you , '' said the Vicar , `` but really !
Our social arrangements are rather complicated .
It's impossible to explain these things all at once , before breakfast .
Don't you feel hungry ? ''
`` I 'm puzzled , '' said the Angel .
The Angel walked slowly , his white hands folded behind his hunched back , his sweet face looking this way and that .
He peered curiously into the eyes of the people he met .
A little child picking a bunch of vetch and honeysuckle looked in his face , and forthwith came and put them in his hand .
It was about the only kindness he had from a human being ( saving only the Vicar and one other ) .
He heard Mother Gustick scolding that granddaughter of hers as he passed the door .
`` You _Brazen_ Faggit -- you ! ''
`` You Trumpery Baggage ! ''
Then the Angel came in sight of the forge , where Sandy Bright 's brother was shoeing a horse for the carter from Upmorton .
Two hobbledehoys were standing by the forge staring in a bovine way at the proceedings .
As the Angel approached these two and then the carter turned slowly through an angle of thirty degrees and watched his approach , staring quietly and steadily at him .
The expression on their faces was one of abstract interest .
Then the silence healed again , and they resumed their quiet expressionless consideration of the Angel 's retreating figure .
`` He looks Frenchified , '' said Susan Hopper , peering through the interstices of that convenient veil on curiosity .
The Angel watched the second tinker walk back , and , with affectionate blasphemy , assist the first to his hat and his coat .
Then he turned , absolutely mystified , towards the village again .
The Angel turned towards them .
He was struck by the queer little heads sticking up over the lichenous wall .
He smiled faintly at their staring faces , and then turned to marvel at the iron railings that enclosed the Fitz-Jarvis tomb .
`` A queer air of uncertainty , '' he said .
`` Slabs , piles of stone , these railings ... .
... Do these Dead ever try and get up again ?
There 's an air of repression -- fortification -- -- ''
`` Where did you get that _'at_ ? ''
sang another little boy .
`` Where did you get them clo'es ? ''
`` They ask questions that they evidently do not want answered , '' said the Angel .
`` I can tell from the tone . ''
He looked thoughtfully at the little boys .
`` I do n't understand the methods of Human intercourse .
These are probably friendly advances , a kind of ritual .
But I do n't know the responses .
I think I will go back to the little fat man in black , with the gold chain across his stomach , and ask him to explain .
It is difficult . ''
This made all the little boys laugh .
A second imitating the first , said `` _Oh !
_ '' and hit the Angel .
His astonishment was really delicious .
They all began crying `` _Oh !
_ '' and throwing beechnut husks .
One hit the Angel 's hand , another stung him smartly by the ear .
The Angel made ungainly movements towards them .
He spluttered some expostulation and made for the roadway .
The little boys were amazed and shocked at his discomfiture and cowardice .
Such sawney behaviour could not be encouraged .
The pelting grew vigorously .
You may perhaps be able to imagine those vivid moments , daring small boys running in close and delivering shots , milder small boys rushing round behind with flying discharges .
Milton Screever 's mongrel dog was roused to yelping ecstacy at the sight , and danced ( full of wild imaginings ) nearer and nearer to the angelic legs .
`` My what ? ''
`` Not at all . ''
`` Do n't spoil everything by denying it .
It is so very , very plain , to a woman of the world .
She amuses me with her suspicions .
In a Curate 's wife .
But I hope it did n't happen when you were in orders . ''
`` Lady Hammergallow , I protest .
Upon my word . ''
`` We will help him together , Mr Hilyer .
You may rely upon me .
It is most romantic . ''
`` I can assure you most solemnly -- ''
`` I thought so .
And being a cripple -- ''
`` Not another word ! ''
said Lady Hammergallow , still resolutely holding her speaking trumpet before her and clutching her eyeglasses .
`` I really must not leave those horses .
Cutler is so annoyed if I keep them too long .
He finds waiting tedious , poor man , unless there is a public-house near . ''
She made for the door .
`` I never saw anything heal so well in my life , '' he said , as they walked into the dining-room .
`` Your blood and flesh must be as clean and free from bacteria as they make 'em .
Whatever stuff there is in your head , '' he added _sotto voce_ .
`` I can assure you ... . ''
Crump tucked in the corners of his mouth and shook his head from side to side even as he had done to the Vicar .
`` No good , '' he said , `` ca n't alter our ideas just because an irresponsible visitor ... . ''
The Angel stared at him for a minute round-eyed , and then was seized for the second time by the human disorder of laughter .
`` Very well , thank you , '' said the Angel , who had mastered the phrase .
`` I have nothing in my pocket , '' said the Angel .
`` It 's a thing these here vivisectionists do .
They takes a frog and they cuts out his brains and they shoves a bit of pith in the place of 'em .
That 's a pithed frog .
Well -- that there village is full of pithed human beings . ''
`` I begin to understand , '' said the Angel , rather dubiously .
`` All that 's pretty and lively of the gals they chucks into the gutters , and all the men with a pennorth of spunk or adventure , all who won't drink what the Curate 's wife sends 'em instead of beer , and touch their hats promiscous , and leave the rabbits and birds alone for their betters , gets drove out of the villages as rough characters .
Talk about improvin ' the race !
Wot 's left aint fit to look a nigger in the face , a Chinaman 'ud be ashamed of 'em ... . ''
`` And now , dear , I want you to tell me frankly -- Do you really believe that creature was a man ? ''
`` But kilts , '' said Mrs Jehoram .
`` Are all very well in the Highlands ... . ''
`` His dress , '' said Mrs Mendham , `` is _quite_ respectable now . ''
`` He looks cross ! ''
`` We are going to educate the folks .
At any rate I mean to see him . ''
`` Yet they do n't like pain , '' said the Angel .
`` The sweet briar , '' said the Vicar .
`` I remember . ''
`` But why does everyone -- everything -- want to give pain ? ''
`` But this world is different .
It is the very reverse of an Angelic world .
Indeed , a number of people -- excellent religious people -- have been so impressed by the universality of pain that they think , after death , things will be even worse for a great many of us .
It seems to me an excessive view .
But it 's a deep question .
Almost beyond one 's power of discussion -- -- ''
`` He is _incog._ '' ; said the very eldest Miss Papaver to Mrs Pirbright .
`` Is n't it quaint and delicious .
Jessica Jehoram says she saw him at Vienna , but she ca n't remember the name .
The Vicar knows all about him , but he is so close -- -- ''
-- I think so too , '' said the younger Miss Pirbright .
`` Can you do Imitations , Mr Angel ? ''
`` What an odd kind of book ! ''
`` What do all those crazy dots mean ? ''
( At that the Vicar 's blood ran cold . )
Then the eldest Miss Papaver turned upon the Vicar .
`` Does not Mr Angel play from ordinary ... .
Music -- from the ordinary notation ? ''
said the Angel perplexed .
`` Are these notes ? ''
The Vicar felt that the heavens had fallen .
He sat crumpled up in his chair , a shattered man .
Lady Hammergallow sat down next to him without appearing to see him .
She was breathing heavily , but her face was terribly calm .
Was the Angel grossly ignorant or only grossly impertinent ?
The Angel was vaguely aware of some frightful offence , aware that in some mysterious way he had ceased to be the centre of the gathering .
He saw reproachful despair in the Vicar 's eye .
He drifted slowly towards the window in the recess and sat down on the little octagonal Moorish stool by the side of Mrs Jehoram .
And under the circumstances he appreciated at more than its proper value Mrs Jehoram's kindly smile .
He put down the violin in the window seat .
Mrs Jehoram and the Angel ( apart ) -- Mr Wilmerdings playing .
`` This is so -- cold , '' said the Angel .
`` So harsh ! ''
He meant the whole world .
`` Her name , '' said the Angel ( Mrs Jehoram made a movement ) `` is Delia .
She is ... . ''
The Polonaise terminated with a flourish .
The Angel was quite surprised at the change in Mrs Jehoram 's expression .
`` One has to be so very careful , '' said the very eldest Miss Papaver .
THE TROUBLE OF THE BARBED WIRE .
`` He asked me to find out who did it .
Course I 've had to do my duty , Sir .
Naturally a disagreeable one . ''
`` I thought I 'd tell you , Sir , '' said Horrocks .
`` Yes , '' said the Vicar .
`` Thanks , Horrocks , thanks ! ''
He scratched the back of his head .
`` You might perhaps ...
I think it 's the best way ... Quite sure Mr Angel did it ? ''
Delia was thinking , vaguely , wonderfully , as girls will think .
It was feeling rather than thinking ; clouds of beautiful translucent emotion drove across the clear sky of her mind , taking shape that changed and vanished .
She had all that wonderful emotional tenderness , that subtle exquisite desire for self-sacrifice , which exists so inexplicably in a girl 's heart , exists it seems only to be presently trampled under foot by the grim and gross humours of daily life , to be ploughed in again roughly and remorselessly , as the farmer ploughs in the clover that has sprung up in the soil .
She had been looking out at the tranquillity of the moonlight long before the Angel began to play , -- waiting ; then suddenly the quiet , motionless beauty of silver and shadow was suffused with tender music .
`` You did not know him before this affair .
He 's changed tremendously .
He used to be neat and comfortable .
For the last fortnight he 's been hazy , with a far-away look in his eyes .
He preached last Sunday without his cuff links , and something wrong with his tie , and he took for his text , 'Eye hath not seen nor ear heard . '
He really believes all this nonsense about the Angel-land .
The man is verging on monomania ! ''
`` Prison , '' said the Angel .
Let me see . ''
Then he remembered the Vicar 's explanation .
`` Not that ! ''
He approached Crump with eyes dilated and hands outstretched .
`` But I tell you -- I assure you the thing is so -- I know nothing , or at least remember nothing of anything I knew of this world before I found myself in the darkness of night on the moorland above Sidderford . ''
`` And you really , '' said Crump , suddenly coming round upon him and looking into his eyes ; `` You really believe you were eternally in a kind of glorious heaven before then ? ''
said Crump , and lit his pipe .
He sat smoking , elbow on knee , for some time , and the Angel sat and watched him .
Then his face grew less troubled .
`` It is just possible , '' he said to himself rather than to the Angel , and began another piece of silence .
`` You have such an ingenuous face .
You almost force me to believe you .
You are certainly not an ordinary lunatic .
Your mind -- except for your isolation from the past -- seems balanced enough .
I wish Nordau or Lombroso or some of these _Saltpetriere_ men could have a look at you .
Down here one gets no practice worth speaking about in mental cases .
There 's one idiot -- and he 's just a damned idiot of an idiot -- ; all the rest are thoroughly sane people . ''
`` Then I shall only go into another village . ''
`` That 's not my affair , '' said Crump .
`` Go where you like .
Leave these three people , the Vicar , Shine , the little servant girl , whose heads are all spinning with galaxies of Angels ... . ''
Sir John Gotch was a little man with scrubby hair , a small , thin nose sticking out of a face crackled with wrinkles , tight brown gaiters , and a riding whip .
`` I 've come , you see , '' he said , as Mrs Hinijer closed the door .
`` Glad to be of any service to you , '' said Sir John Gotch .
( Angular attitude . )
The Vicar 's face suddenly became bright red .
`` You see , '' said the Vicar in horrible perplexity .
`` Such as ... _'im_ !
Do I understand you , Mrs Hinijer , that you don't like Mr Angel ? ''
`` You see , sir , before I came to you , sir , I was at Lord Dundoller's seventeen years , and you , sir -- if you will excuse me -- are a perfect gentleman yourself , sir -- though in the Church .
And then ... . ''
`` There is the violin , '' said the Vicar .
`` Only after our experience -- -- ''
`` Do not trouble overmuch for me , my friend , '' said the Angel .
`` At least this life of yours ends .
And there are things in it .
There is something in this life of yours -- -- Your care for me !
I thought there was nothing beautiful at all in life -- -- ''
Delia sat with her window open , hoping to hear the Angel play .
But that night there was to be no playing .
The sky was overcast , yet not so thickly but that the moon was visible .
High up a broken cloud-lace drove across the sky , and now the moon was a hazy patch of light , and now it was darkened , and now rode clear and bright and sharply outlined against the blue gulf of night .
And presently she heard the door into the garden opening , and a figure came out under the drifting pallor of the moonlight .
She hesitated , then stood up and flitted swiftly towards the door , went slipping quietly downstairs and out into the moonlight .
The Angel still lay upon the lawn , and sobbed for utter wretchedness .
The Angel said not a word .
He was looking at her little face in the bright moonlight , with an expression of uncomprehending wonder in his eyes .
`` This strange world ! ''
`` _1 Leather Portmanteau ( had better see these ) ._ ''
And so forth -- meanderingly .
It kept the Vicar busy until lunch time , though his heart ached .
He came down and went into his study and lit his reading lamp , a patent affair with an incandescent wick , dropping the match into his waste-paper basket without stopping to see if it was extinguished .
Then he fretted into the dining-room and began a desultory attack on the cooling dinner ... .
_ '' said the Angel .
`` I 'm -- -- -- , '' said Sir John Gotch , meditating some cataclysmal expletive .
But he could think of nothing more than `` damned . ''
`` Get out of this wood , '' he said .
He made one step towards him , with the whip raised , and then something happened that neither he nor the Angel properly understood .
The Angel seemed to leap into the air , a pair of grey wings flashed out at the Squire , he saw a face bearing down upon him , full of the wild beauty of passionate anger .
His riding whip was torn out of his hand .
His horse reared behind him , pulled him over , gained his bridle and fled .
He started back from the motionless figure .
_ '' he said suddenly , and turning , panic stricken , fled headlong through the wood .
He found himself thrusting through an excited , swaying crowd , all staring at the flames , and with the red reflection in their eyes .
For a moment the Angel stood staring .
Then in a flash he saw it all , saw this grim little world of battle and cruelty , transfigured in a splendour that outshone the Angelic Land , suffused suddenly and insupportably glorious with the wonderful light of Love and Self-Sacrifice .
He gave a strange cry , and before anyone could stop him , was running towards the burning building .
There were cries of `` The Hunchback !
There was a cry of `` Delia '' and no more .
But suddenly the flames spurted out in a blinding glare that shot upward to an immense height , a blinding brilliance broken by a thousand flickering gleams like the waving of swords .
And a gust of sparks , flashing in a thousand colours , whirled up and vanished .
Just then , and for a moment by some strange accident , a rush of music , like the swell of an organ , wove into the roaring of the flames .
Unless mankind can readjust its political and social ideas to this essential new fact of its enormously enlarged powers , unless it can eliminate or control its pugnacity , no other prospect seems open to us but decadence , at least to such a level of barbarism as to lose and forget again all the scientific and industrial achievements of our present age .
Then , with its powers shrunken to their former puny scale , our race may recover some sort of balance between the injuries and advantages of conflict .
Or , since our decadent species may have less vitality and vigour than it had in its primitive phases , it may dwindle and fade out altogether before some emboldened animal antagonist , or through some world-wide disease brought to it perhaps by rats and dogs and insects and what not , who may be destined to be heirs to the rusting and mouldering ruins of the cities and ports and ways and bridges of to-day .
But is it so ?
If the mass of common men are incurably patriotic and belligerent why is there a note of querulous exhortation in nearly all patriotic literature ?
Why , for instance , is Mr. Rudyard Kipling's `` History of England '' so full of goading and scolding ?
And very significant indeed to any student of the human outlook was the world-response to President Wilson 's advocacy of the League of Nations idea , in its first phase in 1918 , before the weakening off and disillusionment of the Versailles Conference .
Just for a little while it seemed that President Wilson stood for a new order of things in the world , that he had the wisdom and will and power to break the net of hatreds and nationalisms and diplomacies in which the Old World was entangled .
And while he seemed to be capable of that , while he promised most in the way of change and national control , then it was that he found his utmost support in every country in the world .
In the latter half of 1918 there was scarcely a country anywhere in which one could not have found men ready to die for President Wilson .
A great hopefulness was manifest in the world .
It faded , it faded very rapidly again .
But that brief wave of enthusiasm , which set minds astir with the same great idea of one peace of justice throughout the earth in China and Bokhara and the Indian bazaars , in Iceland and Basutoland and Ireland and Morocco , was indeed a fact perhaps more memorable in history even than the great war itself .
It displayed a possibility of the simultaneous operation of the same general ideas throughout the world quite beyond any previous experience .
It demonstrated that the generality of men are as capable of being cosmopolitan and pacifist as they are of being patriotic and belligerent .
Both moods are extensions and exaltations beyond the everyday life , which itself is neither one thing nor the other .
And both are transitory moods , responses to external suggestion .
We have already stated the clear necessity , if mankind is not to perish by the hypertrophy of warfare , for the establishment of an armed and strong world law .
Here in this spirit that has already gleamed upon the world is the possible force to create and sustain such a world law .
What is it that intervenes between the universal human need and its satisfaction ?
Why , since there are overwhelming reasons for it and a widespread disposition for it , is there no world-wide creative effort afoot now in which men and women by the million are participating -- and participating with all their hearts ?
Why is it that , except for the weak gestures of the Geneva League of Nations and a little writing of books and articles , a little pamphleteering , some scattered committee activities on the part of people chiefly of the busybody class , an occasional speech and a diminishing volume of talk and allusion , no attempts are apparent to stay the plain drift of human society towards new conflicts and the sluices of final disaster ?
The answer to that Why , probes deep into the question of human motives .
As we have examined this problem it has become clear that the task of bringing about that consolidated world state which is necessary to prevent the decline and decay of mankind is not primarily one for the diplomatists and lawyers and politicians at all .
It is an educational one .
It is a moral based on an intellectual reconstruction .
The task immediately before mankind is to find release from the contentious loyalties and hostilities of the past which make collective world-wide action impossible at the present time , in a world-wide common vision of the history and destinies of the race .
On that as a basis , and on that alone , can a world control be organized and maintained .
The effort demanded from mankind , therefore , is primarily and essentially a bold reconstruction of the outlook upon life of hundreds of millions of minds .
The idea of a world commonweal has to be established as the criterion of political institutions , and also as the criterion of general conduct in hundreds of millions of brains .
It has to dominate education everywhere in the world .
When that end is achieved , then the world state will be achieved , and it can be achieved in no other way .
And unless that world state can be achieved , it would seem that the outlook before mankind is a continuance of disorder and of more and more destructive and wasteful conflicts , a steady process of violence , decadence , and misery towards extinction , or towards modifications of our type altogether beyond our present understanding and sympathy .
Since the armistice there has been an extraordinary opportunity for the British monarchy to have displayed a sense of the new occasions before the world , and to have led the way towards the efforts and renunciations of an international renascence .
It could have taken up a lead that the President of the United States had initiated and relinquished ; it could have used its peculiar position to make an unexampled appeal to the whole world .
It could have created a new epoch in history .
The Prince of Wales has been touring the world-wide dominions of which , some day , he is to be the crowned head .
He has received addresses , visited sights , been entertained , shaken hands with scores of thousands of people and submitted himself to the eager , yet unpenetrating gaze of vast multitudes .
His smallest acts have been observed with premeditated admiration , his lightest words recorded .
He is not now a boy ; he saw something of the great war , even if his exalted position denied him any large share of its severer hardships and dangers ; he can not be blind to the general posture of the world 's affairs .
Here , surely , was a chance of saying something that would be heard from end to end of the earth , something kingly and great-minded .
Here was the occasion for a fine restatement of the obligations and duties of empire .
But from first to last the prince has said nothing to quicken the imaginations of the multitude of his future subjects to the gigantic possibilities of these times , nothing to reassure the foreign observer that the British Empire embodies anything more than the colossal national egotism and impenetrable self-satisfaction of the British peoples .
`` Here we are , '' said the old order in those demonstrations , `` and here we mean to stick .
Just as we have been , so we remain .
-- we are Bourbons . ''
These smiling tours of the Prince of Wales in these years of shortage , stress , and insecurity , constitute a propaganda of inanity unparalleled in the world 's history .
Nor do we find in the nominal rulers and official representatives of other countries any clear admission of the necessity for a great and fundamental change in the scope and spirit of government .
These official and ruling people , more than any other people , are under the sway of that life of use and wont which dominates us all .
They are often trained to their positions , or they have won their way to their positions of authority through a career of political activities which amounts to a training .
And that training is not a training in enterprise and change ; it is a training in sticking tight and getting back to precedent .
We can expect nothing from them .
We shall be lucky if the resistance of the administrative side of existing states to the conception of a world commonweal is merely passive .
There is little or no prospect of any existing governing system , unless it be such a federal system as Switzerland or the United States , passing directly and without extensive internal changes into combination with other sovereign powers as part of a sovereign world system .
At some point the independent states will as systems resist , and unless an overwhelming world conscience for the world state has been brought into being and surrounds them with an understanding watchfulness , and invades the consciences of their supporters and so weakens their resisting power , they will resist violently and disastrously .
But it will be an incoherent resistance because the very nature of the sovereign states of to-day is incoherence .
There can be no world-wide combination of sovereign states to resist the world state , because that would be to create the world state in the attempt to defeat it .
Given a world law and world security , a release from the net of bickering frontiers , world-wide freedom of movement , and world-wide fellowship , a thousand good things that are now beyond hope or dreaming would come into the ordinary life .
The whole world would be our habitation , and the energies of men , released from their preoccupation with contention , would go more and more abundantly into the accumulation and application of scientific knowledge , that is to say into the increase of mental and bodily health , of human power , of interest and happiness .
Even to-day the most delightful possibilities stand waiting , inaccessible to nearly all of us because of the general insecurity , distrust and anger .
Flying , in a world safely united in peace , could take us now to the ends of the earth smoothly , securely through the sweet upper air , in five or six days .
In two or three years there could again be abundance of food and pleasant clothing for everyone throughout the whole world .
Men could be destroying their slums and pestilential habitations and rebuilding spacious and beautiful cities .
Given only peace and confidence and union we could double our yearly production of all that makes life desirable and still double our leisure for thought and growth .
We could live in a universal palace and make the whole globe our garden and playground .
Even in England and Scotland , in Holland and Denmark and Sweden , it is hard to determine whether things are stagnant or moving forward or moving back -- they are certainly not going ahead as they were before 1913-14 .
The feeling in England is rather like the feeling of a man who is not quite sure whether he has caught a slight chill or whether he is in the opening stage of a serious illness .
This adjustment is a subtle and a difficult task .
It is also a greatly neglected task .
And upon the possibility of our making this adjustment depends the issue whether the ebb of civilizing energy , the actual smashing and breaking down of modern civilization , which has already gone very far indeed in Russia and which is going on in most of Eastern and Central Europe , extends to the whole civilized world .
Let me make a very rough and small scale analysis of what is happening to the world to-day .
And let us disregard many very important issues and concentrate upon the chief , most typical issue , the revolution in the facilities of locomotion and communication that has occurred to the world and the consequences of that revolution .
For the international problem to-day is essentially dependent upon the question of transport and communication -- all others are subordinate to that .
I shall particularly call your attention to certain wide differences between the American case and the old-world case in this matter .
Now this great community of the United States is , I repeat , an altogether new thing in history .
There have been great empires before with populations exceeding 100 millions , but these were associations of divergent peoples ; there has never been one single people on this scale before .
We want a new term for this new thing .
We call the United States a country , just as we call France or Holland a country .
But really the two things are as different as an automobile and a one-horse shay .
They are the creations of different periods and different conditions ; they are going to work at a different pace and in an entirely different way .
If you propose -- as I gather some of the League of Nations people propose -- to push the Peace of the World along on a combination of these two sorts of vehicle , I venture to think the Peace of the World will be subjected to some very considerable strains .
The States of Europe , excepting Russia , were already a settled , established and balanced system .
They were living in final and conclusive boundaries with no further possibility of peaceful expansion .
Every extension of a European state involved a war ; it was only possible through war .
And while the limits to the United States have been set by the steamship and the railroad , the limits to the European sovereign states were drawn at a much earlier time .
They were drawn by the horse , and particularly the coach-horse travelling along the high road .
If you will examine a series of political maps of Europe for the last two thousand years , you will see that there has evidently been a definite limit to the size of sovereign states through all that time , due to the impossibility of keeping them together because of the difficulty of intercommunication if they grew bigger .
And this was in spite of the fact that there were two great unifying ideas present in men 's minds in Europe throughout that period , namely , the unifying idea of the Roman Empire , and the unifying idea of Christendom .
Both these ideas tended to make Europe one , but the difficulties of communication defeated that tendency .
It is quite interesting to watch the adventures of what is called first the Roman Empire and afterwards the Holy Roman Empire , in a series of historical maps .
It keeps expanding and then dropping to pieces again .
It is like the efforts of someone who is trying to pack up a parcel which is much too big , in wet blotting paper .
The cohesion was inadequate .
And so it was that the eighteenth century found Europe still divided up into what I may perhaps call these high-road and coach-horse states , each with a highly developed foreign policy , each with an intense sense of national difference and each with intense traditional antagonisms .
The citizens of the United States of America are not without their experience in this matter .
The crisis of the national history of the American community , the war between Union and Secession , was essentially a crisis between the great state of the new age and the local feeling of an earlier period .
Americans live now in a generation that has almost forgotten that there once seemed a possibility that the map of North America might be broken up at last into as many communities as the map of Europe .
Except by foreign travel , the present generation of Americans can have no idea of the net of vexations and limitations in which Europeans are living at the present time because of their political disunion .
Each of these endorsements necessitates something vexatious , personal attendance , photography , stamps , rubber stamps , mysterious signatures and the like , and always the payment of fees .
Also they necessitate delays .
The other day I had occasion to go to Moscow , and I learnt that it takes three weeks to get a visa for Finland and three weeks to get a visa for Esthonia .
You see you ca n't travel about Europe at all without weeks and weeks of preparation .
The preparations for a little journey to Russia the other day took three whole days out of my life , cost me several pounds in stamps and fees , and five in bribery .
He will then travel for a few hours to the German frontier .
There he will be bundled out again .
The French will investigate him closely to see that he is not carrying gold or large sums of money out of France .
Then he will be handed over to the Germans .
He will go through the same business with the customs and the same business with the money .
His French money is no further use to him and he must get German .
A few more hours and he will arrive on the frontier of Bohemia .
Same search for gold .
Then customs ' examination and change of money again .
A few hours more and he will be in Poland .
Search for gold , customs , fresh money .
Arrived in Warsaw , he will probably need a permit to stay there , and he will certainly need no end of permits to leave .
Now here is a fuss over a fiddling little journey of 1,100 miles .
Is it any wonder that the bookings from London to Warsaw are infinitesimal in comparison with the bookings from New York to St. Louis ?
But what I have noted here are only the normal inconveniences of the traveller .
They are by no means the most serious inconveniences .
All these are the normal inconveniences of the national divisions of Europe in peace time .
By themselves they are strangling all hope of economic recovery .
For Europe is _not_ getting on to its feet economically .
Only a united effort can effect that .
But along each of the ridiculously restricted frontiers into which the European countries are packed , lies also the possibility of war .
National independence means the right to declare war .
And so each of these packed and strangulated European countries is obliged , by its blessed independence , to maintain as big an army and as big a military equipment as its bankrupt condition -- for we are all bankrupt -- permits .
Now I have dwelt on these differences between America and Europe because they involve an absolute difference in outlook towards world peace projects , towards leagues of nations , world states and the like , between the American and the European .
The British Empire is a modern ocean state just as the United States is a modern continental state .
The political and economic cohesion of the British Empire rests upon this one thing , upon the steamship remaining the dominant and secure means of world transport in the future .
If the British Empire is to remain sovereign and secure and independent of the approval and co-operation of other states , it is necessary that steamship transport ( ocean transport ) should remain dominant in peace and invulnerable in war .
In my opening argument I have shown the connexion between the present intense political troubles of the world and more particularly of Europe , and the advance in mechanical knowledge during the past hundred and fifty years .
I have shown that without a very drastic readjustment of political ideas and habits , there opens before Europe and the world generally , a sure prospect of degenerative conflicts ; that without such a readjustment , our civilization has passed its zenith and must continue the process of collapse that has been in progress since August , 1914 .
Do we want to get rid of patriotism altogether ?
Now I am told it sometimes helps scientific men to clear up their ideas about a process by imagining that process reversed and so getting a view of it from a different direction .
Let us then , for a few moments , instead of talking of the expansion and synthesis of patriotism in Europe , imagine a development of narrow patriotism in America and consider how that case could be dealt with .
What would an American citizen think of such an outbreak ?
He would probably think that Kentucky had gone mad .
But this , which seems such fantastic behaviour when we imagine it occurring in Kentucky , is exactly what is happening in Europe in the case of little states that are hardly any larger than Kentucky .
They have always been so .
They have not gone mad ; if this sort of thing is madness then they were born mad .
And they have never been cured .
A state of affairs that is regarded in Europe as normal would be regarded in the United States as a grave case of local mental trouble .
The first task before us in Europe is , at any cost , to release our children from this nationalist obsession , to teach the mass of European people a little truthful history in which each one will see the past and future of his own country in their proper proportions , and a little truthful ethnology in which each country will get over the delusion that its people are a distinct and individual race .
The history teaching in the schools of Europe is at the very core of this business .
No doubt the most evident synthetic forces in America at the present time point towards some sort of pan-American unification .
That is the nearest thing .
That may come first .
But are we to contemplate a sort of dual world -- the New World against the Old ?
For the idea of Man , for human unity , for our common blood , for the one order of the world , I can imagine men living and dying , but not for a miscellaneous assembly that will not mix -- even in its name .
It has no central idea , no heart to it , this League of Nations formula .
It is weak and compromising just where it should be strong -- in defining its antagonism to separate national sovereignty .
For that is what it aims at , if it means business .
If it means business it means at least a super-state overriding the autonomy of existing states , and if it does not mean business then we have no use for it whatever .
I think there is .
I would suggest that the general tendency of thought about these things to-day is altogether too sceptical of what teaching and propaganda can do in these matters .
In the past there have been very great changes in human thought .
I need scarcely remind you of the spread of Christianity in Western Europe .
In a few centuries the whole of Western Europe was changed from the wild confusion of warring tribes that succeeded the breakdown of the Roman Empire , into the unity of Christendom , into a community with such an idea of unity that it could be roused from end to end by the common idea of the Crusades .
Still more remarkable was the swift transformation in less than a century of all the nations and peoples to the south and west of the Mediterranean , from Spain to Central Asia , into the unity of Islam , a unity which has lasted to this day .
In both these cases , what I may call the mental turnover was immense .
Let us try to imagine what a World Government would be like .
I find that when one speaks of a World State people think at once of some existing government and magnify it to world proportions .
They ask , for example , where will the World Congress meet ; and how will you elect your World President ?
Wo n't your World President , they say , be rather a tremendous personage ?
How are we to choose him ?
Or will there be a World King ?
These are very natural questions , at the first onset .
But are they sound questions ?
May they not be a little affected by false analogies ?
The governing of the whole of the world may turn out to be _not_ a magnified version of governing a part of the world , but a different sort of job altogether .
These analogies that people draw so readily from national states may not really work in a world state .
There will be a ministry of posts , transport and communications generally .
He will learn of the peoples and nations of the past , and how each one has brought its peculiar gifts and its distinctive contribution to the accumulating inheritance of our race .
He will learn an outline of all that mankind knows and of the fascinating realms of half knowledge in which man is still struggling to know .
His curiosity and his imagination will be roused and developed .
Sometimes again , in other moods , it seems to me that these barriers and nationalities and separations are so illogical , so much a matter of tradition , so plainly mischievous and cruel , that at any time we may find the common sense of our race dissolving them away ... .
This was the period that produced the Quakers and a number of the most vigorous developments of Puritanism , in which the foundations of modern republicanism were laid , and in which the project of a world league of nations -- or rather of a world state -- received wide attention .
And the student of Comenius will find in him an active and sensitive mind responding with a most interesting similarity to our own responses , to the similar conditions of his time .
He has been distressed and dismayed -- as most of us have been distressed and dismayed -- by a rapid development of violence , by a great release of cruelty and suffering in human affairs .
He felt none of the security that was felt in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries of the _certainty_ of progress .
He realized as we do that the outlook for humanity is a very dark and uncertain one unless human effort is stimulated and organized .
He traced the evils of his time to human discords and divisions , to our political divisions , and the mutual misconceptions due to our diversity of languages and leading ideas .
In all that he might be writing and thinking in 1921 .
And his proposed remedies find an echo in a number of our contemporary movements .
He wanted to bring all nations to form one single state .
He wanted to have a universal language as the common medium of instruction and discussion , and he wanted to create a common Book of Necessary Knowledge , a sort of common basis of wisdom , for all educated men in the world .
You may say that no such book exists -- which is perfectly true -- and that no such book could be written .
But there I think you underrate the capacity of our English-speaking people .
It would be quite possible to get together a committee that would give us the compact and clear cosmogony of history that is needed .
Some of the greatest , most inspiring books and documents in the world have been produced by Committees : Magna Carta , the Declaration of Independence , the English Translation of the Bible , and the Prayer Book of the English Church are all the productions of committees , and they are all fine and inspiring compilations .
For the last three years I have been experimenting with this particular task , and , with the help of six other people , I have sketched out and published an outline of our world 's origins and history to show the sort of thing I mean .
That _Outline_ is , of course , a corrupting mass of faults and minor inaccuracies , but it does demonstrate the possibility of doing what is required .
And its reception both in America and England has shown how ready , how greedy many people are , on account of themselves and on account of their children , for an ordered general account of the existing knowledge of our place in space and time .
For want of anything better they have taken my _Outline_ very eagerly .
Far more eagerly would they have taken a finer , sounder and more authoritative work .
At intervals it would need to be revised , and it could be revised and brought up to date in the same manner .
You see then the first part of my project for a Bible of Civilization , a rewriting of Genesis and Exodus and Judges and Chronicles in terms of World History .
It would be a quite possible thing to do ... .
In no matter is this muddled civilization of ours more hopelessly at sixes and sevens than in this matter of the rights and duties of property .
Manifestly property is a trust for the community varying in its responsibilities with the nature of the property .
The property one has in one 's toothbrush is different from the property one has in ten thousand acres of land ; the property one has in a photograph of a friend is different from the property one has in some irreplaceable masterpiece of portraiture .
The former one may destroy with a good conscience , but not the latter .
At least so it seems to me .
Well , what were they ?
Our Canon I am afraid can not take in such things , and with the plays we must banish also all the novels ; the greater books of such writers as Cervantes , Defoe , Dickens , Fielding , Tolstoi , Hardy , Hamsun , that great succession of writers -- they are all good for `` example of life and instruction of manners , '' and to the Apocrypha they must go .
And so it is that since I would banish _Romeo and Juliet_ , I would also banish the Song of Songs , and since I must put away _Vanity Fair_ and the _Shabby Genteel Story_ , I would also put away _Esther_ and _Ruth_ .
And I find myself most reluctant to exclude not any novels written in English , but one or two great sweeping books by non-English writers .
It seems to me that Tolstoi 's _War and Peace_ and Hamsun 's _Growth of the Soil_ are books on an almost Biblical scale , that they deal with life so greatly as to come nearest to the idea of a universally inspiring and illuminating literature which underlies the idea of our Canon .
If we put in any whole novels into the Canon I would plead for these .
But I will not plead now even for these .
I do not think any novels at all can go into our modern Bible , as whole works .
The possibility of long passages going in , is of course , quite a different matter .
They must have some idea of it .
Otherwise they must be imposters .
I am loth to believe them imposters , mere adventurers who have blundered into positions of power and honour with no idea of what they are doing to the world .
But if they have an idea of what they are doing to the world , they foresee and intend a Future .
That , I take it , is sound reasoning and the inference is plain .
And again every statesman and every politician throughout the world says that the relations of industrial enterprise to the labour it employs are unsatisfactory .
But how are those relations going to develop ?
How do they mean them to develop ?
The Historical Books with maps and the like ; The Books of Conduct and Wisdom ; The Anthologies of Poetry and Literature ; and finally the Book of Forecasts , taking the place of the Prophets and Revelations .
And is this a mere fantastic talk , or is this a thing that could be done and that ought to be done ?
It is also a very practicable one .
The creation of such a Bible , its printing and its translation , and a propaganda that would carry it into the homes and schools of most of the world , could I think all be achieved by a few hundred resolute and capable people at a cost of thirty or forty million dollars .
That is a less sum than that the United States -- in a time when they have no enemy to fear in all the world -- are prepared to spend upon the building of what is for them an entirely superfluous and extravagant toy , a great navy .
I am going to discuss the possibility of raising the general educational level very considerably , and I am going to consider what such a raising of the educational level would mean in human life .
I ask you to note that qualification -- '' given the facilities . ''
Now I want to press home the idea of that difficulty .
I am an old and seasoned educationist ; most of my earliest writings are concealed in the anonymity of the London educational papers of a quarter of a century ago , and my knowledge of educational literature is fairly extensive .
I know in particular the literature of educational reform .
And I do not recall that I have ever encountered any recognition of this fundamental difficulty in the way of educational development .
The literature of educational reform is always assuming parents of limitless intelligence , sympathy and means , employing teachers of limitless energy and capacity .
And that to an extreme degree is what we have n't got and what we can never hope to have .
Educational reformers seem always to be looking at education from the point of view of the individual scholastic enterprise and of the individual pupil , and hardly ever from the point of view of a public task dealing with the community as a whole .
For all practical purposes this makes waste paper of a considerable proportion of educational literature .
This literature , the reader will find , is pervaded by certain fixed ideas .
There is a sort of standing objection to any _machining_ of education .
There is , we are constantly told , to be no syllabus of instruction , no examinations and no controls , no prescribed text-books or diagrams because these things limit the genius of the teacher .
And this goes on with a blissful invincible disregard of the fact that in nine hundred and ninety-nine cases out of the thousand the genius of the teacher is n't and ca n't be there .
And also of the fact that this affair of elementary education has in its essentials been done over and over and over again for thousands of millions of times .
There ought to be as much scope left for genius and originality in ordinary teaching as there is for genius and originality in a hen laying an ordinary egg .
These educational idealists are always disregarding the fundamental problem of educational organization altogether , the problem of economy , economy of the most precious thing of all , _teaching power_ .
It is the problem of stretching the competent teacher over the maximum number of pupils , and that can be done only by the same methods of economy that are practised in every other large-scale production -- by the standardization of everything that can be standardized , and by the use of every possible time and labour-saving device and every possible replacement of human effort , not in order to dispense with originality and initiative but in order to conserve them for application at their points of maximum efficiency .
Let me first suggest that every school should have a complete library of very full and explicit lesson notes , properly sorted and classified .
All the ordinary subjects in schools have been taught over and over again millions and millions of times .
Few people , I think , realize that , and fewer still realize the reasonable consequences of that .
Human minds are very much the same everywhere , and the best way of teaching every ordinary school subject , the best possible lesson and the best possible succession of lessons , ought to have been worked out to the last point , and the courses ought to have been stereotyped long ago .
Yet if you go into any school to-day , in ninety-nine cases out of the hundred you will find an inexpert and ill-prepared young teacher giving a clumsy , vamped-up lesson as though it had never been given before .
He or she will have no proper notes and no proper diagrams , and a halting and faulty discourse will be eked out by feeble scratchings with chalk on a blackboard , by querulous questioning of the pupils , and irrelevancies .
The thing is preposterous .
Now that is the sort of thing that still goes on .
But it ought to be entirely out of date .
All that scientific bric-a-brac in the cupboard had far better be thrown away .
All the demonstration experiments that science teachers will require in the future can be performed once for all -- before a cinematograph .
They can be done _finally_ ; they need never be done again .
You can get the best and most dexterous teacher in the world -- he can do what has to be done with the best apparatus , in the best light ; anything that is very minute or subtle you can magnify or repeat from another point of view ; anything that is intricate you can record with extreme slowness ; you can show the facts a mile off or six inches off , and all that your actual class teacher need do now is to spend five minutes on getting out the films he wants , ten minutes in reading over the corresponding lecture notes , and then he can run the film , give the lesson , question his class upon it , note what they miss and how they take it , run the film again for a second scrutiny , and get out for the subsequent study of the class the ample supply of diagrams and pictures needed to fix the lesson .
Can there be any comparison between the educational efficiency of the two methods ?
It was in the college stage that most of us made out our religion and made it real for ourselves .
It was then we really took hold of social and political ideas , when we became alive to literature and art , when we began the delightful and distressful enterprise of finding ourselves .
I am so far a believer in a biological backbone for the college phase of education that I have secured it for my sons and I have done all I can to extend it in England .
Nevertheless , important as that formal college work was to me , it still seems to me that the informal part of our college life -- the talk , the debates , the discussion , the scampering about London to attend great political meetings , to hear William Morris on Socialism , Auberon Herbert on Individualism , Gladstone on Home Rule , or Bradlaugh on Atheism -- for those were the lights of my remote student days -- was about equally important .
Could we not do much more than we do to make the broad issues of various current questions plain and accessible to our students in the college stage ?
Let me instance my own case .
I am a man of Protestant origins and with a Protestant habit of mind .
But it is a matter of great regret to me that there is no good Roman Catholic propaganda available for my sons in their college life .
I would like to have the old Mother Church giving my boys an account of herself and of the part she has played in the history of the world , telling them what she stands for and claims to be , giving her own account of the Mass .
These things are interwoven with our past ; they are part of us .
I do not like them to go into a church and stare like foreigners and strangers at the altar .
But you will find most colleges and most college societies bar religious instruction and discussion .
What do they think they are training ?
Some sort of genteel recluse -- or men and women ?
Concurrently with it there will be going on , as I have said , a man's special technical training .
He will be preparing himself for a life of industrialism , commerce , engineering , agriculture , medicine , administration , education or what not .
And as with the man , so with the woman .
That , too , is a process which in this changing new world of ours can never be completed .
Neither of these college activities will ever really leave off .
All through his life a man or woman should be confirming , fixing or modifying his or her general opinions ; and all the time his or her technical knowledge and power should be consciously increased .
Can we extend it over most or all of a modern population ?
Now we have to remember that the bulk of this great organization of newspapers and periodicals and all the wide distribution of books that goes on to-day are extremely recent things .
This new nexus of print has grown up in the lifetime of four or five generations , and it is undergoing constant changes .
We are apt to forget its extreme newness in history and to disregard the profound difference in mental conditions it makes between our own times and any former period .
It is impossible to believe that thus far it is anything but a sketch and intimation of what it will presently be .
No man foresaw it ; no one planned it .
We of this generation have grown up with it and are in the habit of behaving as though this nexus had always been with us and as though it would certainly remain with us .
The latter conclusion is almost wilder than the former .
I do not know how far I have conveyed to you in the last two papers my underlying idea of an education not merely intensive but extensive , planned so economically and so ably as to reach every man and woman in the world .
So it is that , in spite of their apparent urgency , I ask the reader to detach himself from these present conflicts of national politics , of political parties and of the class war as completely as he can ; or , if he can not detach himself completely , then to play such a part in them , regardless of any other consideration , as may be most conducive to a wide-thinking , wide-ranging education upon which we can base a new world order .
A resolute push for quite a short period now might reconstruct the entire basis of our collective human life .
Bolshevik propaganda , suppression of , 175
Breeding , points required in , 140
Cinematograph , the , as an aid to teaching , 80 , 161
College stage of education , 168 changed conditions of , 180 how it could be improved , 172 problem of its extension , 177
Committees , good work by , 107
France , national egotism of , 72 post-war decadence in , 45
Frontiers and the possibility of war , 59
Hamsun 's _Growth of the Soil_ , 124
Henley , a poem by , 127
Herbert , Auberon , lectures by , 171
History , and national egotism , 73 cardinal experiences in , 1
Human outlook , the , 1
Hungary , post-war desolation in , 44
International mind , an , 73
Italy , after the war , 45 forbids export of works of art , 117
Mental life , schooling and the , 142
Milton 's defence of free speech , 128
Missouri , establishment of , 49
Napoleon 's retreat from Moscow , 48
Patriotism , a unity-destroying propaganda of , 72 aggressive , dangers of , 39 American , 69 true and false conceptions of , 68 , 69
Railways , American , 49 _et seq._ , 65
Readjustment of political ideas , 46 _et seq._ , 68
Schools and the development of education , 25 of a world state , 90
Sovereign states , incoherent nature of , 31
Thirty Years War , the , 96
United States , the government of , 47 , 83 growth of , 49-50 political system of , 27 ( _see also_ America )
World History , a suggested , 109
A Series of books upon Social , Religious and Political questions :
Just then , Mr. Cave 's step-son re-entered the shop from the inner room -- he had come home a minute or so before Mr. Cave -- and he was blaspheming freely .
He was apprenticed to a second-hand furniture dealer down the road , but he had his meals at home , and he was naturally annoyed to find no dinner ready .
In the evening the matter was resumed , with less passion and in a judicial spirit , under the presidency of the step-daughter .
The supper passed unhappily and culminated in a painful scene .
Mr. Cave gave way at last to extreme exasperation , and went out banging the front door violently .
The rest of the family , having discussed him with the freedom his absence warranted , hunted the house from garret to cellar , hoping to light upon the crystal .
So far , at least , Mr. Wace was able to verify the remarkable story of Mr. Cave .
He has himself repeatedly held this crystal in a ray of light ( which had to be of a less diameter than one millimetre ) .
And in a perfect darkness , such as could be produced by velvet wrapping , the crystal did undoubtedly appear very faintly phosphorescent .
It would seem , however , that the luminousness was of some exceptional sort , and not equally visible to all eyes ; for Mr. Harbinger -- whose name will be familiar to the scientific reader in connection with the Pasteur Institute -- was quite unable to see any light whatever .
And Mr. Wace's own capacity for its appreciation was out of comparison inferior to that of Mr. Cave 's .
Even with Mr. Cave the power varied very considerably : his vision was most vivid during states of extreme weakness and fatigue .
The view , as Mr. Cave described it , was invariably of an extensive plain , and he seemed always to be looking at it from a considerable height , as if from a tower or a mast .
To the east and to the west the plain was bounded at a remote distance by vast reddish cliffs , which reminded him of those he had seen in some picture ; but what the picture was Mr. Wace was unable to ascertain .
These cliffs passed north and south -- he could tell the points of the compass by the stars that were visible of a night -- receding in an almost illimitable perspective and fading into the mists of the distance before they met .
He was nearer the eastern set of cliffs , on the occasion of his first vision the sun was rising over them , and black against the sunlight and pale against their shadow appeared a multitude of soaring forms that Mr. Cave regarded as birds .
A vast range of buildings spread below him ; he seemed to be looking down upon them ; and , as they approached the blurred and refracted edge of the picture , they became indistinct .
There were also trees curious in shape , and in colouring , a deep mossy green and an exquisite grey , beside a wide and shining canal .
And something great and brilliantly coloured flew across the picture .
But the first time Mr. Cave saw these pictures he saw only in flashes , his hands shook , his head moved , the vision came and went , and grew foggy and indistinct .
And at first he had the greatest difficulty in finding the picture again once the direction of it was lost .
Now , while the thing was Mr. Cave 's secret , it remained a mere wonder , a thing to creep to covertly and peep at , as a child might peep upon a forbidden garden .
But Mr. Wace has , for a young scientific investigator , a particularly lucid and consecutive habit of mind .
Directly the crystal and its story came to him , and he had satisfied himself , by seeing the phosphorescence with his own eyes , that there really was a certain evidence for Mr. Cave 's statements , he proceeded to develop the matter systematically .
Mr. Cave was only too eager to come and feast his eyes on this wonderland he saw , and he came every night from half-past eight until half-past ten , and sometimes , in Mr. Wace 's absence , during the day .
On Sunday afternoons , also , he came .
From the outset Mr. Wace made copious notes , and it was due to his scientific method that the relation between the direction from which the initiating ray entered the crystal and the orientation of the picture were proved .
And , by covering the crystal in a box perforated only with a small aperture to admit the exciting ray , and by substituting black holland for his buff blinds , he greatly improved the conditions of the observations ; so that in a little while they were able to survey the valley in any direction they desired .
After a time Mr. Wace aspired to attract the attention of the Martians , and the next time that the strange eyes of one of them appeared close to the crystal Mr. Cave cried out and sprang away , and they immediately turned on the light and began to gesticulate in a manner suggestive of signalling .
But when at last Mr. Cave examined the crystal again the Martian had departed .
Thus far these observations had progressed in early November , and then Mr. Cave , feeling that the suspicions of his family about the crystal were allayed , began to take it to and fro with him in order that , as occasion arose in the daytime or night , he might comfort himself with what was fast becoming the most real thing in his existence .
He rapped and the door was opened by the step-son in black .
He at once called Mrs. Cave , who was , Mr. Wace could not but observe , in cheap but ample widow 's weeds of the most imposing pattern .
Without any very great surprise Mr. Wace learnt that Cave was dead and already buried .
She was in tears , and her voice was a little thick .
She had just returned from Highgate .
Her mind seemed occupied with her own prospects and the honourable details of the obsequies , but Mr. Wace was at last able to learn the particulars of Cave 's death .
He had been found dead in his shop in the early morning , the day after his last visit to Mr. Wace , and the crystal had been clasped in his stone-cold hands .
His face was smiling , said Mrs. Cave , and the velvet cloth from the minerals lay on the floor at his feet .
He must have been dead five or six hours when he was found .
Mrs. Cave 's first impulse , directly Cave 's body had been taken upstairs , had been to write to the mad clergyman who had offered five pounds for the crystal , informing him of its recovery ; but after a violent hunt in which her daughter joined her , they were convinced of the loss of his address .
As they were without the means required to mourn and bury Cave in the elaborate style the dignity of an old Seven Dials inhabitant demands , they had appealed to a friendly fellow-tradesman in Great Portland Street .
He had very kindly taken over a portion of the stock at a valuation .
The valuation was his own and the crystal egg was included in one of the lots .
Mr. Wace , after a few suitable consolatory observations , a little off-handedly proffered perhaps , hurried at once to Great Portland Street .
But there he learned that the crystal egg had already been sold to a tall , dark man in grey .
And there the material facts in this curious , and to me at least very suggestive , story come abruptly to an end .
The Great Portland Street dealer did not know who the tall dark man in grey was , nor had he observed him with sufficient attention to describe him minutely .
He did not even know which way this person had gone after leaving the shop .
For a time Mr. Wace remained in the shop , trying the dealer 's patience with hopeless questions , venting his own exasperation .
And at last , realising abruptly that the whole thing had passed out of his hands , had vanished like a vision of the night , he returned to his own rooms , a little astonished to find the notes he had made still tangible and visible upon his untidy table .
My own ideas in the matter are practically identical with those of Mr. Wace .
I believe the crystal on the mast in Mars and the crystal egg of Mr. Cave 's to be in some physical , but at present quite inexplicable , way _en rapport_ , and we both believe further that the terrestrial crystal must have been -- possibly at some remote date -- sent hither from that planet , in order to give the Martians a near view of our affairs .
Possibly the fellows to the crystals in the other masts are also on our globe .
No theory of hallucination suffices for the facts .
And presently they began to understand .
That night the star rose later , for its proper eastward motion had carried it some way across Leo towards Virgo , and its brightness was so great that the sky became a luminous blue as it rose , and every star was hidden in its turn , save only Jupiter near the zenith , Capella , Aldebaran , Sirius and the pointers of the Bear .
It was very white and beautiful .
In many parts of the world that night a pallid halo encircled it about .
It was perceptibly larger ; in the clear refractive sky of the tropics it seemed as if it were nearly a quarter the size of the moon .
The frost was still on the ground in England , but the world was as brightly lit as if it were midsummer moonlight .
One could see to read quite ordinary print by that cold clear light , and in the cities the lamps burnt yellow and wan .
And along the coast of Argentina and up the South Atlantic the tides were higher than had ever been in the memory of man , and the storms drove the waters in many cases scores of miles inland , drowning whole cities .
And so great grew the heat during the night that the rising of the sun was like the coming of a shadow .
The earthquakes began and grew until all down America from the Arctic Circle to Cape Horn , hillsides were sliding , fissures were opening , and houses and walls crumbling to destruction .
The whole side of Cotopaxi slipped out in one vast convulsion , and a tumult of lava poured out so high and broad and swift and liquid that in one day it reached the sea .
And then the clouds gathered , blotting out the vision of the sky , the thunder and lightning wove a garment round the world ; all over the earth was such a downpour of rain as men had never before seen , and where the volcanoes flared red against the cloud canopy there descended torrents of mud .
Everywhere the waters were pouring off the land , leaving mud-silted ruins , and the earth littered like a storm-worn beach with all that had floated , and the dead bodies of the men and brutes , its children .
For days the water streamed off the land , sweeping away soil and trees and houses in the way , and piling huge dykes and scooping out Titanic gullies over the country side .
Those were the days of darkness that followed the star and the heat .
All through them , and for many weeks and months , the earthquakes continued .
A STORY OF THE STONE AGE
None of these buff-skinned savages were clothed , but some wore about their hips rude girdles of adder-skin or crackling undressed hide , from which depended little bags , not made , but torn from the paws of beasts , and carrying the rudely-dressed flints that were men 's chief weapons and tools .
And one woman , the mate of Uya the Cunning Man , wore a wonderful necklace of perforated fossils -- that others had worn before her .
Beside some of the sleeping men lay the big antlers of the elk , with the tines chipped to sharp edges , and long sticks , hacked at the ends with flints into sharp points .
There was little else save these things and the smouldering fire to mark these human beings off from the wild animals that ranged the country .
But Uya the Cunning did not sleep , but sat with a bone in his hand and scraped busily thereon with a flint , a thing no animal would do .
He was the oldest man in the tribe , beetle-browed , prognathous , lank-armed ; he had a beard and his cheeks were hairy , and his chest and arms were black with thick hair .
And by virtue both of his strength and cunning he was master of the tribe , and his share was always the most and the best .
At that she forgot the squirrel and set off through the alders and reeds as fast as she could go .
She did not care where she went so long as she escaped Uya .
She splashed nearly knee-deep through a swampy place , and saw in front of her a slope of ferns -- growing more slender and green as they passed up out of the light into the shade of the young chestnuts .
She was soon amidst the trees -- she was very fleet of foot , and she ran on and on until the forest was old and the vales great , and the vines about their stems where the light came were thick as young trees , and the ropes of ivy stout and tight .
On she went , and she doubled and doubled again , and then at last lay down amidst some ferns in a hollow place near a thicket , and listened with her heart beating in her ears .
She lay a long time there , glad of her escape , and then she sat up listening .
As he ran he made a continuous growling grumble .
`` Men in my very lair !
At the very mouth of my lair .
Men , men , men .
Fighting and blood . ''
For he was the lord of the wood and of the caves .
She tried to see Brother Fire , who guarded the squatting-place from beasts , but he was not in sight .
And far away she heard the mammoths trumpeting as they went down to the drinking-place , and once some huge bulk with heavy paces hurried along , making a noise like a calf , but what it was she could not see .
But she thought from the voice it was Yaaa the rhinoceros , who stabs with his nose , goes always alone , and rages without cause .
Wau and all the women and children were coming towards them , a scattered array of buff shock-headed figures , howling , leaping , and crying .
Over the knoll two youths hurried .
Down among the ferns to the right came a man , heading them off from the wood .
Ugh-lomi left her arm , and the two began running side by side , leaping the bracken and stepping clear and wide .
Eudena , knowing her fleetness and the fleetness of Ugh-lomi , laughed aloud at the unequal chase .
They were an exceptionally straight-limbed couple for those days .
They knew there was no mercy for them .
There was no hunting so sweet to these ancient men as the hunting of men .
Once the fierce passion of the chase was lit , the feeble beginnings of humanity in them were thrown to the winds .
And Uya in the night had marked Ugh-lomi with the death word .
Ugh-lomi was the day 's quarry , the appointed feast .
At last the two fugitives gained the bank of the river , where the stream ran deep and narrow , and they still had fifty yards in hand of Wau , the foremost pursuer , the man who made the smiting-stones .
He carried one , a large flint , the shape of an oyster and double the size , chipped to a chisel edge , in either hand .
Ugh-lomi stood watching for a space , and snarled at the sight of Uya .
Then he turned and plunged into the thicket .
That night they made a fire from flint sparks and bracken fronds , and talked and caressed by it .
And in their sleep Uya 's spirit came again , and suddenly , while Ugh-lomi was trying to fight vainly , the foolish flint on the stick came into his hand , and he struck Uya with it , and behold !
But afterwards came other dreams of Uya -- for spirits take a lot of killing , and he had to be killed again .
Then after that the stone would not keep on the stick .
He awoke tired and rather gloomy , and was sulky all the forenoon , in spite of Eudena 's kindliness , and instead of hunting he sat chipping a sharp edge to the singular flint , and looking strangely at her .
Then he bound the perforated flint on to the stick with strips of rabbit skin .
And afterwards he walked up and down the ledge , striking with it , and muttering to himself , and thinking of Uya .
It felt very fine and heavy in the hand .
On one of those days Ugh-lomi dropped a chunk of flint over the cliff .
He saw it fall , and go bounding across the river bank into the river , and after laughing and thinking it over a little he tried another .
This smashed a bush of hazel in the most interesting way .
They spent all the morning dropping stones from the ledge , and in the afternoon they discovered this new and interesting pastime was also possible from the cliffbrow .
The next day they had forgotten this delight .
Or at least , it seemed they had forgotten .
But Uya came in dreams to spoil the paradise .
Three nights he came fighting Ugh-lomi .
In the morning after these dreams Ugh-lomi would walk up and down , threatening him and swinging the axe , and at last came the night after Ugh-lomi brained the otter , and they had feasted .
Uya went too far .
Ugh-lomi awoke , scowling under his heavy brows , and he took his axe , and extending his hand towards Eudena he bade her wait for him upon the ledge .
Then he clambered down the white declivity , glanced up once from the foot of it and flourished his axe , and without looking back again went striding along the river bank until the overhanging cliff at the bend hid him .
In the days when Eudena and Ugh-lomi fled from the people of Uya towards the fir-clad mountains of the Weald , across the forests of sweet chestnut and the grass-clad chalkland , and hid themselves at last in the gorge of the river between the chalk cliffs , men were few and their squatting-places far between .
The nearest men to them were those of the tribe , a full day 's journey down the river , and up the mountains there were none .
Man was indeed a newcomer to this part of the world in that ancient time , coming slowly along the rivers , generation after generation , from one squatting-place to another , from the south-westward .
And the animals that held the land , the hippopotamus and rhinoceros of the river valleys , the horses of the grass plains , the deer and swine of the woods , the grey apes in the branches , the cattle of the uplands , feared him but little -- let alone the mammoths in the mountains and the elephants that came through the land in the summer-time out of the south .
For why should they fear him , with but the rough , chipped flints that he had not learnt to haft and which he threw but ill , and the poor spear of sharpened wood , as all the weapons he had against hoof and horn , tooth and claw ?
`` Bear , '' said Ugh-lomi , looking round with his face white .
In half a minute they were at the crest , their hearts pumping noisily , with Andoo and his wife far and safe below them .
Andoo was sitting on his haunches , both paws at work , trying with quick exasperated movements to wipe the blindness out of his eyes , and the she-bear stood on all-fours a little way off , ruffled in appearance and growling angrily .
Ugh-lomi flung himself flat on the grass , and lay panting and bleeding with his face on his arms .
said she -- a simple but expressive conversation .
And then the spoor of the bear fell away from the cliff , showing , Ugh-lomi thought , that he came from some place to the left , and keeping to the cliff 's edge , they presently came to an end .
They found themselves looking down on a great semi-circular space caused by the collapse of the cliff .
It had smashed right across the gorge , banking the up-stream water back in a pool which overflowed in a rapid .
The slip had happened long ago .
It was grassed over , but the face of the cliffs that stood about the semicircle was still almost fresh-looking and white as on the day when the rock must have broken and slid down .
Starkly exposed and black under the foot of these cliffs were the mouths of several caves .
And as they stood there , looking at the space , and disinclined to skirt it , because they thought the bears ' lair lay somewhere on the left in the direction they must needs take , they saw suddenly first one bear and then two coming up the grass slope to the right and going across the amphitheatre towards the caves .
Andoo was first ; he dropped a little on his fore-foot and his mien was despondent , and the she-bear came shuffling behind .
`` It 's a change , '' said the she-bear .
Dim imaginings ran through Ugh-lomi 's mind as he watched -- by virtue of which two rabbits lived the longer .
And sleeping , his brains were clearer and bolder -- for that was the way in those days .
He came near the horses , he dreamt , and fought , smiting-stone against hoof , but then the horses changed to men , or , at least , to men with horses ' heads , and he awoke in a cold sweat of terror .
he 's nearer , '' said the Foal with a stripe .
The next day this foolish drab creature with the leonine mane , instead of going about the grazing or hunting he was made for , was prowling round the horses again .
The Eldest Mare was all for silent contempt .
`` I suppose he wants to learn something from us , '' she said , and `` _Let_ him . ''
The next day he was at it again .
The Master Horse decided he meant absolutely nothing .
But as a matter of fact , Ugh-lomi , the first of men to feel that curious spell of the horse that binds us even to this day , meant a great deal .
He admired them unreservedly .
There was a rudiment of the snob in him , I am afraid , and he wanted to be near these beautifully-curved animals .
Then there were vague conceptions of a kill .
If only they would let him come near them !
But they drew the line , he found , at fifty yards .
If he came nearer than that they moved off -- with dignity .
I suppose it was the way he had blinded Andoo that made him think of leaping on the back of one of them .
But though Eudena after a time came out in the open too , and they did some unobtrusive stalking , things stopped there .
The first hot bolt of the Master Horse was long since over .
He was falling into a measured trot , and Ugh-lomi , albeit bruised exceedingly and quite uncertain of the future , was in a state of glorious enjoyment .
And now came a new development .
The pace broke again , the Master Horse came round on a short curve , and stopped dead ... .
But that whoop was unfortunate , for coming close to the ear of the horse , and being quite unexpected , it startled the stallion extremely .
Ugh-lomi suddenly found himself uncomfortable again .
He was hanging on to the horse , he found , by one arm and one knee .
For a space they spoke together .
Then an old woman lifted a shrill voice and answered him .
`` Our Lord is a Lion . ''
The old woman turned her face that way , and pointed to the hawthorn thickets .
`` Uya , '' she screamed , `` there goes thine enemy !
There goes thine enemy , Uya !
Why do you devour us nightly ?
We have tried to snare him !
There goes thine enemy , Uya ! ''
In the morning before the sun had risen , Siss the Tracker , and the lad Wau-Hau , who now chipped flints , and One Eye , and Bo , and the Snail-eater , the two red-haired men , and Cat's-skin and Snake , all the men that were left alive of the Sons of Uya , taking their ash spears and their smiting-stones , and with throwing-stones in the beast-paw bags , started forth upon the trail of Ugh-lomi through the hawthorn thickets where Yaaa the Rhinoceros and his brothers were feeding , and up the bare downland towards the beechwoods .
Presently the firestone ceased .
She looked for the sun and found he had gone , and overhead and growing brighter was the waxing moon .
She looked towards the thicket of the lair , seeking shapes in the reeds , and then suddenly she began to wriggle and wriggle , weeping and calling upon Ugh-lomi .
There were long gaps of aching waiting .
After a long time some animal splashed in the water , and seemed to cross the river at the ford beyond the lair , but what animal it was she could not see .
From the distant drinking-pools she could hear the sound of splashing , and the noise of elephants -- so still was the night .
Then an odd sound , a sobbing panting , that grew faster and fainter .
Yet another silence , and then dim sounds and the grunting of some animal .
Long was the time they remained there motionless , with the light of the setting moon shining on their limbs .
Very slowly , as slowly as the setting of the moon , did the shadow of the reeds towards the mound flow over them .
Presently their legs were hidden , and Ugh-lomi was but a bust of silver .
The shadow crept to his neck , crept over his face , and so at last the darkness of the night swallowed them up .
The shadow became full of instinctive stirrings .
There was a patter of feet , and a faint snarling -- the sound of a blow .
From the knoll the bustle of preparation grew , the hacking of spears and throwing-stones .
None spake the name of Ugh-lomi for fear that it might bring him .
The men were going to keep together , close together , in the hunting for a day or so .
And their hunting was to be Ugh-lomi , lest instead he should come a-hunting them .
The sunset passed and the twilight came , the fires glowed red against the hazy blue of the distant chestnut-trees , and the voices over the mound were merry .
Eudena lay scarcely stirring , looking from the mound to the meat and then to the mound .
She was hungry , but she was afraid .
At last she crept back to Ugh-lomi .
But before Ugh-lomi could get up , the two red-haired men were tumbling out of the reeds , spears and smiting-stones ready , and Snake hard behind them .
One she struck on the neck , but not to fell him , and he blundered aside and spoilt his brother 's blow at Ugh-lomi 's head .
In a moment Ugh-lomi dropped his club and had his assailant by the waist , and had pitched him sideways sprawling .
He snatched at his club again and recovered it .
The man Eudena had hit stabbed at her with his spear as he stumbled from her blow , and involuntarily she gave ground to avoid him .
He hesitated between her and Ugh-lomi , half turned , gave a vague cry at finding Ugh-lomi so near , and in a moment Ugh-lomi had him by the throat , and the club had its third victim .
As he went down Ugh-lomi shouted -- no words , but an exultant cry .
The next day they sat again nearer -- without stones or sticks , and with the same offerings , and Cat's-skin had a trout .
It was rare men caught fish in those days , but Cat's-skin would stand silently in the water for hours and catch them with his hand .
And the fourth day Ugh-lomi suffered these three to come to the squatting-place in peace , with the food they had with them .
Ugh-lomi ate the trout .
Thereafter for many moons Ugh-lomi was master and had his will in peace .
And on the fulness of time he was killed and eaten even as Uya had been slain .
The excellent Mr. Morris was an Englishman , and he lived in the days of Queen Victoria the Good .
He was a prosperous and very sensible man ; he read the _Times_ and went to church , and as he grew towards middle age an expression of quiet contented contempt for all who were not as himself settled on his face .
He was one of those people who do everything that is right and proper and sensible with inevitable regularity .
He always wore just the right and proper clothes , steering the narrow way between the smart and the shabby , always subscribed to the right charities , just the judicious compromise between ostentation and meanness , and never failed to have his hair cut to exactly the proper length .
Everything that it was right and proper for a man in his position to possess , he possessed ; and everything that it was not right and proper for a man in his position to possess , he did not possess .
`` I feared you would never come , '' he said .
In spite of the intervening space of time , the English language was still almost exactly the same as it had been in England under Victoria the Good .
The invention of the phonograph and suchlike means of recording sound , and the gradual replacement of books by such contrivances , had not only saved the human eyesight from decay , but had also by the establishment of a sure standard arrested the process of change in accent that had hitherto been so inevitable .
He concentrated his mind on the jelly .
The hypnotist shook his head .
`` It did n't matter then if they were a bit silly or faddy .
Life was so easy-going then .
No competition worth speaking of -- no pressure .
A human being had to be very lopsided before anything happened .
Then , you know , they clapped 'em away in what they called a lunatic asylum . ''
`` Speaking of these historical romances , '' said Mwres , with an attempt at an easy , off-hand manner , `` brings me -- ah -- to the matter I -- ah -- had in mind when I asked you -- when I expressed a wish to see you . ''
He paused and took a deep breath .
`` Egyptians -- very probably .
Hack about with swords and revolvers and things -- bloodshed galore -- horrible !
-- and about young men on torpedo catchers who blow up -- Spaniards , I fancy -- and all sorts of irregular adventurers .
And she has got it into her head that she must marry for Love , and that poor little Bindon -- ''
`` I 've met similar cases , '' said the hypnotist .
`` Who is the other young man ? ''
`` No -- not notes ... .
Ah -- poems . ''
`` Oh , precisely !
But still -- ! ''
`` It 's hard a man can not dispose of his own daughter , '' said Mwres irrelevantly .
She spent the middle part of the day in the gymnasium , and took her midday meal with two other girls and their common chaperone -- for it was still the custom to have a chaperone in the case of motherless girls of the more prosperous classes .
The chaperone had a visitor that day , a man in green and yellow , with a white face and vivid eyes , who talked amazingly .
Among other things , he fell to praising a new historical romance that one of the great popular story-tellers of the day had just put forth .
It was , of course , about the spacious times of Queen Victoria ; and the author , among other pleasing novelties , made a little argument before each section of the story , in imitation of the chapter headings of the old-fashioned books : as for example , `` How the Cabmen of Pimlico stopped the Victoria Omnibuses , and of the Great Fight in Palace Yard , '' and `` How the Piccadilly Policeman was slain in the midst of his Duty . ''
The man in green and yellow praised this innovation .
`` These pithy sentences , '' he said , `` are admirable .
They show at a glance those headlong , tumultuous times , when men and animals jostled in the filthy streets , and death might wait for one at every corner .
Life was life then !
How great the world must have seemed then !
They were still parts of the world absolutely unexplored .
Nowadays we have almost abolished wonder , we lead lives so trim and orderly that courage , endurance , faith , all the noble virtues seem fading from mankind . ''
`` The thing is possible at last , '' the hypnotist said .
`` You may order a dream as you wish . ''
The other two girls , encouraged by her enthusiasm , also placed themselves in the hands of the hypnotist and had plunges into the romantic past .
No one suggested that Elizabeth should try this novel entertainment ; it was at her own request at last that she was taken into that land of dreams where there is neither any freedom of choice nor will ... .
One day , when Denton went down to that quiet seat beneath the flying stage , Elizabeth was not in her wonted place .
He was disappointed , and a little angry .
The next day she did not come , and the next also .
To hide his fear from himself , he set to work to write sonnets for her when she should come again ... .
At last chance was kind to him , and he saw her .
She turned in unfeigned astonishment .
Nothing but the fear of a strange man showed in her face .
`` Elizabeth , '' he cried , and his voice was strange to him : `` dearest -- you _know_ me ? ''
`` She does not know you , '' said the chaperone .
`` You must not ... .
You have made a mistake .
You must not go on talking to us after that .
You must not annoy us on the public ways . ''
The chaperone raised her eyebrows .
She spoke in a clear , audible voice .
`` Some half-witted creature .
I have never set eyes on him before . ''
And soon after this the celebrated hypnotist who dressed in green and yellow had another client .
The young man paced his consulting-room , pale and disordered .
`` I want to forget , '' he cried .
`` I _must_ forget . ''
`` Elizabeth Mwres -- the girl -- ''
`` Let go ! ''
cried the hypnotist , thrusting an arm against Denton 's chest .
In a moment the two men were locked in a clumsy wrestle .
Neither had the slightest training -- for athleticism , except for exhibition and to afford opportunity for betting , had faded out of the earth -- but Denton was not only the younger but the stronger of the two .
They swayed across the room , and then the hypnotist had gone down under his antagonist .
They fell together ... .
`` In the Stone Age no man dared to come between man and woman , '' said Denton .
`` I looked about for a weapon also .
It is an astonishing thing how few weapons there are nowadays .
If you consider that in the Stone Age men owned scarcely anything _but_ weapons .
I hit at last upon this lamp .
I have wrenched off the wires and things , and I hold it so . ''
He extended it over the hypnotist 's shoulders .
`` With that I can quite easily smash your skull .
I _will_ -- unless you do as I tell you . ''
`` Violence is no remedy , '' said the hypnotist , quoting from the `` Modern Man 's Book of Moral Maxims . ''
`` It 's an undesirable disease , '' said Denton .
`` The chaperone will see you directly she comes -- ''
`` I shall stand in that recess .
`` There is nothing a hypnotist or doctor hates so much as a scandal .
I at least am no savage .
I am annoyed ... .
But in a day or so I shall bear no malice ... . ''
She choked ; she could not say the word that is so terrible to the young and happy .
In the nineteenth century the lower quarters were still beneath the sky ; they were areas of land on clay or other unsuitable soil , liable to floods or exposed to the smoke of more fortunate districts , insufficiently supplied with water , and as insanitary as the great fear of infectious diseases felt by the wealthier classes permitted .
In the twenty-second century , however , the growth of the city storey above storey , and the coalescence of buildings , had led to a different arrangement .
The prosperous people lived in a vast series of sumptuous hotels in the upper storeys and halls of the city fabric ; the industrial population dwelt beneath in the tremendous ground-floor and basement , so to speak , of the place .
`` And yet what else is there ? ''
She looked at him to see if he was serious in proposing such an adventure .
`` But then there were houses . ''
`` There are so many things .
Think of all the things we have , things that we should miss . ''
`` Dear , '' he said , `` it is something the world has forgotten .
It is Heaven and all the host of stars . ''
Each time they talked the thing seemed more possible and more desirable to them .
In a week or so it was quite possible .
Another week , and it was the inevitable thing they had to do .
A great enthusiasm for the country seized hold of them and possessed them .
The sordid tumult of the town , they said , overwhelmed them .
They marvelled that this simple way out of their troubles had never come upon them before .
By a great archway in that enormous city wall emerged the Eadhamite road to Portsmouth , swarming in the morning sunshine with an enormous traffic bearing the blue-clad servants of the Food Company to their toil .
A rushing traffic , beside which they seemed two scarce-moving dots .
Along the outer tracks hummed and rattled the tardy little old-fashioned motors of such as had duties within twenty miles or so of the city ; the inner ways were filled with vaster mechanisms -- swift monocycles bearing a score of men , lank multicycles , quadricycles sagging with heavy loads , empty gigantic produce carts that would come back again filled before the sun was setting , all with throbbing engines and noiseless wheels and a perpetual wild melody of horns and gongs .
The shepherd stared from one to the other .
`` You 'll go back to-morrow , '' he said .
`` It looks pleasant enough in the sunlight ... .
Are you sure you 've done nothing ?
We shepherds are not such _great_ friends of the police . ''
Denton looked at him steadfastly .
`` No , '' he said .
`` But we are too poor to live in the city , and we ca n't bear the thought of wearing clothes of blue canvas and doing drudgery .
We are going to live a simple life here , like the people of old . ''
And in the evening they came to the deserted village , with its houses that seemed so small and odd to them : they found it golden in the glory of the sunset , and desolate and still .
They went from one deserted house to another , marvelling at their quaint simplicity , and debating which they should choose .
And at last , in a sunlit corner of a room that had lost its outer wall , they came upon a wild flower , a little flower of blue that the weeders of the Food Company had overlooked .
That house they decided upon ; but they did not remain in it long that night , because they were resolved to feast upon nature .
And moreover the houses became very gaunt and shadowy after the sunlight had faded out of the sky .
So after they had rested a little time they went to the crest of the hill again to see with their own eyes the silence of heaven set with stars , about which the old poets had had so many things to tell .
It was a wonderful sight , and Denton talked like the stars , and when they went down the hill at last the sky was pale with dawn .
They slept but little , and in the morning when they woke a thrush was singing in a tree .
Seizing hands , these children of the city ran down the hill to their home , in infinite astonishment .
And ere they reached it , Elizabeth was weeping with dismay , and the darkling ground about them was white and brittle and active with the pelting hail .
The storm seemed to last interminably , until at last they dozed between the thunderclaps , and then very swiftly it fell and ceased .
And as the last patter of the rain died away they heard an unfamiliar sound .
`` I do n't like dogs , '' answered Elizabeth , after a long silence .
`` There was a romance I heard once .
A dog killed a man . ''
`` I ca n't hear , '' shouted Elizabeth .
She stood up and came to him .
For a moment they stood panting and victorious , and then Elizabeth , dropping her spade , covered her face , and sank to the ground in a paroxysm of weeping .
Denton looked about him , thrust the point of his sword into the ground so that it was at hand , and stooped to comfort her .
`` I am afraid so .
Very likely they will prosecute us for trespass . ''
She looked at the dead dogs , and shivered .
`` We can not stay here , '' she said .
`` Could I ? ''
`` To each generation , '' he said , `` the life of its time .
I see it all plainly now .
In the city -- that is the life to which we were born .
To live in any other fashion ... Coming here was a dream , and this -- is the awakening . ''
Then silently , side by side , they went across the empty garden-space into the old high road , and set their faces resolutely towards the distant city -- towards the complex mechanical city of those latter days , the city that had swallowed up mankind .
Presently Elizabeth was of age , and Denton had a business interview with her father that was not agreeable .
An exceedingly disagreeable interview with their money-lender followed , from which he brought home a white face .
On his return Elizabeth had to tell him of a new and marvellous intonation of `` Goo '' that their daughter had devised , but Denton was inattentive .
In the midst , just as she was at the cream of her description , he interrupted .
`` How much money do you think we have left , now that everything is settled ? ''
Presently it was time to go .
By that time Dings was happily established in a corner , sitting on the floor with her arms filled , and herself , indeed , for the most part hidden by an unaccustomed wealth of toys .
She seemed careless of all human relationships as her parents receded .
said the little girl .
Denton and Elizabeth sat apart in the waiting-room until their turn came .
Most of the others collected there seemed limp and taciturn , but three or four young people gaudily dressed made up for the quietude of their companions .
They were life clients of the Company , born in the Company 's _creche_ and destined to die in its hospital , and they had been out for a spree with some shillings or so of extra pay .
They talked vociferously in a later development of the Cockney dialect , manifestly very proud of themselves .
Presently Elizabeth and then Denton interviewed the manageress -- for the Company preferred women in this capacity -- and found she possessed an energetic face , a contemptuous manner , and a particularly unpleasant voice .
They were given various checks , including one to certify that they need not have their heads cropped ; and when they had given their thumb-marks , learnt the number corresponding thereunto , and exchanged their shabby middle-class clothes for duly numbered blue canvas suits , they repaired to the huge plain dining-room for their first meal under these new conditions .
Afterwards they were to return to her for instructions about their work .
`` It 's odd , '' said Denton .
`` I suppose it would n't be if it were not the thought of being ordered about ... .
I hope we shall have decent managers . ''
Only two or three of Elizabeth 's fellow-workers were born labour serfs ; plain , morose girls , but most of them corresponded to what the nineteenth century would have called a `` reduced '' gentlewoman .
But the ideal of what constituted a gentlewoman had altered : the faint , faded , negative virtue , the modulated voice and restrained gesture of the old-fashioned gentlewoman had vanished from the earth .
Most of her companions showed in discoloured hair , ruined complexions , and the texture of their reminiscent conversations , the vanished glories of a conquering youth .
All of these artistic workers were much older than Elizabeth , and two openly expressed their surprise that any one so young and pleasant should come to share their toil .
But Elizabeth did not trouble them with her old-world moral conceptions .
And it was Elizabeth who was the first to speak , after an aching , dull interspace of days : not , indeed , of the foolish little name that was a name no longer , but of the darkness that brooded over her soul .
They had come through the shrieking , tumultuous ways of the city together ; the clamour of trade , of yelling competitive religions , of political appeal , had beat upon deaf ears ; the glare of focussed lights , of dancing letters , and fiery advertisements , had fallen upon the set , miserable faces unheeded .
They took their dinner in the dining-hall at a place apart .
`` I want , '' said Elizabeth clumsily , `` to go out to the flying stages -- to that seat .
Here , one can say nothing ... . ''
It presently forced itself upon Denton 's mind that this remarkable conversation was being repeated in indignant tones to more sympathetic hearers , and that it gave rise to astonishment and ironical laughter .
They looked at Denton with manifestly enhanced interest .
A curious perception of isolation dawned upon him .
He tried to think of his press and its unfamiliar peculiarities ... .
Denton looked into the threatening face before him , and odd little currents of energy seemed to be running through his limbs and body .
`` I do n't want it , '' he said , trying a pleasant smile that twitched and failed .
He was aware that time -- seconds or minutes -- had passed , abstract , uneventful time .
He was lying with his head in a heap of ashes , and something wet and warm ran swiftly into his neck .
The first shock broke up into discrete sensations .
All his head throbbed ; his eye and his chin throbbed exceedingly , and the taste of blood was in his mouth .
Slowly , unwillingly , Denton stood up .
Now it was coming .
`` No , I have n't , '' said Denton , with a catching of the breath , and resolved to try this brute behind the ear before he himself got stunned again .
He knew he would be stunned again .
He was astonished how ill he had judged himself beforehand .
A few ridiculous lunges , and down he would go again .
He watched the albino 's eyes .
The albino was grinning confidently , like a man who plans an agreeable trick .
A sudden perception of impending indignities stung Denton .
His mood was a sort of stagnant astonishment .
All his conceptions were overthrown .
He had regarded his security from physical violence as inherent , as one of the conditions of life .
So , indeed , it had been while he wore his middle-class costume , had his middle-class property to serve for his defence .
But who would interfere among Labour roughs fighting together ?
And indeed in those days no man would .
In the Underworld there was no law between man and man ; the law and machinery of the state had become for them something that held men down , fended them off from much desirable property and pleasure , and that was all .
Violence , that ocean in which the brutes live for ever , and from which a thousand dykes and contrivances have won our hazardous civilised life , had flowed in again upon the sinking underways and submerged them .
Denton had come right down at last to the elemental -- fist and trick and the stubborn heart and fellowship -- even as it was in the beginning .
What would happen at the end of the spell ?
He could not tell .
He could not imagine .
He could not imagine the thoughts of these men .
He was sensible only of their hostility and utter want of sympathy .
Vague possibilities of shame and violence chased one another across his mind .
Could he devise some weapon ?
He recalled his assault upon the hypnotist , but there were no detachable lamps here .
He could see nothing that he could catch up in his defence .
`` No -- you leave 'im alone , '' said the swart man .
`` I did not mean to be offensive to you , '' he said , `` in refusing that bit of bread . ''
`` Yes , '' said Denton with sudden fervour : `` I was a fool . ''
But Elizabeth remained with eyes wide open in the darkness , until the clamour of a bell and the sudden brilliance of the electric light warned them that the Labour Company had need of them for yet another day .
Whitey was not popular , and the vault disgorged to see him haze the new man with only a languid interest .
But matters changed when Whitey's attempt to open the proceedings by kicking Denton in the face was met by an excellently executed duck , catch and throw , that completed the flight of Whitey 's foot in its orbit and brought Whitey 's head into the ash-heap that had once received Denton 's .
Whitey arose a shade whiter , and now blasphemously bent upon vital injuries .
There were indecisive passages , foiled enterprises that deepened Whitey 's evidently growing perplexity ; and then things developed into a grouping of Denton uppermost with Whitey 's throat in his hand , his knee on Whitey 's chest , and a tearful Whitey with a black face , protruding tongue and broken finger endeavouring to explain the misunderstanding by means of hoarse sounds .
Moreover , it was evident that among the bystanders there had never been a more popular person than Denton .
The little ferret-faced man was the first in the competition to pat him on the back .
The lender of oil cans was a radiant sun of genial congratulation ... .
It seemed incredible to Denton that he had ever thought of despair .
She paused and began again .
`` I _am_ growing like them , '' she cried passionately .
At times he would distend himself with pneumatic vestments in the rococo vein .
From among the billowy developments of this style , and beneath a translucent and illuminated headdress , his eye watched jealously for the respect of the less fashionable world .
At other times he emphasised his elegant slenderness in close-fitting garments of black satin .
For effects of dignity he would assume broad pneumatic shoulders , from which hung a robe of carefully arranged folds of China silk , and a classical Bindon in pink tights was also a transient phenomenon in the eternal pageant of Destiny .
In the days when he hoped to marry Elizabeth , he sought to impress and charm her , and at the same time to take off something of his burthen of forty years , by wearing the last fancy of the contemporary buck , a costume of elastic material with distensible warts and horns , changing in colour as he walked , by an ingenious arrangement of versatile chromatophores .
And no doubt , if Elizabeth's affection had not been already engaged by the worthless Denton , and if her tastes had not had that odd bias for old-fashioned ways , this extremely _chic_ conception would have ravished her .
Bindon had consulted Elizabeth 's father before presenting himself in this garb -- he was one of those men who always invite criticism of their costume -- and Mwres had pronounced him all that the heart of woman could desire .
But the affair of the hypnotist proved that his knowledge of the heart of woman was incomplete .
`` My God ! ''
cried Bindon : `` I will have her !
If I have to kill myself to get her !
And that other fellow -- ! ''
`` She will divorce him , '' he said , and sat for a moment intent upon that prospect .
For in those days the austere limitations of divorce of Victorian times were extraordinarily relaxed , and a couple might separate on a hundred different scores .
And so , with a fair persistency , Bindon sat himself to the work of being Elizabeth 's malignant providence , using with ingenious dexterity every particle of advantage wealth in those days gave a man over his fellow-creatures .
A resort to the consolations of religion hindered these operations not at all .
He would go and talk with an interesting , experienced and sympathetic Father of the Huysmanite sect of the Isis cult , about all the irrational little proceedings he was pleased to regard as his heaven-dismaying wickedness , and the interesting , experienced and sympathetic Father representing Heaven dismayed , would with a pleasing affectation of horror , suggest simple and easy penances , and recommend a monastic foundation that was airy , cool , hygienic , and not vulgarised , for viscerally disordered penitent sinners of the refined and wealthy type .
And after these excursions , Bindon would come back to London quite active and passionate again .
He would machinate with really considerable energy , and repair to a certain gallery high above the street of moving ways , from which he could view the entrance to the barrack of the Labour Company in the ward which sheltered Denton and Elizabeth .
And at last one day he saw Elizabeth go in , and thereby his passion was renewed .
`` She 's obstinate , '' said Mwres doubtfully .
said Bindon , respecting this manly grief .
said Bindon quite suddenly , with his hand to his side .
And Mwres , after a decent solicitude for Bindon 's pain , proceeded with his report .
It was even unexpectedly hopeful .
Elizabeth , in her first emotion at discovering that her father had not absolutely deserted her , had been frank with him about her sorrows and disgusts .
For these lower pains the priest was comparatively ineffectual , inclining rather to regard the body and them as mental illusions amenable to contemplation ; so Bindon took it to a man of a class he loathed , a medical man of extraordinary repute and incivility .
`` We must go all over you , '' said the medical man , and did so with the most disgusting frankness .
`` Did you ever bring any children into the world ? ''
asked this gross materialist among other impertinent questions .
`` Nothing , '' said the medical man .
`` A few opiates .
The thing is your own doing , you know , to a certain extent . ''
`` I was a spirited young fellow . ''
`` You 've been doing it all your life . ''
He was interrupted by a voice behind him .
`` By God ! ''
cried Bindon ; `` I'll have her yet . ''
So soon as this painful interview was over , Bindon gave way to rage .
He settled that the medical man was not only an unsympathetic brute and wanting in the first beginnings of a gentleman , but also highly incompetent ; and he went off to four other practitioners in succession , with a view to the establishment of this intuition .
But to guard against surprises he kept that little prescription in his pocket .
With each he began by expressing his grave doubts of the first doctor 's intelligence , honesty and professional knowledge , and then stated his symptoms , suppressing only a few more material facts in each case .
These were always subsequently elicited by the doctor .
In spite of the welcome depreciation of another practitioner , none of these eminent specialists would give Bindon any hope of eluding the anguish and helplessness that loomed now close upon him .
To the last of them he unburthened his mind of an accumulated disgust with medical science .
`` After centuries and centuries , '' he exclaimed hotly ; `` and you can do nothing -- except admit your helplessness .
I say , 'save me ' -- and what do you do ? ''
It 's an eddy . ''
He had reserved that .
His thoughts having come to Elizabeth gravitated about her for some time .
How _little_ Elizabeth understood him !
From that idea he expanded .
He might impress her profoundly -- he might impress her so that she should for evermore regret her treatment of him .
The thing that she must realise before everything else was his magnanimity .
he had loved her with amazing greatness of heart .
He had not seen it so clearly before -- but of course he was going to leave her all his property .
He saw it instantly , as a thing determined and inevitable .
She would think how good he was , how spaciously generous ; surrounded by all that makes life tolerable from his hand , she would recall with infinite regret her scorn and coldness .
And when she sought expression for that regret , she would find that occasion gone forever , she should be met by a locked door , by a disdainful stillness , by a white dead face .
He closed his eyes and remained for a space imagining himself that white dead face .
At last he faced the unpalatable problem of Denton .
It needed all his newborn magnanimity before he could swallow the thought of Denton ; but at last this greatly misunderstood man , assisted by his sedative and the near approach of death , effected even that .
If he was at all exclusive about Denton , if he should display the slightest distrust , if he attempted any specific exclusion of that young man , she might -- _misunderstand_ .
Yes -- she should have her Denton still .
His magnanimity must go even to that .
He tried to think only of Elizabeth in the matter .
Suddenly he started out of a vague reverie and pressed an investigatory hand to his side .
Her choice of the apartments they presently took expressed the vehemence of her release .
They were rooms upon the very verge of the city ; they had a roof space and a balcony upon the city wall , wide open to the sun and wind , the country and the sky .
For a time Denton pursued the thoughts of this spacious vision , trying in obedience to his instinct to find his place and proportion in the scheme .
He became silent again .
Elizabeth said nothing to these things , but she regarded his dreaming face with infinite affection .
Her mind was not very active that evening .
A great contentment possessed her .
After a time she laid a gentle hand on his beside her .
He fondled it softly , still looking out upon the spacious gold-woven view .
So they sat as the sun went down .
Until presently Elizabeth shivered .
It was enough to make anyone say `` Hullo ! ''
The impossible , the incredible , was visible to them all .
The lamp hung inverted in the air , burning quietly with its flame pointing down .
It was as solid , as indisputable as ever a lamp was , the prosaic common lamp of the Long Dragon bar .
Mr. Fotheringay stood with an extended forefinger and the knitted brows of one anticipating a catastrophic smash .
The cyclist , who was sitting next the lamp , ducked and jumped across the bar .
Everybody jumped , more or less .
Miss Maybridge turned and screamed .
For nearly three seconds the lamp remained still .
A faint cry of mental distress came from Mr. Fotheringay .
`` I ca n't keep it up , '' he said , `` any longer . ''
He staggered back , and the inverted lamp suddenly flared , fell against the corner of the bar , bounced aside , smashed upon the floor , and went out .
It was lucky it had a metal receiver , or the whole place would have been in a blaze .
Mr. Cox was the first to speak , and his remark , shorn of needless excrescences , was to the effect that Fotheringay was a fool .
Fotheringay was beyond disputing even so fundamental a proposition as that !
He was astonished beyond measure at the thing that had occurred .
The subsequent conversation threw absolutely no light on the matter so far as Fotheringay was concerned ; the general opinion not only followed Mr. Cox very closely but very vehemently .
Everyone accused Fotheringay of a silly trick , and presented him to himself as a foolish destroyer of comfort and security .
His mind was in a tornado of perplexity , he was himself inclined to agree with them , and he made a remarkably ineffectual opposition to the proposal of his departure .
`` Working a -- -- !
'Ere , do n't you talk rot .
Working a miracle , indeed !
Well , that 's downright funny !
Why , you 's the chap that don't believe in miracles ... .
Fact is , this is another of your silly conjuring tricks -- that 's what this is .
Now , I tell you -- -- ''
`` It 's possible , '' said Mr. Maydig .
`` Something of the sort , perhaps , is possible . ''
Mr. Maydig started violently at the change , and stood looking from the thaumaturgist to the bowl of flowers .
Presently he ventured to lean over the table and smell the violets ; they were fresh-picked and very fine ones .
Then he stared at Mr. Fotheringay again .
`` Now , after that it 's easier to explain what I came about , '' said Mr. Fotheringay ; and proceeded to a lengthy and involved narrative of his strange experiences , beginning with the affair of the lamp in the Long Dragon and complicated by persistent allusions to Winch .
As he went on , the transient pride Mr. Maydig 's consternation had caused passed away ; he became the very ordinary Mr. Fotheringay of everyday intercourse again .
Mr. Maydig listened intently , the tobacco-jar in his hand , and his bearing changed also with the course of the narrative .
Presently , while Mr. Fotheringay was dealing with the miracle of the third egg , the minister interrupted with a fluttering extended hand --
Mr. Maydig looked serious .
`` I see you are in a tangle .
Yes , it 's a difficult position .
How you are to end it ... '' He became diffuse and inconclusive .
For a time Mr. Maydig opposed the idea , and then he yielded .
Mr. Fotheringay issued his orders , and a little less at their ease , perhaps , the two gentlemen proceeded with their repast .
Mr. Maydig was enlarging on the changes he might expect in his housekeeper next day , with an optimism that seemed even to Mr. Fotheringay 's supper senses a little forced and hectic , when a series of confused noises from upstairs began .
Their eyes exchanged interrogations , and Mr. Maydig left the room hastily .
Mr. Fotheringay heard him calling up to his housekeeper and then his footsteps going softly up to her .
`` We 're only beginning , '' said Mr. Maydig , full of the sweetness of unlimited power .
`` We 're only beginning .
Think of all the good we're doing .
When people wake -- ''
He buttoned up his jacket and addressed himself to the habitable globe , with as good an assumption of confidence as lay in his power .
`` Jest stop rotating , will you , '' said Mr. Fotheringay .
Mr. Fotheringay struggled to get to his feet in vain , and after one failure , remained on all fours , holding on .
He surveyed the moonlit world to leeward , with the tails of his jacket streaming over his head .
`` There 's something seriously wrong , '' said Mr. Fotheringay .
`` And what it is -- goodness knows . ''
You see , when Mr. Fotheringay had arrested the rotation of the solid globe , he had made no stipulation concerning the trifling movables upon its surface .
And the earth spins so fast that the surface at its equator is travelling at rather more than a thousand miles an hour , and in these latitudes at more than half that pace .
So that the village , and Mr. Maydig , and Mr. Fotheringay , and everybody and everything had been jerked violently forward at about nine miles per second -- that is to say , much more violently than if they had been fired out of a cannon .
And every human being , every living creature , every house , and every tree -- all the world as we know it -- had been so jerked and smashed and utterly destroyed .
These things Mr. Fotheringay did not , of course , fully appreciate .
But he perceived that his miracle had miscarried , and with that a great disgust of miracles came upon him .
He was in darkness now , for the clouds had swept together and blotted out his momentary glimpse of the moon , and the air was full of fitful struggling tortured wraiths of hail .
A great roaring of wind and waters filled earth and sky , and , peering under his hand through the dust and sleet to windward , he saw by the play of the lightnings a vast wall of water pouring towards him .
screamed Mr. Fotheringay 's feeble voice amid the elemental uproar .
`` Just a moment , '' said Mr. Fotheringay to the lightnings and thunder .
`` Stop jest a moment while I collect my thoughts ... .
And now what shall I do ? ''
`` What _shall_ I do ?
I wish Maydig was about .
_By E. F. Benson_ Six Common Things .
_By Margaret Deland_ Old Chester Tales .
Illustrated by Howard Pyle .
They were silent as it went by , and then as it receded -- '' That 's 'Arry 'Icks .
Wot 's _he_ got ? ''
said the stout gentleman known as Old Tootles .
`` Looks like a 'igh 'at . ''
`` What a bloomin ' lark it is !
Three to one on old George , '' said the ostler boy .
The money was snatched out of his hand .
`` Right you are , '' said the cabman , and the trap slammed , and the lash lay along the glistening side of the horse .
The cab swayed , and the Anarchist , half-standing under the trap , put the hand containing the little glass tube upon the apron to preserve his balance .
He felt the brittle thing crack , and the broken half of it rang upon the floor of the cab .
He fell back into the seat with a curse , and stared dismally at the two or three drops of moisture on the apron .
The buying of orchids always has in it a certain speculative flavour .
You have before you the brown shrivelled lump of tissue , and for the rest you must trust your judgment , or the auctioneer , or your good-luck , as your taste may incline .
The plant may be moribund or dead , or it may be just a respectable purchase , fair value for your money , or perhaps -- for the thing has happened again and again -- there slowly unfolds before the delighted eyes of the happy purchaser , day after day , some new variety , some novel richness , a strange twist of the labellum , or some subtler colouration or unexpected mimicry .
Pride , beauty , and profit blossom together on one delicate green spike , and , it may be , even immortality .
For the new miracle of Nature may stand in need of a new specific name , and what so convenient as that of its discoverer ?
There have been worse names .
`` Are these the things collected by that poor young fellow you told me of the other day ? ''
asked his cousin as she filled his cup .
`` I am sure it was not good for him , '' said the lady , with conviction .
`` I do n't suppose it was comfortable , but some men seem to enjoy that kind of thing , '' said Wedderburn .
`` Anyhow , the natives of his party were sufficiently civilised to take care of all his collection until his colleague , who was an ornithologist , came back again from the interior ; though they could not tell the species of the orchid and had let it wither .
And it makes these things more interesting . ''
`` There are such queer things about orchids , '' he said one day ; `` such possibilities of surprises .
You know , Darwin studied their fertilisation , and showed that the whole structure of an ordinary orchid-flower was contrived in order that moths might carry the pollen from plant to plant .
Well , it seems that there are lots of orchids known the flower of which can not possibly be used for fertilisation in that way .
Some of the Cypripediums , for instance ; there are no insects known that can possibly fertilise them , and some of them have never be found with seed . ''
Then the overpowering scent of the blossom began to make her head reel .
How they clung to him !
She tore at the tough ropes , and he and the white inflorescence swam about her .
She felt she was fainting , knew she must not .
She left him and hastily opened the nearest door , and , after she had panted for a moment in the fresh air , she had a brilliant inspiration .
She caught up a flower-pot and smashed in the windows at the end of the green-house .
She tugged now with renewed strength at Wedderburn 's motionless body , and brought the strange orchid crashing to the floor .
It still clung with the grimmest tenacity to its victim .
In a frenzy , she lugged it and him into the open air .
The observatory at Avu , in Borneo , stands on the spur of the mountain .
To the north rises the old crater , black at night against the unfathomable blue of the sky .
From the little circular building , with its mushroom dome , the slopes plunge steeply downward into the black mysteries of the tropical forest beneath .
The little house in which the observer and his assistant live is about fifty yards from the observatory , and beyond this are the huts of their native attendants .
The reader is probably familiar with the structure of an ordinary astronomical observatory .
The building is usually cylindrical in shape , with a very light hemispherical roof capable of being turned round from the interior .
The telescope is supported upon a stone pillar in the centre , and a clockwork arrangement compensates for the earth 's rotation , and allows a star once found to be continuously observed .
Besides this , there is a compact tracery of wheels and screws about its point of support , by which the astronomer adjusts it .
There is , of course , a slit in the movable roof which follows the eye of the telescope in its survey of the heavens .
The observer sits or lies on a sloping wooden arrangement , which he can wheel to any part of the observatory as the position of the telescope may require .
Within it is advisable to have things as dark as possible , in order to enhance the brilliance of the stars observed .
There was a pause ; then he heard the sound of claws and the dragging of a heavy body away from him over the observatory floor .
Then there was silence , broken only by his own sobbing breathing , and a sound like licking .
Everything was black except the parallelogram of the blue skylight with the luminous dust of stars , against which the end of the telescope now appeared in silhouette .
He waited , as it seemed , an interminable time .
Was the thing coming on again ?
He felt in his trouser-pocket for some matches , and found one remaining .
He tried to strike this , but the floor was wet , and it spat and went out .
He could not see where the door was situated .
In his struggle he had quite lost his bearings .
The strange beast , disturbed by the splutter of the match , began to move again .
called Woodhouse , with a sudden gleam of mirth , but the thing was not coming at him again .
He must have hurt it , he thought , with the broken bottle .
He felt a dull pain in his ankle .
Probably he was bleeding there .
He wondered if it would support him if he tried to stand up .
The night outside was very still .
There was no sound of any one moving .
The sleepy fools had not heard those wings battering upon the dome , nor his shouts .
It was no good wasting strength in shouting .
The monster flapped its wings and startled him into a defensive attitude .
He hit his elbow against the seat , and it fell over with a crash .
He cursed this , and then he cursed the darkness .
Then he remembered the Thing , and the fight he had had with it .
`` _You_ know that best , '' said Thaddy .
`` But , anyhow , do n't worry yourself now about it .
Have some more to drink . ''
Here are some of the secrets of taxidermy .
They were told me by the taxidermist in a mood of elation .
He told me them in the time between the first glass of whisky and the fourth , when a man is no longer cautious and yet not drunk .
We sat in his den together ; his library it was , his sitting and his eating-room -- separated by a bead curtain , so far as the sense of sight went , from the noisome den where he plied his trade .
He resumed his attitude during an impressive silence .
`` Yes , '' said Wilderspin ; `` _isn't_ it ? ''
Bailey was all alone in the house , for his housekeeper had gone into the town three miles away to pay bills , and the servant had her holiday .
The morning began dull .
A canoe went up about half-past nine , and later a boat-load of camping men came down .
But this was mere margin .
Things became cheerful about ten o'clock .
Then just the bows of the boat came into view , with the towing-mast and a tall , fair-haired man standing up and trying to see over the bank .
The boat bumped unexpectedly among the reeds , and the tall , fair-haired man disappeared suddenly , having apparently fallen back into the invisible part of the boat .
There was a curse and some indistinct laughter .
Hagshot did not laugh , but hastily clambered into the boat and pushed off .
Abruptly the boat passed out of Bailey's sight .
The Malay stopped for a moment and surveyed the bank to the right .
Then he left the path , and , breaking through the corn , vanished in that direction .
The three pursuers followed suit , and their heads and gesticulating arms above the corn , after a brief interval , also went out of Bailey 's field of vision .
This seemed to Bailey an unendurable wrong .
The man was lost to him for ever now , so he thought .
Why could n't the brute have got himself decently caught on the opposite bank , or shot in the water ?
`` It 's worse than Edwin Drood , '' said Bailey .
`` Confound it ! ''
`` To be continued again , and no chance this time of the sequel .
But this is hard on a sick man . ''
Sipping a little , the lady began to recover her powers of explanation .
Bailey endured this patiently enough for perhaps ten minutes .
At last he thought it advisable to assert himself .
`` It 's twenty past one , Mrs Green , '' he said .
`` Do n't you think it time you got me something to eat ? ''
`` Oh Lord , sir ! ''
do n't go making me go out of this room , sir , till I know he 's caught .
He might have got into the house , sir .
He might be creeping , creeping , with that knife of his , along the passage this very -- ''
She broke off suddenly and glared over him at the window .
Her lower jaw dropped .
Bailey turned his head sharply .
Bailey thought swiftly and clutched a medicine bottle in either hand .
One he flung , and it smashed against the acacia .
Silently and deliberately , and keeping his bright eyes fixed on Bailey , the Malay clambered into the balcony .
Bailey , still clutching his second bottle , but with a sickening , sinking feeling about his heart , watched first one leg come over the railing and then the other .
Following his version of the affair , the narrative deposes that Harringay went into his studio about ten o'clock to see what he could make of the head that he had been working at the day before .
The head in question was that of an Italian organ-grinder , and Harringay thought -- but was not quite sure -- that the title would be the `` Vigil . ''
So far he is frank , and his narrative bears the stamp of truth .
He had seen the man expectant for pennies , and with a promptness that suggested genius , had had him in at once .
`` Do n't _grin_ ! ''
`` I do n't want to paint your gums .
Look as though you were unhappy . ''
He walked about the studio and looked at the thing from this point and from that .
Then he said a wicked word .
In the original the word is given .
He went to the blinds and began to pull them down .
They were made of blue holland with the rollers at the bottom of the window , so that you pull them down to get more light .
He gathered his palette , brushes , and mahl stick from his table .
Then he turned to the picture and put a speck of brown in the corner of the mouth ; and shifted his attention thence to the pupil of the eye .
Then he decided that the chin was a trifle too impassive for a vigil .
`` Why do you keep moving about then , '' he said , `` making faces and all that -- sneering and squinting , while I am painting you ? ''
Now it must be remembered that for what follows we have only Harringay 's word .
sneered the sardonic figure ; `` a fancy that came from your seeing an organ-grinder looking up at a window !
You just started painting on the chance of something coming -- that's what you did .
And when I saw you at it I came .
I want a talk with you ! ''
His blood was up .
His danger only nerved him to action , so he says .
So he planted a dab of vermilion in his creature 's mouth .
The Italian spluttered and tried to wipe it off -- evidently horribly surprised .
And then -- according to Harringay -- there began a very remarkable struggle , Harringay splashing away with the red paint , and the picture wriggling about and wiping it off as fast as he put it on .
`` _Two_ masterpieces , '' said the demon .
`` Two indubitable masterpieces for a Chelsea artist's soul .
It 's a bargain ? ''
Harringay replied with the paint brush .
Harringay delivered cut two across the demon , and followed with a thrust in the eye .
There was an indistinct rumbling .
`` _Four_ masterpieces , '' and a spitting sound .
Then Harringay -- according to Harringay 's account -- lit his pipe and sat down and stared at the enamelled canvas , and tried to make out clearly what had happened .
Then he walked round behind it , to see if the back of it was at all remarkable .
Then it was he began to regret he had not photographed the Devil before he painted him out .
`` It 's so confoundedly childish , '' said the Ethnologist , becoming irritated .
`` How did you play it off upon them ? ''
The lieutenant laughed cheerfully .
`` Go on , '' he said .
`` Go on . ''
At last he wearied .
`` To trade so , '' he said , `` on these unsophisticated children of the mountains .
How could you bring yourself to do it , man ? ''
`` We got in sight of the place early the next morning .
You know how it lies , on a spur halfway between the big hills , and as we began to appreciate how wickedly quiet the village lay under the sunlight , we came to a stop to consider .
`` 'Headed orf , or I 'm a nigger , ' said one of the men .
`` I told him to go and do it again , and with that we went on again .
`` I must have thought at a frightful pace .
It seemed a long time before I was sure that the thing meant to keep steady .
At first it heeled sideways .
Then I noticed the face of the rock which seemed to be streaming up past me , and me motionless .
Then I looked down and saw in the darkness the river and the dead Sepoy rushing up towards me .
But in the indistinct light I also saw three Chins , seemingly aghast at the sight of me , and that the Sepoy was decapitated .
At that I wanted to go back again .
`` Then my boot was in the mouth of one , and in a moment he and I were in a heap with the canvas fluttering down on the top of us .
I fancy I dashed out his brains with my foot .
I expected nothing more than to be brained myself by the other two , but the poor heathen had never heard of Baldwin , and incontinently bolted .
`` That about ends the explanation of the flying man story .
I never met a soul the whole eight miles of the way .
I got to Walters ' camp by ten o'clock , and a born idiot of a sentinel had the cheek to fire at me as I came trotting out of the darkness .
So soon as I had hammered my story into Winter 's thick skull , about fifty men started up the valley to clear the Chins out and get our men down .
But for my own part I had too good a thirst to provoke it by going with them .
I looked at him curiously .
Would he have anything to tell me worth the money , or was he the common incapable -- incapable even of telling his own story ?
There was a quality of intelligence in his forehead and eyes , and a certain tremulousness in his nether lip that decided me .
My banter under the circumstances was in very vile taste .
I spoke on the spur of the contrast of his appearance and speech .
I was sorry even while I was speaking .
He measured me for a moment .
`` No doubt it is very absurd .
You will not believe me even when I tell you , so that it is fairly safe to tell you .
And it will be a comfort to tell someone .
I really have a big business in hand , a very big business .
But there are troubles just now .
I make diamonds . ''
I looked at my interlocutor with rising curiosity .
`` It certainly is rather like a diamond .
But , if so , it is a Behemoth of diamonds .
Where did you get it ? ''
`` When I came back the thing was just where I left it , among the white-hot coals .
The explosive had n't burst the case .
And then I had a problem to face .
You know time is an important element in crystallisation .
If you hurry the process the crystals are small -- it is only by prolonged standing that they grow to any size .
I resolved to let this apparatus cool for two years , letting the temperature go down slowly during that time .
And I was now quite out of money ; and with a big fire and the rent of my room , as well as my hunger to satisfy , I had scarcely a penny in the world .
`` If I go in to respectable jewellers they ask me to wait , and go and whisper to a clerk to fetch a policeman , and then I say I can not wait .
And I found out a receiver of stolen goods , and he simply stuck to the one I gave him and told me to prosecute if I wanted it back .
I am going about now with several hundred thousand pounds-worth of diamonds round my neck , and without either food or shelter .
You are the first person I have taken into my confidence .
But I like your face and I am hard-driven . ''
I wonder if you 've heard the name of Butcher ever ? ''
`` It must be the same .
It 's on the east coast .
And somehow there's something in the water that keeps things from decaying .
Like creosote it smells .
It reminded me of Trinidad .
Did they get any more eggs ?
Some of the eggs I found were a foot-and-a-half long .
The swamp goes circling round , you know , and cuts off this bit .
It 's mostly salt , too .
What a time I had of it !
I found the things quite by accident .
We went for eggs , me and two native chaps , in one of those rum canoes all tied together , and found the bones at the same time .
We had a tent and provisions for four days , and we pitched on one of the firmer places .
To think of it brings that odd tarry smell back even now .
It 's funny work .
You go probing into the mud with iron rods , you know .
Usually the egg gets smashed .
I wonder how long it is since these Aepyornises really lived .
The missionaries say the natives have legends about when they were alive , but I never heard any such stories myself .
[ A ] But certainly those eggs we got were as fresh as if they had been new laid .
Carrying them down to the boat one of my nigger chaps dropped one on a rock and it smashed .
How I lammed into the beggar !
But sweet it was , as if it was new laid , not even smelly , and its mother dead these four hundred years , perhaps .
Said a centipede had bit him .
However , I 'm getting off the straight with the story .
It had taken us all day to dig into the slush and get these eggs out unbroken , and we were all covered with beastly black mud , and naturally I was cross .
So far as I knew they were the only eggs that have ever been got out not even cracked .
I went afterwards to see the ones they have at the Natural History Museum in London ; all of them were cracked and just stuck together like a mosaic , and bits missing .
Mine were perfect , and I meant to blow them when I got back .
Naturally I was annoyed at the silly duffer dropping three hours ' work just on account of a centipede .
I hit him about rather . ''
`` They jabbered something at me , and the man that broke the egg jeered .
I aimed at the other -- because he was unwounded and had the paddle , and I missed .
However , I was n't beat .
I knew I had to keep cool , and I tried him again and made him jump with the whang of it .
He did n't laugh that time .
The third time I got his head , and over he went , and the paddle with him .
It was a precious lucky shot for a revolver .
I reckon it was fifty yards .
He went right under .
I don't know if he was shot , or simply stunned and drowned .
Then I began to shout to the other chap to come back , but he huddled up in the canoe and refused to answer .
So I fired out my revolver at him and never got near him .
`` He was a nice friendly little chap , at first , about the size of a small hen -- very much like most other young birds , only bigger .
His plumage was a dirty brown to begin with , with a sort of grey scab that fell off it very soon , and scarcely feathers -- a kind of downy hair .
I can hardly express how pleased I was to see him .
I tell you , Robinson Crusoe do n't make near enough of his loneliness .
But here was interesting company .
He looked at me and winked his eye from the front backwards , like a hen , and gave a chirp and began to peck about at once , as though being hatched three hundred years too late was just nothing .
'Glad to see you , Man Friday ! '
says I , for I had naturally settled he was to be called Man Friday if ever he was hatched , as soon as ever I found the egg in the canoe had developed .
I was a bit anxious about his feed , so I gave him a lump of raw parrot-fish at once .
He took it , and opened his beak for more .
I was glad of that , for , under the circumstances , if he 'd been at all fanciful , I should have had to eat him after all .
You 'd be surprised what an interesting bird that Aepyornis chick was .
He followed me about from the very beginning .
He used to stand by me and watch while I fished in the lagoon , and go shares in anything I caught .
And he was sensible , too .
There were nasty green warty things , like pickled gherkins , used to lie about on the beach , and he tried one of these and it upset him .
He never even looked at any of them again .
`` I decided to swim across the lagoon and leave him alone for a bit , until the affair blew over .
I shinned up the tallest palm-tree , and sat there thinking of it all .
I do n't suppose I ever felt so hurt by anything before or since .
It was the brutal ingratitude of the creature .
I 'd been more than a brother to him .
I 'd hatched him , educated him .
A great gawky , out-of-date bird !
And me a human being -- heir of the ages and all that .
`` I wo n't tell you all the little devices I tried to get that bird round again .
I simply ca n't .
It makes my cheek burn with shame even now to think of the snubs and buffets I had from this infernal curiosity .
I chucked lumps of coral at him from a safe distance , but he only swallowed them .
I shied my open knife at him and almost lost it , though it was too big for him to swallow .
I tried starving him out and struck fishing , but he took to picking along the beach at low water after worms , and rubbed along on that .
Half my time I spent up to my neck in the lagoon , and the rest up the palm-trees .
One of them was scarcely high enough , and when he caught me up it he had a regular Bank Holiday with the calves of my legs .
I do n't know if you have ever tried sleeping up a palm-tree .
It gave me the most horrible nightmares .
Think of the shame of it , too !
Here was this extinct animal mooning about my island like a sulky duke , and me not allowed to rest the sole of my foot on the place .
I used to cry with weariness and vexation .
I told him straight that I did n't mean to be chased about a desert island by any damned anachronisms .
I told him to go and peck a navigator of his own age .
But he only snapped his beak at me .
Great ugly bird -- all legs and neck !
`` I sold the bones to a man named Winslow -- a dealer near the British Museum , and he says he sold them to old Havers .
It seems Havers didn't understand they were extra large , and it was only after his death they attracted attention .
They called 'em Aepyornis -- what was it ? ''
I was surprised to hear a queer sort of laugh , and saw Davidson standing unsteadily in the middle of the room , with a dazzled look on his face .
My first impression was that he was drunk .
He did not notice me .
He was clawing out at something invisible a yard in front of his face .
He put out his hand , slowly , rather hesitatingly , and then clutched nothing .
`` What 's come to it ? ''
He held up his hands to his face , fingers spread out .
`` Great Scot ! ''
The thing happened three or four years ago , when everyone swore by that personage .
Then he began raising his feet clumsily , as though he had expected to find them glued to the floor .
`` Ca n't you see it 's me ? ''
`` I ca n't even see it 's myself .
Where the devil are we ? ''
I put my hand on his arm again , and this time he was less alarmed .
`` We seem to have a sort of invisible bodies , '' said he .
there 's a boat coming round the headland .
It 's very much like the old life after all -- in a different climate . ''
`` What _do_ you see ? ''
Davidson said he could see nothing but a lot of sand and broken-up shells .
Wade gave him some other things to feel , telling him what they were , and watching him keenly .
`` Do n't mistake me , '' said Wade .
`` You are alive and in this room of Boyce 's .
But something has happened to your eyes .
You can not see ; you can feel and hear , but not see .
Do you follow me ? ''
`` It seems to me that I see too much . ''
Davidson rubbed his knuckles into his eyes .
Then he opened his eyes , `` And there , '' said he , `` is the sun just rising , and the yards of the ship , and a tumbled sea , and a couple of birds flying .
I never saw anything so real .
And I 'm sitting up to my neck in a bank of sand . ''
`` Good Lord ! ''
said Atkins , who had now heard the particulars of the seizure .
`` How the deuce could you dream that ? ''
If it were possible we would have the noises of that shed always about the reader as he reads , we would tell all our story to such an accompaniment .
It was a steady stream of din , from which the ear picked out first one thread and then another ; there was the intermittent snorting , panting , and seething of the steam engines , the suck and thud of their pistons , the dull beat on the air as the spokes of the great driving-wheels came round , a note the leather straps made as they ran tighter and looser , and a fretful tumult from the dynamos ; and over all , sometimes inaudible , as the ear tired of it , and then creeping back upon the senses again , was this trombone note of the big machine .
The floor never felt steady and quiet beneath one 's feet , but quivered and jarred .
It was a confusing , unsteady place , and enough to send anyone 's thoughts jerking into odd zigzags .
And for three months , while the big strike of the engineers was in progress , Holroyd , who was a blackleg , and Azuma-zi , who was a mere black , were never out of the stir and eddy of it , but slept and fed in the little wooden shanty between the shed and the gates .
It is hard to say exactly what madness is .
I fancy Azuma-zi was mad .
The incessant din and whirl of the dynamo shed may have churned up his little store of knowledge and big store of superstitious fancy , at last , into something akin to frenzy .
At any rate , when the idea of making Holroyd a sacrifice to the Dynamo Fetich was thus suggested to him , it filled him with a strange tumult of exultant emotion .
Then he saw the set expression of Azuma-zi 's eyes as the Asiatic came out of the shadow towards him .
Never had Azuma-zi seen a man killed so swiftly and pitilessly .
The big humming machine had slain its victim without wavering for a second from its steady beating .
It was indeed a mighty god .
I see now . ''
Then almost mechanically he went towards the switch in the shadow and turned the current into the railway circuit again .
As he did so the singed body loosened its grip upon the machine and fell forward on its face .
The core of the dynamo roared out loud and clear , and the armature beat the air .
`` Did they hang you well ? ''
`` Yes , '' said Mr Watkins , `` I thought it rather a good notion when it occurred to me .
I expect to begin to-morrow night . ''
Mr Watkins was apparently unaware of his approach .
A friendly conversation with Lady Hammerpond 's butler had just terminated , and that individual , surrounded by the three pet dogs which it was his duty to take for an airing after dinner had been served , was receding in the distance .
Mr Watkins was mixing colour with an air of great industry .
Sant , approaching more nearly , was surprised to see the colour in question was as harsh and brilliant an emerald green as it is possible to imagine .
Having cultivated an extreme sensibility to colour from his earliest years , he drew the air in sharply between his teeth at the very first glimpse of this brew .
Mr Watkins turned round .
`` What on earth are you going to do with that _beastly_ green ? ''
Mr Watkins was collecting his resources .
Nothing could save the situation but decision .
`` If you come here interrupting my work , '' he said , `` I 'm a-goin ' to paint your face with it . ''
No one answered this remark .
Yet he failed to see how it applied to him .
`` I presume you saw the rascals making for the shrubbery , and dropped down on them ? ''
`` Yes , I ought to have thought of all that , '' said Mr Watkins ; `` but one ca n't think of everythink . ''
And instead of entering Hammerpond House by the dressing-room window , Mr Watkins entered it -- slightly intoxicated , and inclined now to cheerfulness again -- on the arm of a real live peer , and by the front door .
`` This , '' thought Mr Watkins , `` is burgling in style ! ''
The `` scoundrels , '' seen by the gaslight , proved to be mere local amateurs unknown to Mr Watkins , and they were taken down into the pantry and there watched over by the three policemen , two gamekeepers with loaded guns , the butler , an ostler , and a carman , until the dawn allowed of their removal to Hazelhurst police-station .
Mr Watkins was made much of in the saloon .
They devoted a sofa to him , and would not hear of a return to the village that night .
Lady Aveling was sure he was brilliantly original , and said her idea of Turner was just such another rough , half-inebriated , deep-eyed , brave , and clever man .
Some one brought up a remarkable little folding-ladder that had been picked up in the shrubbery , and showed him how it was put together .
They also described how wires had been found in the shrubbery , evidently placed there to trip-up unwary pursuers .
It was lucky he had escaped these snares .
And they showed him the jewels .
[ Footnote A : `` Remarks on a Recent Revision of Microlepidoptera . ''
[ Footnote C : `` Further Remarks , '' & c .
In an elaborate critique he rent Pawkins to tatters -- one can fancy the man 's disordered black hair , and his queer dark eyes flashing as he went for his antagonist -- and Pawkins made a reply , halting , ineffectual , with painful gaps of silence , and yet malignant .
There was no mistaking his will to wound Hapley , nor his incapacity to do it .
But few of those who heard him -- I was absent from that meeting -- realised how ill the man was .
Suddenly his attention drifted from one eye to the other .
The table-cloth was of the material called tapestry by shopmen , and rather brightly coloured .
The pattern was in gold , with a small amount of crimson and pale blue upon a greyish ground .
At one point the pattern seemed displaced , and there was a vibrating movement of the colours at this point .
It was a large moth or butterfly ; its wings spread in butterfly fashion !
Something about the head and body of the insect became singularly suggestive of Pawkins , just as the chess king had been .
The moth , or butterfly , trailing an odd flavour of Pawkins with it , kept coming into that walk , though he did his best to keep his mind off it .
Once he saw it quite distinctly , with its wings flattened out , upon the old stone wall that runs along the west edge of the park , but going up to it he found it was only two lumps of grey and yellow lichen .
`` This , '' said Hapley , `` is the reverse of mimicry .
Instead of a butterfly looking like a stone , here is a stone looking like a butterfly ! ''
Once something hovered and fluttered round his head , but by an effort of will he drove that impression out of his mind again .
In the afternoon Hapley called upon the Vicar , and argued with him upon theological questions .
They sat in the little arbour covered with briar , and smoked as they wrangled .
`` Look at that moth ! ''
said Hapley , suddenly , pointing to the edge of the wooden table .
They hurried to the window .
It was a dim grey night ; an almost unbroken sheet of watery cloud was sweeping across the moon , and the hedge and trees in front of the house were black against the pale roadway .
They saw Hapley , looking like a ghost in his shirt and white trousers , running to and fro in the road , and beating the air .
Now he would stop , now he would dart very rapidly at something invisible , now he would move upon it with stealthy strides .
At last he went out of sight up the road towards the down .
Then , while they argued who should go down and lock the door , he returned .
He was walking very fast , and he came straight into the house , closed the door carefully , and went quietly up to his bedroom .
Then everything was silent .
`` The fact is , I am a sleep-walker , and the last two nights I have been without my sleeping mixture .
There is nothing to be alarmed about , really .
I am sorry I made such an ass of myself .
I will go over the down to Shoreham , and get some stuff to make me sleep soundly .
I ought to have done that yesterday . ''
Both men spoke in low tones , and their lips were hard and dry .
The man called Evans came swaying along the canoe until he could look over his companion 's shoulder .
`` This curved and twisting line is the river -- I could do with a drink now !
-- and this star is the place . ''
`` Your turn with the paddle now , Hooker , '' said he .
So they reached the river mouth .
A little way up Hooker took some water in the hollow of his hand , tasted it , and spat it out .
A little further he tried again .
`` This will do , '' he said , and they began drinking eagerly .
`` _He_ said there was a heap of stones , '' said Hooker .
Evans stood with the ingot in his hands .
What did a dead Chinaman signify ?
`` We shall have to take this stuff to the mainland piecemeal , and bury it there for a while .
How shall we get it to the canoe ? ''
He took his jacket off and spread it on the ground , and flung two or three ingots into it .
Presently he found that another little thorn had punctured his skin .
Then with an abrupt transition to unreasonable anger : `` What is the good of waiting here all the day ?
Lend a hand , I say !
You have done nothing but moon since we saw the dead Chinaman . ''
`` Do n't touch me !
Do n't touch me ! ''
said Evans in a stifled voice .
`` Put the gold back on the coat . ''
As Hooker handled the ingots he felt a little prick on the ball of his thumb .
He looked at his hand and saw a slender thorn , perhaps two inches in length .
`` God help me ! ''
For the thorns were similar to those the Dyaks poison and use in their blowing-tubes .
He understood now what Chang-hi 's assurance of the safety of his treasure meant .
He understood that grin now .
Then Hooker began to suck furiously at the little pink spot on the ball of his thumb -- sucking for dear life .
Presently he felt a strange aching pain in his arms and shoulders , and his fingers seemed difficult to bend .
Then he knew that sucking was no good .
Also 30 copies on hand-made paper _Demy 8vo_ .
Few announcements will be more welcome to lovers of English verse than the one that Mr. Henley is bringing together into one book the finest lyrics in our language .
The book will be produced with the same care that made 'Lyra Heroica ' delightful to the hand and eye .
THE CHRONICLES OF COUNT ANTONIO .
By ANTHONY HOPE , Author of 'The Prisoner of Zenda , ' 'The God in the Car , ' etc .
This is a story of amateur pugilism and chivalrous adventure , written by an author whose books on sport are well known .
ARTICLES OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND .
Edited with an Introduction by E.C .
, Principal of Wells Theological College .
THE WORSHIP OF THE ROMANS .
, Professor of Philosophy at University College , Nottingham .
THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE .
HOBHOUSE , Fellow and Tutor of Corpus College , Oxford .
THE PHILOSOPHY OF T.H .
, Lecturer at Lincoln College , Oxford .
FLINDERS PETRIE , D.C.L .
Translated from the Papyri , and edited with notes by W.M .
Illustrated by TRISTRAM ELLIS .
THE LIFE OF SIR THOMAS MORE .
, Author of 'William Laud . '
MODERN CIVILISATION IN SOME OF ITS ECONOMIC ASPECTS .
By W. CUNNINGHAM , LL.D.
, Fellow of Trinity College , Cambridge .
[ Social Questions Series_ .
Mr. Henley has brought to the task of selection an instinct alike for poetry and for chivalry which seems to us quite wonderfully , and even unerringly , right . '
'Of the many anthologies of 'old rhyme ' recently made , Mr. Couch's seems the richest in its materials , and the most artistic in its arrangement .
Mr. Couch 's notes are admirable ; and Messrs. Methuen are to be congratulated on the format of the sumptuous volume . '
'The verses display a rare and versatile gift of parody , great command of metre , and a very pretty turn of humour . '
'An attractive and catholic selection . '
`` A.G. '' VERSES TO ORDER .
By `` A.G. '' _Cr .
Also a limited edition on hand-made paper .
'Simple , manly , and humorous .
Every cricketer should buy the book . '
The series , of which Mr. William Ernest Henley is the general editor , will confine itself to no single period or department of literature .
Poetry , fiction , drama , biography , autobiography , letters , essays -- in all these fields is the material of many goodly volumes .
The books , which are designed and printed by Messrs. Constable , are issued in two editions -- ( 1 ) A small edition , on the finest Japanese vellum , demy 8vo , 21_s_ .
a volume net ; ( 2 ) the popular edition on laid paper , crown 8vo , buckram , 3_s .
25 copies on Japanese paper .
Illustrated by TRISTRAM ELLIS .
_Crown 8vo._ In two volumes .
'A survey at once graphic , acute , and quaintly written . '
ENGLISH SEAMEN ( Howard , Clifford , Hawkins , Drake , Cavendish ) .
Edited , with an Introduction , by DAVID HANNAY .
A BOOK OF ENGLISH PROSE .
HENLEY and CHARLES WHIBLEY .
Also 15 copies on Japanese paper .
A little book on Fly-Fishing by an old friend of Mr. Ruskin .
By P. CHALMERS MITCHELL , M.A.
A MONOGRAPH OF THE MYXOGASTRES .
With 12 Coloured Plates .
'A very learned and instructive work . '
Bishop Westcott 's is a noble sermon . '
THE IMITATION OF CHRIST .
By THOMAS A KEMPIS .
With an Introduction by ARCHDEACON FARRAR .
GERE , and printed in black and red .
With an Introduction and Notes by W. LOCK , M.A.
, Sub-Warden of Keble College , Author of 'The Life of John Keble . '
Illustrated by R. ANNING BELL .
A series of short biographies of the most prominent leaders of religious life and thought of all ages and countries .
Other volumes will be announced in due course .
With Sixty-seven Illustrations by W. PARKINSON , F.D .
BEDFORD , and F. MASEY .
_Large Crown 8vo , cloth super extra , top edge gilt , 10s .
Fifth and Cheaper Edition .
THE TRAGEDY OF THE CAESARS : The Emperors of the Julian and Claudian Lines .
With numerous Illustrations from Busts , Gems , Cameos , etc .
By S. BARING GOULD , Author of 'Mehalah , ' etc .
'A bright , entertaining , unusually able book , quite worthy of its brilliant author . '
'A very notable book ; a very sympathetically , at times delightfully written book . '
MRS. CURGENVEN OF CURGENVEN .
By S. BARING GOULD .
THE QUEEN OF LOVE .
By S. BARING GOULD .
'A strong and original story , teeming with graphic description , stirring incident , and , above all , with vivid and enthralling human interest . '
Norris is always happy in his delineation of everyday experiences , but rarely has he been brighter or breezier than in `` Matthew Austin . ''
The pictures are in Mr. Norris 's pleasantest vein , while running through the entire story is a felicity of style and wholesomeness of tone which one is accustomed to find in the novels of this favourite author . '
TALES OF MEAN STREETS .
'By all those who delight in the uses of words , who rate the exercise of prose above the exercise of verse , who rejoice in all proofs of its delicacy and its strength , who believe that English prose is chief among the moulds of thought , by these Mr. Marriott Watson 's book will be welcomed . '
'The author 's faults are atoned for by certain positive and admirable merits .
The romances have not their counterpart in modern literature , and to read them is a unique experience . '
ARMINELL : A Social Romance .
By S. BARING GOULD .
JACQUETTA , and other Stories .
By S. BARING GOULD .
'A delightful collection of studies of animal nature .
It is very seldom that we get anything so perfect in its kind ... .
The illustrations are clever , and the whole book a singularly delightful one . '
THE COMING OF CUCULAIN .
A Romance of the Heroic Age of Ireland .
By STANDISH O'GRADY , Author of 'Finn and his Companions , ' etc .
Illustrated by MURRAY SMITH .
A CUMBERER OF THE GROUND .
By CONSTANCE SMITH , Author of 'The Repentance of Paul Wentworth , ' etc .
By F. MABEL ROBINSON .
_A Series of Books by well-known Authors , well illustrated .
By Mrs. PARR , Author of 'Adam and Eve . '
_The following volumes are ready_ : --
THE CHEMISTRY OF FIRE .
The Elementary Principles of Chemistry .
PATTISON MUIR , M.A .
A TEXT-BOOK OF AGRICULTURAL BOTANY .
BACK TO THE LAND : An Inquiry into the Cure for Rural Depopulation .
TRUSTS , POOLS AND CORNERS : As affecting Commerce and Industry .
By J. STEPHEN JEANS , M.R.I.
