She says the snake advises her to try the fruit of that tree , and says the result will be a great and fine and noble education .
I told her there would be another result , too -- it would introduce death into the world .
That was a mistake -- it had been better to keep the remark to myself ; it only gave her an idea -- she could save the sick buzzard , and furnish fresh meat to the despondent lions and tigers .
I advised her to keep away from the tree .
She said she would n't .
I have been off hunting and fishing a month , up in the region that she calls Buffalo ; I do n't know why , unless it is because there are not any buffaloes there .
Meantime the bear has learned to paddle around all by itself on its hind legs , and says `` poppa '' and `` momma . ''
It is certainly a new species .
This resemblance to words may be purely accidental , of course , and may have no purpose or meaning ; but even in that case it is still extraordinary , and is a thing which no other bear can do .
This imitation of speech , taken together with general absence of fur and entire absence of tail , sufficiently indicates that this is a new kind of bear .
The further study of it will be exceedingly interesting .
Meantime I will go off on a far expedition among the forests of the North and make an exhaustive search .
There must certainly be another one somewhere , and this one will be less dangerous when it has company of its own species .
I will go straightway ; but I will muzzle this one first .
`` Well , Tucker [ foreman of the printing shop ] and I soaked some handmade linen paper in weak coffee , put it as a wet bundle into a warm room to mildew , dried it to a dampness approved by Tucker and he printed the 'copy ' on a hand press .
I had special punches cut for such Elizabethan abbreviations as the a , e , o and u , when followed by m or n -- and for the ( commonly and stupidly pronounced ye ) .
In his later years at Stormfield Mark loved to play his favorite billiards .
`` It was sometimes a wonderful and fearsome thing to watch Mr. Clemens play billiards , '' relates Elizabeth Wallace .
`` He loved the game , and he loved to win , but he occasionally made a very bad stroke , and then the varied , picturesque , and unorthodox vocabulary , acquired in his more youthful years , was the only thing that gave him comfort .
Gently , slowly , with no profane inflexions of voice , but irresistibly as though they had the headwaters of the Mississippi for their source , came this stream of unholy adjectives and choice expletives . ''
`` With a nigger squat on her safety-valve '' John Hay , Pike County Ballads .
`` In every gallery in Europe there are hideous pictures of blood , carnage , oozing brains , putrefaction -- pictures portraying intolerable suffering -- pictures alive with every conceivable horror , wrought out in dreadful detail -- and similar pictures are being put on the canvas every day and publicly exhibited -- without a growl from anybody -- for they are innocent , they are inoffensive , being works of art .
But suppose a literary artist ventured to go into a painstaking and elaborate description of one of these grisly things -- the critics would skin him alive .
Well , let it go , it can not be helped ; Art retains her privileges , Literature has lost hers .
Somebody else may cipher out the whys and the wherefores and the consistencies of it -- I have n't got time . ''
`` Whether a particular book would tend to excite such impulses and thoughts must be tested by the court 's opinion as to its effect on a person with average sex instincts -- what the French would call 'l'homme moyen sensuel ' -- who plays , in this branch of legal inquiry , the same role of hypothetical reagent as does the 'reasonable man ' in the law of torts and 'the learned man in the art ' on questions of invention in patent law . ''
Immediately upon first reading , John Hay , later Secretary of State , had proclaimed 1601 a masterpiece .
Human taste is a curious thing ; delicacy is purely a matter of environment and point of view . ''
`` Then I took it to one of the greatest , best and most learned of Divines [ Rev .
Joseph H. Twichell ] and read it to him .
He came within an ace of killing himself with laughter ( for between you and me the thing was dreadfully funny .
I do n't often write anything that I laugh at myself , but I can hardly think of that thing without laughing ) .
That old Divine said it was a piece of the finest kind of literary art -- and David Gray of the Buffalo Courier said it ought to be printed privately and left behind me when I died , and then my fame as a literary artist would last . ''
YESTERNIGHT toke her maiste ye queene a fantasie such as she sometimes hath , and had to her closet certain that doe write playes , bokes , and such like , these being my lord Bacon , his worship Sir Walter Ralegh , Mr. Ben Jonson , and ye child Francis Beaumonte , which being but sixteen , hath yet turned his hand to ye doing of ye Lattin masters into our Englishe tong , with grete discretion and much applaus .
Also came with these ye famous Shaxpur .
A righte straunge mixing truly of mighty blode with mean , ye more in especial since ye queenes grace was present , as likewise these following , to wit : Ye Duchess of Bilgewater , twenty-six yeres of age ; ye Countesse of Granby , thirty ; her doter , ye Lady Helen , fifteen ; as also these two maides of honor , to-wit , ye Lady Margery Boothy , sixty-five , and ye Lady Alice Dilberry , turned seventy , she being two yeres ye queenes graces elder .
-- My lord Bacon ?
Lord Bacon.-Not from my leane entrailes hath this prodigy burst forth , so please your grace .
Naught doth so befit ye grete as grete performance ; and haply shall ye finde yt 't is not from mediocrity this miracle hath issued .
[ Tho ' ye subjct be but a fart , yet will this tedious sink of learning pondrously phillosophize .
Meantime did the foul and deadly stink pervade all places to that degree , yt never smelt I ye like , yet dare I not to leave ye presence , albeit I was like to suffocate . ]
[ Then was there a silence , and each did turn him toward the worshipful Sr Walter Ralegh , that browned , embattled , bloody swashbuckler , who rising up did smile , and simpering say , ]
Sr W. -- Most gracious maisty , 't was I that did it , but indeed it was so poor and frail a note , compared with such as I am wont to furnish , yt in sooth I was ashamed to call the weakling mine in so august a presence .
It was nothing -- less than nothing , madam -- I did it but to clear my nether throat ; but had I come prepared , then had I delivered something worthy .
Bear with me , please your grace , till I can make amends .
Then fell they to talk about ye manners and customs of many peoples , and Master Shaxpur spake of ye boke of ye sieur Michael de Montaine , wherein was mention of ye custom of widows of Perigord to wear uppon ye headdress , in sign of widowhood , a jewel in ye similitude of a man's member wilted and limber , whereat ye queene did laugh and say widows in England doe wear prickes too , but betwixt the thighs , and not wilted neither , till coition hath done that office for them .
Master Shaxpur did likewise observe how yt ye sieur de Montaine hath also spoken of a certain emperor of such mighty prowess that he did take ten maidenheddes in ye compass of a single night , ye while his empress did entertain two and twenty lusty knights between her sheetes , yet was not satisfied ; whereat ye merrie Countess Granby saith a ram is yet ye emperor's superior , sith he wil tup above a hundred yewes 'twixt sun and sun ; and after , if he can have none more to shag , will masturbate until he hath enrich 'd whole acres with his seed .
Then spake ye queene of how she met old Rabelais when she was turned of fifteen , and he did tell her of a man his father knew that had a double pair of bollocks , whereon a controversy followed as concerning the most just way to spell the word , ye contention running high betwixt ye learned Bacon and ye ingenious Jonson , until at last ye old Lady Margery , wearying of it all , saith , 'Gentles , what mattereth it how ye shall spell the word ?
I warrant Ye when ye use your bollocks ye shall not think of it ; and my Lady Granby , be ye content ; let the spelling be , ye shall enjoy the beating of them on your buttocks just the same , I trow .
Before I had gained my fourteenth year I had learnt that them that would explore a cunt stop 'd not to consider the spelling o't . '
I , Scene I ,
Hear for your love , and buy for your money .
A delicate ballad o ' the ferret and the coney .
A preservative again ' the punk 's evil .
Another goose-green starch , and the devil .
A dozen of divine points , and the godly garter The fairing of good counsel , of an ell and three-quarters .
What is't you buy ?
The windmill blown down by the witche 's fart , Or Saint George , that , O !
did break the dragon 's heart .
Martial , too ( Book XII , Epigram LXXVII ) , tells of the embarrassment of one who broke wind while praying in the Capitol ,
`` YE BOKE OF YE SIEUR MICHAEL DE MONTAINE ''
But Pliny , notwithstanding his great attainments , was often a retailer of stale gossip , and in like case was Aurelius Victor , another writer who heaped much odium on her name .
Again , there is a great hiatus in the Annals of Tacitus , a true historian , at the period covering the earlier days of the Empress ; while Suetonius , bitter as he may be , is little more than an anecdotist .
Juvenal , another of her detractors , is a prejudiced witness , for he started out to satirize female vice , and naturally aimed at high places .
Dio also tells of Messalina 's misdeeds , but his work is under the same limitations as that of Suetonius .
Furthermore , none but Pliny mentions the excess under consideration .
`` 'BOCCACCIO HATH A STORY ''
Indeed , the story of the various printings of 1601 is almost legendary .
In the days of the `` jour . ''
printer , so I am told , well-thumbed copies were carried from print shop to print shop .
For more than a quarter century now it has been one of the chief sources of enjoyment for printers ' devils ; and many a young rascal has learned about life from this Fireside Conversation .
It has been printed all over the country , and if report is to be believed , in foreign countries as well .
Because of the many surreptitious and anonymous printings it is exceedingly difficult , if not impossible , to compile a complete bibliography .
Many printings lack the name of the publisher , the printer , the place or date of printing .
In many instances some of the data , through the patient questioning of fellow collectors , has been obtained and supplied .
DESCRIPTION : Pamphlet , pp .
[ 1 ] -8 , without wrappers or cover , measuring 7x8 inches .
The title is Set in caps .
Later , in 1916 , a facsimile edition of this printing was published in Chicago from plates .
Not in literary letters -- prepared with care , and the thought of possible publication -- but in those letters wrought out of the press of circumstances , and with no idea of print in mind .
A collection of such documents , written by one whose life has become of interest to mankind at large , has a value quite aside from literature , in that it reflects in some degree at least the soul of the writer .
He was a man of few restraints and of no affectations .
In his correspondence , as in his talk , he spoke what was in his mind , untrammeled by literary conventions .
Necessarily such a collection does not constitute a detailed life story , but is supplementary to it .
His letters are here gathered for those who wish to pursue the subject somewhat more exhaustively from the strictly personal side .
Selections from this correspondence were used in the biography mentioned .
Most of these are here reprinted in the belief that an owner of the `` Letters '' will wish the collection to be reasonably complete .
[ Etext Editor 's Note : A .
He was one of the foremost American philosophers of his day ; he was the world 's most famous humorist of any day .
During the later years of his life he ranked not only as America 's chief man of letters , but likewise as her best known and best loved citizen .
The beginnings of that life were sufficiently unpromising .
The family was a good one , of old Virginia and Kentucky stock , but its circumstances were reduced , its environment meager and disheartening .
The father , John Marshall Clemens -- a lawyer by profession , a merchant by vocation -- had brought his household to Florida from Jamestown , Tennessee , somewhat after the manner of judge Hawkins as pictured in The Gilded Age .
Florida was a small town then , a mere village of twenty-one houses located on Salt River , but judge Clemens , as he was usually called , optimistic and speculative in his temperament , believed in its future .
Salt River would be made navigable ; Florida would become a metropolis .
He established a small business there , and located his family in the humble frame cottage where , five months later , was born a baby boy to whom they gave the name of Samuel -- a family name -- and added Langhorne , after an old Virginia friend of his father .
The child was puny , and did not make a very sturdy fight for life .
Still he weathered along , season after season , and survived two stronger children , Margaret and Benjamin .
By 1839 Judge Clemens had lost faith in Florida .
In Tom Sawyer we have a picture of the Hannibal of those days and the atmosphere of his boyhood there .
His schooling was brief and of a desultory kind .
It ended one day in 1847 , when his father died and it became necessary that each one should help somewhat in the domestic crisis .
His brother Orion , ten years his senior , was already a printer by trade .
Pamela , his sister ; also considerably older , had acquired music , and now took a few pupils .
The little boy Sam , at twelve , was apprenticed to a printer named Ament .
His wages consisted of his board and clothes -- '' more board than clothes , '' as he once remarked to the writer .
He remained with Ament until his brother Orion bought out a small paper in Hannibal in 1850 .
The paper , in time , was moved into a part of the Clemens home , and the two brothers ran it , the younger setting most of the type .
A still younger brother , Henry , entered the office as an apprentice .
The Hannibal journal was no great paper from the beginning , and it did not improve with time .
Still , it managed to survive -- country papers nearly always manage to survive -- year after year , bringing in some sort of return .
It was on this paper that young Sam Clemens began his writings -- burlesque , as a rule , of local characters and conditions -- usually published in his brother 's absence ; generally resulting in trouble on his return .
Yet they made the paper sell , and if Orion had but realized his brother 's talent he might have turned it into capital even then .
In 1853 ( he was not yet eighteen ) Sam Clemens grew tired of his limitations and pined for the wider horizon of the world .
He gave out to his family that he was going to St. Louis , but he kept on to New York , where a World 's Fair was then going on .
In New York he found employment at his trade , and during the hot months of 1853 worked in a printing-office in Cliff Street .
By and by he went to Philadelphia , where he worked a brief time ; made a trip to Washington , and presently set out for the West again , after an absence of more than a year .
Onion , meanwhile , had established himself at Muscatine , Iowa , but soon after removed to Keokuk , where the brothers were once more together , till following their trade .
Young Sam Clemens remained in Keokuk until the winter of 1856-57 , when he caught a touch of the South-American fever then prevalent ; and decided to go to Brazil .
He left Keokuk for Cincinnati , worked that winter in a printing-office there , and in April took the little steamer , Paul Jones , for New Orleans , where he expected to find a South-American vessel .
In Life on the Mississippi we have his story of how he met Horace Bixby and decided to become a pilot instead of a South American adventurer -- jauntily setting himself the stupendous task of learning the twelve hundred miles of the Mississippi River between St. Louis and New Orleans -- of knowing it as exactly and as unfailingly , even in the dark , as one knows the way to his own features .
Yet within eighteen months he had become not only a pilot , but one of the best and most careful pilots on the river , intrusted with some of the largest and most valuable steamers .
He continued in that profession for two and a half years longer , and during that time met with no disaster that cost his owners a single dollar for damage .
Then the war broke out .
South Carolina seceded in December , 1860 and other States followed .
Clemens was in New Orleans in January , 1861 , when Louisiana seceded , and his boat was put into the Confederate service and sent up the Red River .
His occupation gone , he took steamer for the North -- the last one before the blockade closed .
A blank cartridge was fired at them from Jefferson Barracks when they reached St. Louis , but they did not understand the signal , and kept on .
Presently a shell carried away part of the pilot-house and considerably disturbed its inmates .
They realized , then , that war had really begun .
In those days Clemens 's sympathies were with the South .
He hurried up to Hannibal and enlisted with a company of young fellows who were recruiting with the avowed purpose of `` throwing off the yoke of the invader . ''
They were ready for the field , presently , and set out in good order , a sort of nondescript cavalry detachment , mounted on animals more picturesque than beautiful .
Still , it was a resolute band , and might have done very well , only it rained a good deal , which made soldiering disagreeable and hard .
Lieutenant Clemens resigned at the end of two weeks , and decided to go to Nevada with Orion , who was a Union abolitionist and had received an appointment from Lincoln as Secretary of the new Territory .
He was Orion 's private secretary , but there was no private-secretary work to do , and no salary attached to the position .
The incumbent presently went to mining , adding that to his other trades .
He became a professional miner , but not a rich one .
He was at Aurora , California , in the Esmeralda district , skimping along , with not much to eat and less to wear , when he was summoned by Joe Goodman , owner and editor of the Virginia City Enterprise , to come up and take the local editorship of that paper .
He had been contributing sketches to it now and then , under the pen , name of `` Josh , '' and Goodman , a man of fine literary instincts , recognized a talent full of possibilities .
This was in the late summer of 1862 .
Clemens walked one hundred and thirty miles over very bad roads to take the job , and arrived way-worn and travel-stained .
He began on a salary of twenty-five dollars a week , picking up news items here and there , and contributing occasional sketches , burlesques , hoaxes , and the like .
The name presently became known up and down the Pacific coast .
His articles were , copied and commented upon .
He left Carson City one day , after becoming involved in a duel , the result of an editorial squib written in Goodman 's absence , and went across the Sierras to San Francisco .
The duel turned out farcically enough , but the Nevada law , which regarded even a challenge or its acceptance as a felony , was an inducement to his departure .
Furthermore , he had already aspired to a wider field of literary effort .
He attached himself to the Morning Call , and wrote occasionally for one or two literary papers -- the Golden Era and the Californian -- -prospering well enough during the better part of the year .
Bret Harte and the rest of the little Pacific-slope group were also on the staff of these papers , and for a time , at least , the new school of American humor mustered in San Francisco .
Undecided as to his plans , he was one day advised by a friend to deliver a lecture .
He was already known as an entertaining talker , and his adviser judged his possibilities well .
In Roughing It we find the story of that first lecture and its success .
He followed it with other lectures up and down the Coast .
He had added one more profession to his intellectual stock in trade .
Meantime , a home was being built for them in Hartford , and in the autumn of 1874 they took up residence in ita happy residence , continued through seventeen years -- well-nigh perfect years .
Their summers they spent in Elmira , on Quarry Farm -- a beautiful hilltop , the home of Mrs. Clemens's sister .
He had a special study there , some distance from the house , where he loved to work out his fancies and put them into visible form .
He had made a reading tour with George W. Cable during the winter of 1884-85 , but he abominated the platform , and often vowed he would never appear before an audience again .
Yet , in 1895 , when he was sixty years old , he decided to rebuild his fortunes by making a reading tour around the world .
It was not required of him to pay his debts in full .
The creditors were willing to accept fifty per cent .
of the liabilities , and had agreed to a settlement on that basis .
But this did not satisfy Mrs. Clemens , and it did not satisfy him .
They decided to pay dollar for dollar .
They sailed for America , and in July , 1895 , set out from Elmira on the long trail across land and sea .
Mrs. Clemens , and Clara Clemens , joined this pilgrimage , Susy and Jean Clemens remaining at Elmira with their aunt .
Looking out of the car windows , the travelers saw Susy waving them an adieu .
It was a picture they would long remember .
His work did not cease when the pressing need of money came to an end .
He was full of ideas , and likely to begin a new article or story at any time .
He wrote and published a number of notable sketches , articles , stories , even books , during these later years , among them that marvelous short story -- '' The Man That Corrupted Hadleyburg . ''
In that story , as in most of his later work , he proved to the world that he was much more than a humorist -- that he was , in fact , a great teacher , moralist , philosopher -- the greatest , perhaps , of his age .
The coveted estate of silence , time 's only absolute gift , it was the one benefaction he had ever considered worth while .
The Machinery department is on the main floor , but I can not enumerate any of it on account of the lateness of the hour ( past 8 o'clock . )
It would take more than a week to examine everything on exhibition ; and as I was only in a little over two hours tonight , I only glanced at about one-third of the articles ; and having a poor memory ; I have enumerated scarcely any of even the principal objects .
The visitors to the Palace average 6,000 daily -- double the population of Hannibal .
The price of admission being 50 cents , they take in about $ 3,000 .
`` I want you to take hold of the end of this , Sam , '' she said , `` and make me a promise .
I want you to repeat after me these words : 'I do solemnly swear that I will not throw a card , or drink a drop of liquor while I am gone . '
To Mrs. Moffett , in St. Louis :
MY DEAR SISTER , -- I have not written to any of the family for some time , from the fact , firstly , that I did n't know where they were , and secondly , because I have been fooling myself with the idea that I was going to leave New York every day for the last two weeks .
I have taken a liking to the abominable place , and every time I get ready to leave , I put it off a day or so , from some unaccountable cause .
It is as hard on my conscience to leave New York , as it was easy to leave Hannibal .
I think I shall get off Tuesday , though .
How many subscribers has the Journal got ?
What does the job-work pay ?
and what does the whole concern pay ?
KEOKUK , Iowa , June 10th , 1856 .
MY DEAR MOTHER & SISTER , -- I have nothing to write .
Everything is going on well .
The Directory is coming on finely .
I have to work on it occasionally , which I do n't like a particle I do n't like to work at too many things at once .
They take Henry and Dick away from me too .
Before we commenced the Directory , I could tell before breakfast just how much work could be done during the day , and manage accordingly -- but now , they throw all my plans into disorder by taking my hands away from their work .
I have nothing to do with the book -- if I did I would have the two book hands do more work than they do , or else I would drop it .
It is not a mere supposition that they do not work fast enough -- I know it ; for yesterday the two book hands were at work all day , Henry and Dick all the afternoon , on the advertisements , and they set up five pages and a half -- and I set up two pages and a quarter of the same matter after supper , night before last , and I do n't work fast on such things .
They are either excessively slow motioned or very lazy .
I am not getting along well with the job work .
I ca n't work blindly -- without system .
I gave Dick a job yesterday , which I calculated he would set in two hours and I could work off in three , and therefore just finish it by supper time , but he was transferred to the Directory , and the job , promised this morning , remains untouched .
Through all the great pressure of job work lately , I never before failed in a promise of the kind .
Samuel Clemens was never celebrated for his patience ; we may imagine that the disorder of the office tried his nerves .
He seems , on the whole , however , to have been rather happy in Keokuk .
There were plenty of young people there , and he was a favorite among them .
But he had grown dissatisfied , and when one day some weeks later there fell into His hands an account of the riches of the newly explored regions of the upper Amazon , he promptly decided to find his fortune at the headwaters of the great South-American river .
The second letter reports this momentous decision .
It was written to Henry Clemens , who was temporarily absent-probably in Hannibal .
MY DEAR BROTHER , -- ... .
Ward and I held a long consultation , Sunday morning , and the result was that we two have determined to start to Brazil , if possible , in six weeks from now , in order to look carefully into matters there and report to Dr. Martin in time for him to follow on the first of March .
We propose going via New York .
Now , between you and I and the fence you must say nothing about this to Orion , for he thinks that Ward is to go clear through alone , and that I am to stop at New York or New Orleans until he reports .
But that do n't suit me .
My confidence in human nature does not extend quite that far .
I won't depend upon Ward 's judgment , or anybody 's else -- I want to see with my own eyes , and form my own opinion .
But you know what Orion is .
When he gets a notion into his head , and more especially if it is an erroneous one , the Devil ca n't get it out again .
So I know better than to combat his arguments long , but apparently yielded , inwardly determined to go clear through .
Ma knows my determination , but even she counsels me to keep it from Orion .
She says I can treat him as I did her when I started to St. Louis and went to New York -- I can start to New York and go to South America !
Although Orion talks grandly about furnishing me with fifty or a hundred dollars in six weeks , I could not depend upon him for ten dollars , so I have `` feelers '' out in several directions , and have already asked for a hundred dollars from one source ( keep it to yourself . )
I will lay on my oars for awhile , and see how the wind sets , when I may probably try to get more .
Mrs. Creel is a great friend of mine , and has some influence with Ma and Orion , though I reckon they would not acknowledge it .
I am going up there tomorrow , to press her into my service .
I shall take care that Ma and Orion are plentifully supplied with South American books .
They have Herndon 's Report now .
Ward and the Dr. and myself will hold a grand consultation tonight at the office .
We have agreed that no more shall be admitted into our company .
Bixby soon made some trips up the Missouri River , and in his absence turned his apprentice , or `` cub , '' over to other pilots , such being the river custom .
Young Clemens , in love with the life , and a favorite with his superiors , had a happy time until he came under a pilot named Brown .
Brown was illiterate and tyrannical , and from the beginning of their association pilot and apprentice disliked each other cordially .
Among other things , we gather from this letter that Orion Clemens had faith in his brother as a newspaper correspondent , though the two contributions from Cincinnati , already mentioned , were not promising .
Furthermore , we get an intimation of Orion 's unfailing confidence in the future of the `` land '' -- that is to say , the great tract of land in Eastern Tennessee which , in an earlier day , his father had bought as a heritage for his children .
It is the same Tennessee land that had `` millions in it '' for Colonel Sellers -- the land that would become , as Orion Clemens long afterward phrased it , `` the worry of three generations . ''
The paragraph concerning Henry , and his employment on the Pennsylvania , begins the story of a tragedy .
-- and need only be sketched briefly here .
Henry , a gentle , faithful boy , shared with his brother the enmity of the pilot Brown .
Some two months following the date of the foregoing letter , on a down trip of the Pennsylvania , an unprovoked attack made by Brown upon the boy brought his brother Sam to the rescue .
Brown received a good pummeling at the hands of the future humorist , who , though upheld by the captain , decided to quit the Pennsylvania at New Orleans and to come up the river by another boat .
The Brown episode has no special bearing on the main tragedy , though now in retrospect it seems closely related to it .
Samuel Clemens , coming up the river on the A. T. Lacey , two days behind the Pennsylvania , heard a voice shout as they approached the Greenville , Mississippi , landing :
`` The Pennsylvania is blown up just below Memphis , at Ship Island !
One hundred and fifty lives lost ! ''
He went back to the river , and in September of the same year , after an apprenticeship of less than eighteen months , received his license as a St. Louis and New Orleans pilot , and was accepted by his old chief , Bixby , as full partner on an important boat .
He was , in fact , an apt pupil and a pilot of very high class .
Pilots did not remain long on one boat , as a rule ; just why it is not so easy to understand .
Perhaps they liked the experience of change ; perhaps both captain and pilot liked the pursuit of the ideal .
In the light-hearted letter that follows -- written to a friend of the family , formerly of Hannibal -- we get something of the uncertainty of the pilot's engagements .
To Mrs. Elizabeth W. Smith , in Jackson , Cape Girardeau County , Mo .
To Orion Clemens , in Keokuk , Iowa :
`` ALONZO CHILD , '' N. ORLEANS , Sep. 28th 1860 .
Yours is a watery planet ; you gain your livelihood on the water ; but you should have been a lawyer -- there is where your talents lie : you might have distinguished yourself as an orator , or as an editor ; you have written a great deal ; you write well -- but you are rather out of practice ; no matter -- you will be in practice some day ; you have a superb constitution , and as excellent health as any man in the world ; you have great powers of endurance ; in your profession your strength holds out against the longest sieges , without flagging ; still , the upper part of your lungs , the top of them is slightly affected -- you must take care of yourself ; you do not drink , but you use entirely too much tobacco ; and you must stop it ; mind , not moderate , but stop the use of it totally ; then I can almost promise you 86 when you will surely die ; otherwise look out for 28 , 31 , 34 , 47 , and 65 ; be careful -- for you are not of a long-lived race , that is on your father 's side ; you are the only healthy member of your family , and the only one in it who has anything like the certainty of attaining to a great age -- so , stop using tobacco , and be careful of yourself ... ..
In some respects you take after your father , but you are much more like your mother , who belongs to the long-lived , energetic side of the house ... .
You never brought all your energies to bear upon any subject but what you accomplished it -- for instance , you are self-made , self-educated .
S. L. C. Which proves nothing .
A death perhaps , and this threw you upon the world and made you what you are ; it was always intended that you should make yourself ; therefore , it was well that this calamity occurred as early as it did .
You will never die of water , although your career upon it in the future seems well sprinkled with misfortune .
You will continue upon the water for some time yet ; you will not retire finally until ten years from now ... .
What is your brother 's age ?
35 -- and a lawyer ?
and in pursuit of an office ?
Well , he stands a better chance than the other two , and he may get it ; he is too visionary -- is always flying off on a new hobby ; this will never do -- tell him I said so .
He is a good lawyer -- a , very good lawyer -- and a fine speaker -- is very popular and much respected , and makes many friends ; but although he retains their friendship , he loses their confidence by displaying his instability of character ... ..
The land he has now will be very valuable after a while --
It is not so difficult to credit Madame Caprell with clairvoyant powers when one has read the letters of Samuel Clemens up to this point .
If we may judge by those that have survived , her prophecy of literary distinction for him was hardly warranted by anything she could have known of his past performance .
The squibs and skits which he sometimes contributed to the New Orleans papers were bright , perhaps , and pleasing to his pilot associates , but they were without literary value .
He was twenty-five years old .
More than one author has achieved reputation at that age .
Clemens went from the battle-front to Keokuk , where Orion was preparing to accept the appointment prophesied by Madame Caprell .
Orion was a stanch Unionist , and a member of Lincoln 's Cabinet had offered him the secretaryship of the new Territory of Nevada .
Orion had accepted , and only needed funds to carry him to his destination .
His pilot brother had the funds , and upon being appointed `` private '' secretary , agreed to pay both passages on the overland stage , which would bear them across the great plains from St. Jo to Carson City .
His letters form a supplement of realism to a tale that is more or less fictitious , though marvelously true in color and background .
The first bears no date , but it was written not long after their arrival , August 14 , 1861 .
It is not complete , but there is enough of it to give us a very fair picture of Carson City , `` a wooden town ; its population two thousand souls . ''
( Date not given , but Sept , or Oct. , 1861 . )
`` In the bright lexicon of youth , There 's no such word as Fail -- '' and I 'll prove it !
MY DEAR MOTHER , -- Yours of March 2nd has just been received .
I see I am in for it again -- with Annie .
But she ought to know that I was always stupid .
She used to try to teach me lessons from the Bible , but I never could understand them .
Does n't she remember telling me the story of Moses , one Sunday , last Spring , and how hard she tried to explain it and simplify it so that I could understand it -- but I could n't ?
And how she said it was strange that while her ma and her grandma and her uncle Orion could understand anything in the world , I was so dull that I could n't understand the `` ea-siest thing ? ''
And does n't she remember that finally a light broke in upon me and I said it was all right -- that I knew old Moses himself -- and that he kept a clothing store in Market Street ?
And then she went to her ma and said she did n't know what would become of her uncle Sam he was too dull to learn anything -- ever !
And I'm just as dull yet .
Now I have no doubt her letter was spelled right , and was correct in all particulars -- but then I had to read it according to my lights ; and they being inferior , she ought to overlook the mistakes I make specially , as it is not my fault that I was n't born with good sense .
I am sure she will detect an encouraging ray of intelligence in that last argument ... ..
I hope I am wearing the last white shirt that will embellish my person for many a day -- for I do hope that I shall be out of Carson long before this reaches you .
But a few of the letters here will best speak for themselves ; not all of them are needed .
It is perhaps unnecessary to say that there is no intentional humor in these documents .
To Orion Clemens , in Carson City :
`` Douglas '' and `` Red Bird '' are both recorded .
I am living with `` Ratio Phillips . ''
Send him one of those black portfolios -- by the stage , and put a couple of pen-holders and a dozen steel pens in it .
If you should have occasion to dispose of the long desk before I return , do n't forget to break open the middle drawer and take out my things .
Envelop my black cloth coat in a newspaper and hang it in the back room .
You see Bixby is on the flag-ship .
He always was the best pilot on the Mississippi , and deserves his `` posish . ''
They have done a reckless thing , though , in putting Sam Bowen on the `` Swan '' -- for if a bomb-shell happens to come his way , he will infallibly jump overboard .
Orion , by the way , was acquiring `` feet '' on his own account , and in one instance , at least , seems to have won his brother's commendation .
To Orion Clemens , in Carson City :
I got in with them , and again demanded possession .
They said I might stay in it as long as I pleased , and work but they would do the same .
I asked one of our company to take my place in the hole , while I went to consult a lawyer .
The lawyer said it was no go .
They must offer some `` force . ''
Do n't you suppose they have pretty much quit writing , at home ?
I have nothing to report , at present , except that I shall find out all I want to know about this locality before I leave it .
The Territorial Enterprise at Virginia City was at this time owned by Joseph T. Goodman , who had bought it on the eve of the great Comstock silver-mining boom , and from a struggling , starving sheet had converted it into one of the most important -- certainly the most picturesque-papers on the coast .
The sketches which the Esmeralda miner had written over the name of `` Josh '' fitted into it exactly , and when a young man named Barstow , in the business office , urged Goodman to invite `` Josh '' to join their staff , the Enterprise owner readily fell in with the idea .
Among a lot of mining matters of no special interest , Clemens , July 30th , wrote his brother : `` Barstow has offered me the post as local reporter for the Enterprise at $ 25 a week , and I have written him that I will let him know next mail , if possible . ''
In this letter we realize that he had gone into the wilderness to reflect -- to get a perspective on the situation .
He was a great walker in those days , and sometimes with Higbie , sometimes alone , made long excursions .
One such is recorded in Roughing It , the trip to Mono Lake .
We have no means of knowing where his seventy-mile tour led him now , but it is clear that he still had not reached a decision on his return .
Indeed , we gather that he is inclined to keep up the battle among the barren Esmeralda hills .
Dan Twing and I and Dan 's dog , `` cabin '' together -- and will continue to do so for awhile -- until I leave for --
P. S. No 2 -- 5 A.M. -- The pistol did its work well -- one man -- a Jackson County Missourian , shot two of my friends , ( police officers , ) through the heart -- both died within three minutes .
Murderer 's name is John Campbell .
His real name was Rice , and he had undertaken to criticize Clemens's reports .
The brisk reply that Rice 's letters concealed with a show of parliamentary knowledge a `` festering mass of misstatements the author of whom should be properly termed the 'Unreliable , '' fixed that name upon him for life .
This burlesque warfare delighted the frontier and it did not interfere with friendship .
Clemens and Rice were constant associates , though continually firing squibs at each other in their respective papers -- a form of personal journalism much in vogue on the Comstock .
Another man on the staff of the Enterprise , William Wright , who called himself `` Dan de Quille , '' a graceful humorist , gave far more promise , Goodman thought , of future distinction .
AUSTIN , Jan. 1 , '64 .
Why did you not go with me and save me that night ?
-- I mean the night I left you after that dinner party .
I went and got drunker , beating , I may say , Alexander the Great , in his most drinkinist days , and I blackened my face at the Melodeon , and made a gibbering , idiotic speech .
I suppose the Union will have it .
But let it go .
I shall always remember Virginia as a bright spot in my existence , as all others must or rather can not be , as it were .
Do not , sir -- do not flatter yourself that you are the only chastely-humorous writer onto the Pacific slopes .
Good-bye , old boy -- and God bless you !
The matter of which I spoke to you so earnestly shall be just as earnestly attended to -- and again with very many warm regards for Jo .
, and regards to many of the good friends we met .
The Union which Ward mentions was the rival Virginia .
Ward wrote a second letter , after a siege of illness at Salt Lake City .
He was a frail creature , and three years later , in London , died of consumption .
Ward 's second letter here follows .
MY DEAR MOTHER AND SISTER , -- I do not know what to write ; my life is so uneventful .
I wish I was back there piloting up and down the river again .
Verily , all is vanity and little worth -- save piloting .
His book was a wretchedly poor one , generally speaking , and it could be no credit to either of us to appear between its covers .
I have been asked fifty times about it and its author , and the papers are copying it far and near .
It is voted the best thing of the day .
Can not the Californian afford to keep Mark all to itself ?
It should not let him scintillate so widely without first being filtered through the California press . ''
Bret Harte and Clemens had by this time quit the Californian , expecting to contribute to Eastern periodicals .
Clemens , however , was not yet through with Coast journalism .
There was much interest just at this time in the Sandwich Islands , and he was selected by the foremost Sacramento paper to spy out the islands and report aspects and conditions there .
His letters home were still infrequent , but this was something worth writing .
I got the same leg hurt last week ; I said I had n't got hold of a spirited horse since I had been on the island , and one of the proprietors loaned me a big vicious colt ; he was altogether too spirited ; I went to tighten the cinch before mounting him , when he let out with his left leg ( ? )
and kicked me across a ten-acre lot .
A native rubbed and doctored me so well that I was able to stand on my feet in half an hour .
It was then half after four and I had an appointment to go seven miles and get a girl and take her to a card party at five .
To Mrs. Orion Clemens , in Carson City :
MY DEAR SISTER , -- I have just got back from a sea voyage -- from the beautiful island of Maui , I have spent five weeks there , riding backwards and forwards among the sugar plantations -- looking up the splendid scenery and visiting the lofty crater of Haleakala .
It has been a perfect jubilee to me in the way of pleasure .
I have not written a single line , and have not once thought of business , or care or human toil or trouble or sorrow or weariness .
Few such months come in a lifetime .
HONOLULU , SANDWICH ISLANDS , June 21,1866 .
The Crown Princess is dead and thousands of natives cry and wail and dance and dance for the dead , around the King 's Palace all night and every night .
They will keep it up for a month and then she will be buried .
Anson Burlingame , U. S. Minister to China , and Gen. Van Valkenburgh , Minister to Japan , with their families and suites , have just arrived here en route .
They were going to do me the honor to call on me this morning , and that accounts for my being out of bed now .
You know what condition my room is always in when you are not around -- so I climbed out of bed and dressed and shaved pretty quick and went up to the residence of the American Minister and called on them .
Mr. Burlingame told me a good deal about Hon .
Jere Clemens and that Virginia Clemens who was wounded in a duel .
He was in Congress years with both of them .
Mr. B. sent for his son , to introduce him -- said he could tell that frog story of mine as well as anybody .
I told him I was glad to hear it for I never tried to tell it myself without making a botch of it .
At his request I have loaned Mr. Burlingame pretty much everything I ever wrote .
I guess he will be an almighty wise man by the time he wades through that lot .
The Hawaiian letters , however , do show the transition stage between the rough elemental humor of the Comstock and the refined and subtle style which flowered in the Innocents Abroad .
Burlingame pointed out his faults to him , and directed him to a better way .
No more than that was needed at such a time to bring about a transformation .
Hawaii was then dominated chiefly by French and English ; though the American interests were by no means small .
Fitch said `` There 's the king .
That 's him in the buggy .
I know him as far as I can see him . ''
This has something of the flavor of the man we were to know later ; the quaint , gentle resignation to disappointment which is one of the finest touches in his humor .
He found the islands during his periods of inaction conducive to indolence .
`` If I were not so fond of looking into the rich mass of green leaves , '' he says , `` that swathe the stately tamarind right before my door , I would idle less , and write more , I think . ''
The Union made good use of his letters .
Sometimes it printed them on the front page .
Evidently they were popular from the beginning .
The Union was a fine , handsome paper -- beautiful in its minute typography , and in its press-work ; more beautiful than most papers of to-day , with their machine-set type , their vulgar illustrations , and their chain-lightning presses .
A few more extracts :
`` The only cigars here are those trifling , insipid , tasteless , flavorless things they call Manilas -- ten for twenty-five cents -- and it would take a thousand of them to be worth half the money .
After you have smoked about thirty-five dollars ' worth of them in the forenoon , you feel nothing but a desperate yearning to go out somewhere and take a smoke . ''
`` Captains and ministers form about half the population .
The third fourth is composed of Kanakas and mercantile foreigners and their families .
The final fourth is made up of high officers of the Hawaiian government , and there are just about enough cats to go round . ''
In the postscript of a letter which I wrote two or three days ago , and sent by the ship `` Live Yankee , '' I gave you the substance of a letter received here from Hilo , by Walker Allen and Co. , informing them that a boat , containing fifteen men in a helpless and starving condition , had drifted ashore at Sanpahoe , Island of Hawaii , and that they had belonged to the clipper ship `` Hornet '' -- Cap .
Mitchell , master -- had been afloat since the burning of that vessel , about one hundred miles north of the equator , on the third of May -- forty-three days .
14. and 15. he gives further particulars of the month of mourning for the princess , and funeral ceremonials .
He refers to Burlingame , who was still in the islands .
The remaining letters are unimportant .
There is a ship in sight -- the first object we have seen since we left Honolulu .
We are still 1300 or 1400 miles from land and so anything like this that varies the vast solitude of the ocean makes all hands light-hearted and cheerful .
We think the ship is the `` Comet , '' which left Honolulu several hours before we did .
She is about twelve miles away , and so we can not see her hull , but the sailors think it is the Comet because of some peculiarity about her fore-top-gallant sails .
We have watched her all the forenoon .
Aug. 8 -- The calm continues .
The gentlemen have all turned boys .
They play boyish games on the poop and quarter-deck .
For instance : They lay a knife on the fife-rail of the mainmast -- stand off three steps , shut one eye , walk up and strike at it with the fore-finger ; ( seldom hit it ; ) also they lay a knife on the deck and walk seven or eight steps with eyes close shut , and try to find it .
They kneel -- place elbows against knees -- extend hands in front along the deck -- place knife against end of fingers -- then clasp hands behind back and bend forward and try to pick up the knife with their teeth and rise up from knees without rolling over or losing their balance .
They tie a string to the shrouds -- stand with back against it walk three steps ( eyes shut ) -- turn around three times and go and put finger on the string ; only a military man can do it .
If you want to know how perfectly ridiculous a grown man looks performing such absurdities in the presence of ladies , get one to try it .
The transition from the dreamland of a becalmed sailing-vessel to the dull , cheerless realities of his old life , and the uncertainties of his future , depressed him -- filled him with forebodings .
At one moment he felt himself on the verge of suicide -- the world seemed so little worth while .
In Roughing It , and elsewhere , has been told the story of this venture -- the tale of its splendid success .
He was no longer concerned , now , as to his immediate future .
The lecture field was profitable .
His audience laughed and shouted .
He was learning the flavor of real success and exulting in it .
With Dennis McCarthy , formerly one of the partners in the Enterprise , as manager , he made a tour of California and Nevada .
They offer a full house and no expense in Dayton -- go there next .
Sandy Baldwin says I have made the most sweeping success of any man he knows of .
Fate had great matters in preparation for him .
He wrote at once to the proprietors of the Alta-California and proposed that they send him as their correspondent .
To his delight his proposition was accepted , the Alta agreeing to the twelve hundred dollars passage money , and twenty dollars each for letters .
To Mrs. Jane Clemens and family , in St. Louis :
I 'll send the book soon .
I am awfully hurried now , but not worried .
All I do know or feel , is , that I am wild with impatience to move -- move -- move !
Half a dozen times I have wished I had sailed long ago in some ship that was n't going to keep me chained here to chafe for lagging ages while she got ready to go .
Curse the endless delays !
They always kill me -- they make me neglect every duty and then I have a conscience that tears me like a wild beast .
I wish I never had to stop anywhere a month .
I do more mean things , the moment I get a chance to fold my hands and sit down than ever I can get forgiveness for .
You observe that under a cheerful exterior I have got a spirit that is angry with me and gives me freely its contempt .
I can get away from that at sea , and be tranquil and satisfied -- and so , with my parting love and benediction for Orion and all of you , I say goodbye and God bless you all -- and welcome the wind that wafts a weary soul to the sunny lands of the Mediterranean !
Letters to Mrs. Jane Clemens and family , in St. Louis :
DEAR FOLKS , -- We have been representing the United States all we knew how today .
We went to Sebastopol , after we got tired of Constantinople ( got your letter there , and one at Naples , ) and there the Commandant and the whole town came aboard and were as jolly and sociable as old friends .
They said the Emperor of Russia was at Yalta , 30 miles or 40 away , and urged us to go there with the ship and visit him -- promised us a cordial welcome .
They insisted on sending a telegram to the Emperor , and also a courier overland to announce our coming .
But we knew that a great English Excursion party , and also the Viceroy of Egypt , in his splendid yacht , had been refused an audience within the last fortnight , so we thought it not safe to try it .
They said , no difference -- the Emperor would hardly visit our ship , because that would be a most extraordinary favor , and one which he uniformly refuses to accord under any circumstances , but he would certainly receive us at his palace .
But we had to go to Odessa , 250 miles away , and there the Governor General urged us , and sent a telegram to the Emperor , which we hardly expected to be answered , but it was , and promptly .
So we sailed back to Yalta .
2 about Constantinople , the Golden Horn and the beauties of the Bosphorus .
We are going on a trip , tomorrow .
I must to bed .
Later : We can not anchor -- must go on .
We shall be at Gibraltar before midnight and I think I will go horseback ( a long days ) and thence by rail and diligence to Cadiz .
I will not mail this till I see the Gibraltar lights -- I begin to think they wo n't let us in anywhere .
WASHINGTON AND SAN FRANCISCO .
THE PROPOSED BOOK OF TRAVEL .
OFFICE OF THE AMERICAN PUBLISHING COMPANY .
Clemens had already the idea of a book in mind and welcomed this proposition .
I have just arrived from New York-been there ever since Christmas staying at the house of Dan Slote my Quaker City room-mate , and having a splendid time .
Charley Langdon , Jack Van Nostrand , Dan and I , ( all Quaker City night-hawks , ) had a blow-out at Dan 's ' house and a lively talk over old times .
We went through the Holy Land together , and I just laughed till my sides ached , at some of our reminiscences .
It was the unholiest gang that ever cavorted through Palestine , but those are the best boys in the world .
We needed Moulton badly .
I started to make calls , New Year 's Day , but I anchored for the day at the first house I came to -- Charlie Langdon 's sister was there ( beautiful girl , ) and Miss Alice Hooker , another beautiful girl , a niece of Henry Ward Beecher 's .
We sent the old folks home early , with instructions not to send the carriage till midnight , and then I just staid there and worried the life out of those girls .
I am going to spend a few days with the Langdon 's in Elmira , New York , as soon as I get time , and a few days at Mrs. Hooker's in Hartford , Conn. , shortly .
We had a very gay time , if it was Sunday .
I expect I told more lies than I have told before in a month .
HARTFORD , CONN. Jan. 24-68 .
I 'll make it a point to write one letter a week , any-how .
( Private and General . )
I have to spend August and September in Hartford which is n't San Francisco .
Mr. Conness offers me any choice out of five influential California offices .
Now , some day or other I shall want an office and then , just my luck , I ca n't get it , I suppose .
Sometime in the course of the present century I think they will create a Commissioner of Patents , and then I hope to get a berth for Orion .
To Orion Clemens , in St. Louis :
, -- I am glad you do not want the clerkship , for that Patent Office is in such a muddle that there would be no security for the permanency of a place in it .
The same remark will apply to all offices here , now , and no doubt will , till the close of the present administration .
DEAR FOLKS , -- I have nothing to write , except that I am well -- that the weather is fearfully hot-that the Henry Chauncey is a magnificent ship -- that we have twelve hundred , passengers on board -- that I have two staterooms , and so am not crowded -- that I have many pleasant friends here , and the people are not so stupid as on the Quaker City -- that we had Divine Service in the main saloon at 10.30 this morning -- that we expect to meet the upward bound vessel in Latitude 23 , and this is why I am writing now .
In his letter of January 8th we note that he expects to go to Elmira for a few days as soon as he has time .
Did n't finish yesterday .
Something called me away .
I am most comfortably situated here .
This is the pleasantest family I ever knew .
I only have one trouble , and that is they give me too much thought and too much time and invention to the object of making my visit pass delightfully .
However , he was carrying everything , just then , by storm .
The largest houses everywhere were crowded to hear him .
Papers spoke of him as the coming man of the age , people came to their doors to see him pass .
There is but one letter of this period , but it gives us the picture .
CLEVELAND , Nov. 20 , 1868 .
DEAR FOLKS , -- I played against the Eastern favorite , Fanny Kemble , in Pittsburgh , last night .
She had 200 in her house , and I had upwards of 1,500 .
All the seats were sold ( in a driving rain storm , 3 days ago , ) as reserved seats at 25 cents extra , even those in the second and third tiers -- and when the last seat was gone the box office had not been open more than 2 hours .
When I reached the theatre they were turning people away and the house was crammed , 150 or 200 stood up , all the evening .
... ... ... ... ... ... ... .
To Mrs. Jane Clemens and family , in St. Louis
My love to Mollie and Annie and Sammie and all .
To Mrs. Moffett , in St. Louis :
I have bundled up Livy 's picture and will try and recollect to mail it tomorrow .
It is a porcelaintype and I think you will like it .
I have twice instructed the publishers to send you a book -- it was the first thing I did -- long before the proofs were finished .
Write me if it is not yet done .
Livy says we must have you all at our marriage , and I say we ca n't .
It will be at Christmas or New Years , when such a trip across the country would be equivalent to murder & arson & everything else.
-- And it would cost five hundred dollars -- an amount of money she do n't know the value of now , but will before a year is gone .
She grieves over it , poor little rascal , but it ca n't be helped .
She must wait awhile , till I am firmly on my legs , & then she shall see you .
She says her father and mother will invite you just as soon as the wedding date is definitely fixed , anyway -- & she thinks that 's bound to settle it .
But the ice & snow , & the long hard journey , & the injudiciousness of laying out any money except what we are obliged to part with while we are so much in debt , settles the case differently .
For it is a debt .
I took up extensions on the main lead-extensions that reached to British America , in one direction , and to the Isthmus of Panama in the other -- and I verily believe I would have been a rich man if I had ever found those infernal extensions .
But I did n't .
I ran tunnels till I tapped the Arctic Ocean , and I sunk shafts till I broke through the roof of perdition ; but those extensions turned up missing every time .
I am willing to sell all that property and throw in the improvements .
Perhaps you remember that celebrated `` North Ophir ? ''
I bought that mine .
It was very rich in pure silver .
You could take it out in lumps as large as a filbert .
But when it was discovered that those lumps were melted half dollars , and hardly melted at that , a painful case of `` salting '' was apparent , and the undersigned adjourned to the poorhouse again .
With all good wishes for the Returned Prodigals , and regrets that I can not partake of a small piece of the fatted calf ( rare and no gravy , )
In the next letter we find him in the midst of a sort of confusion of affairs , which , in one form or another , would follow him throughout the rest of his life .
It was the price of his success and popularity , combined with his general gift for being concerned with a number of things , and a natural tendency for getting into hot water , which becomes more evident as the years and letters pass in review .
Orion Clemens , in his attempt to save money for the government , had employed methods and agents which the officials at Washington did not understand , and refused to recognize .
Instead of winning the credit and commendation he had expected , he now found himself pursued by claims of considerable proportions .
The `` land '' referred to is the Tennessee tract , the heritage which John Clemens had provided for his children .
ELMIRA , N.Y. Jan. 26 , '70 .
The mention of `` California plums '' refers to some inedible fruit which Gillis once , out of pure goodness of heart , bought of a poor wandering squaw , and then , to conceal his motive , declared that they were something rare and fine , and persisted in eating them , though even when stewed they nearly choked him .
BUFFALO , March 22 , 1890 .
To James Redpath , in Boston :
The reference to the Galaxy in the foregoing letter has to do with a department called Memoranda , which he had undertaken to conduct for the new magazine .
This work added substantially to his income , and he believed it would be congenial .
He was allowed free hand to write and print what he chose , and some of his best work at this time was published in the new department , which he continued for a year .
His mother and sister were no longer far away in St. Louis .
Soon after his marriage they had , by his advice , taken up residence at Fredonia , New York , where they could be easily visited from Buffalo .
To Mrs. Jane Clemens , and Mrs. Moffett , in Fredonia , N. Y. :
, -- Per contract I must have another 600-page book ready for my publisher Jan. 2 , and I only began it today .
The subject of it is a secret , because I may possibly change it .
But as it stands , I propose to do up Nevada and Cal.
, beginning with the trip across the country in the stage .
Have you a memorandum of the route we took -- or the names of any of the Stations we stopped at ?
Do you remember any of the scenes , names , incidents or adventures of the coach trip ?
-- for I remember next to nothing about the matter .
Jot down a foolscap page of items for me .
I wish I could have two days ' talk with you .
We are all getting along tolerably well .
Mr. Langdon died early in August , and Mrs. Clemens returned to Buffalo , exhausted in mind and body .
If she hoped for rest now , in the quiet of her own home , she was disappointed , as the two brief letters that follow clearly show .
Do exactly as you please with the land -- always remember this -- that so trivial a percentage as ten per cent will never sell it .
I have no time to turn round , a young lady visitor ( schoolmate of Livy 's ) is dying in the house of typhoid fever ( parents are in South Carolina ) and the premises are full of nurses and doctors and we are all fagged out .
Dec. 19th , 1870 .
But this came too late .
Aldrich replied that he could not be prevented from doing him justice , as forty-two thousand copies of the first note , with the editor 's apology duly appended , were already in press .
Once more I apologize , and this time I do it `` stanning ! ''
When I told Bliss in N. Y. that I would write something for the Publisher I could not know that I was just about to lose fifty days .
Do you see the difference it makes ?
Just as soon as ever I can , I will send some of the book M.S .
but right in the first chapter I have got to alter the whole style of one of my characters and re-write him clear through to where I am now .
It is no fool of a job , I can tell you , but the book will be greatly bettered by it .
Hold on a few days -- four or five -- and I will see if I can get a few chapters fixed to send to Bliss .
We are almost certain of that .
Ask Bliss how it would be to ship our furniture to Hartford , rent an upper room in a building and unbox it and store it there where somebody can frequently look after it .
Is not the idea good ?
The furniture is worth $ 10,000 or $ 12,000 and must not be jammed into any kind of a place and left unattended to for a year .
When I was writing the `` Innocents '' my daily stunt was 30 pages of MS and I hardly ever got beyond it ; but I have gone over that nearly every day for the last ten .
That shows that I am writing with a red-hot interest .
Nothing grieves me now -- nothing troubles me , nothing bothers me or gets my attention -- I do n't think of anything but the book , and I do n't have an hour 's unhappiness about anything and do n't care two cents whether school keeps or not .
It will be a bully book .
If I keep up my present lick three weeks more I shall be able and willing to scratch out half of the chapters of the Overland narrative -- and shall do it .
P. S. -- The reaction is beginning and my stock is looking up .
I am getting the bulliest offers for books and almanacs ; am flooded with lecture invitations , and one periodical offers me $ 6,000 cash for 12 articles , of any length and on any subject , treated humorously or otherwise .
Clemens 's enthusiasm for work was now such that he agreed with Redpath to return to the platform that autumn , and he began at once writing lectures .
His disposal of the Buffalo paper had left him considerably in debt , and platforming was a sure and quick method of retrenchment .
Brief letters to Redpath of this time have an interest and even a humor of their own .
ELMIRA , June 27 , 1871 .
HARTFORD , Tuesday Aug. 8 , 1871 .
P. S. Shall be here 2 weeks , will run up there when Nasby comes .
DEAR REDPATH , -- I wish you would get me released from the lecture at Buffalo .
I mortally hate that society there , and I do n't doubt they hired me .
I once gave them a packed house free of charge , and they never even had the common politeness to thank me .
They left me to shift for myself , too , a la Bret Harte at Harvard .
Get me rid of Buffalo !
Otherwise I 'll have no recourse left but to get sick the day I lecture there .
I can get sick easy enough , by the simple process of saying the word -- well never mind what word -- I am not going to lecture there .
To James Redpath , in Boston :
It was in June of that year that Clemens wrote his first letter to William Dean Howells the first of several hundred that would follow in the years to come , and has in it something that is characteristic of nearly all the Clemens-Howells letters -- a kind of tender playfulness that answered to something in Howells 's make-up , his sense of humor , his wide knowledge of a humanity which he pictured so amusingly to the world .
FRIEND HOWELLS , -- Could you tell me how I could get a copy of your portrait as published in Hearth and Home ?
I hear so much talk about it as being among the finest works of art which have yet appeared in that journal , that I feel a strong desire to see it .
Is it suitable for framing ?
I have written the publishers of H & H time and again , but they say that the demand for the portrait immediately exhausted the edition and now a copy can not be had , even for the European demand , which has now begun .
Bret Harte has been here , and says his family would not be without that portrait for any consideration .
He says his children get up in the night and yell for it .
I would give anything for a copy of that portrait to put up in my parlor .
I have Oliver Wendell Holmes and Bret Harte 's , as published in Every Saturday , and of all the swarms that come every day to gaze upon them none go away that are not softened and humbled and made more resigned to the will of God .
If I had yours to put up alongside of them , I believe the combination would bring more souls to earnest reflection and ultimate conviction of their lost condition , than any other kind of warning would .
Where in the nation can I get that portrait ?
Here are heaps of people that want it , -- that need it .
There is my uncle .
He wants a copy .
He is lying at the point of death .
He has been lying at the point of death for two years .
He wants a copy -- and I want him to have a copy .
And I want you to send a copy to the man that shot my dog .
I want to see if he is dead to every human instinct .
Now you send me that portrait .
I am sending you mine , in this letter ; and am glad to do it , for it has been greatly admired .
People who are judges of art , find in the execution a grandeur which has not been equalled in this country , and an expression which has not been approached in any .
P. S. 62,000 copies of `` Roughing It '' sold and delivered in 4 months .
He had also conceived the idea of another book of travel , and this was his purpose of a projected trip to England .
The nuisance of keeping a scrap-book is : 1 .
One never has paste or gum tragacanth handy ; 2 .
Mucilage wo n't stick , or stay , 4 weeks ; 3 .
Mucilage sucks out the ink and makes the scraps unreadable ; 4 .
To daub and paste 3 or 4 pages of scraps is tedious , slow , nasty and tiresome .
My idea is this : Make a scrap-book with leaves veneered or coated with gum-stickum of some kind ; wet the page with sponge , brush , rag or tongue , and dab on your scraps like postage stamps .
Yrs Truly S. L. CLEMENS .
`` If you and Theodore will come over in the Spring with Livy and me , and spend the summer you will see a country that is so beautiful that you will be obliged to believe in Fairyland ... .. and Theodore can browse with me among dusty old dens that look now as they looked five hundred years ago ; and puzzle over books in the British Museum that were made before Christ was born ; and in the customs of their public dinners , and the ceremonies of every official act , and the dresses of a thousand dignitaries , trace the speech and manners of all the centuries that have dragged their lagging decades over England since the Heptarchy fell asunder .
I would a good deal rather live here if I could get the rest of you over . ''
To Mrs. Jane Clemens and Mrs. Moffett :
MY DEAR MOTHER AND SISTER , -- I have been so everlasting busy that I could n't write -- and moreover I have been so unceasingly lazy that I could n't have written anyhow .
I came here to take notes for a book , but I have n't done much but attend dinners and make speeches .
But have had a jolly good time and I do hate to go away from these English folks ; they make a stranger feel entirely at home -- and they laugh so easily that it is a comfort to make after-dinner speeches here .
I have made hundreds of friends ; and last night in the crush of the opening of the New Guild-hall Library and Museum , I was surprised to meet a familiar face every few steps .
Nearly 4,000 people , of both sexes , came and went during the evening , so I had a good opportunity to make a great many new acquaintances .
Warner 's been in here swearing like a lunatic , and saying he had written you to come on the 4th , -- and I said , `` You leather-head , if I talk in Boston both afternoon and evening March 5 , I 'll have to go to Boston the 4th , '' -- and then he just kicked up his heels and went off cursing after a fashion I never heard of before .
But never mind-things may revive while I am away .
During the last two months my next-door neighbor , Chas .
Dudley Warner , has dropped his `` Back-Log Studies , '' and he and I have written a bulky novel in partnership .
He has worked up the fiction and I have hurled in the facts .
I consider it one of the most astonishing novels that ever was written .
Night after night I sit up reading it over and over again and crying .
It will be published early in the Fall , with plenty of pictures .
Do you consider this an advertisement ?
-- and if so , do you charge for such things when a man is your friend ?
Yours truly , SAML .
DEAR OLD JOE , -- I consider myself wholly at liberty to decline to pay Chew anything , and at the same time strongly tempted to sue him into the bargain for coming so near ruining me .
If he had n't happened to send me that thing in print , I would have used the story ( like an innocent fool ) and would straightway have been hounded to death as a plagiarist .
It would have absolutely destroyed me .
I can not conceive of a man being such a hopeless ass ( after serving as a legislative reporter , too ) as to imagine that I or any other literary man in his senses would consent to chew over old stuff that had already been in print .
If that man weren't an infant in swaddling clothes , his only reply to our petition would have been , `` It has been in print . ''
It makes me as mad as the very Old Harry every time I think of Mr. Chew and the frightfully narrow escape I have had at his hands .
Confound Mr. Chew , with all my heart !
I 'm willing that he should have ten dollars for his trouble of warming over his cold victuals -- cheerfully willing to that -- but no more .
If I had had him near when his letter came , I would have got out my tomahawk and gone for him .
He did n't tell the story half as well as you did , anyhow .
Today they discovered a `` collie '' on board !
I find ( as per advertisement which I sent you ) that they wo n't carry dogs in these ships at any price .
This one has been concealed up to this time .
Now his owner has to pay L10 or heave him overboard .
Fortunately the doggie is a performing doggie and the money will be paid .
So after all it was just as well you did n't intrust your collie to us .
BEGINNING `` TOM SAWYER . ''
It was the delight of such a visit that kept Clemens constantly urging its repetition .
One can not but feel the genuine affection of these letters .
And you shall go to bed when you please , get up when you please , talk when you please , read when you please .
Mrs. Howells may even go to New York Saturday if she feels that she must , but if some gentle , unannoying coaxing can beguile her into putting that off a few days , we shall be more than glad , for I do wish she and Mrs. Clemens could have a good square chance to get acquainted with each other .
But first and last and all the time , we want you to feel untrammeled and wholly free from restraint , here .
The date suits -- all dates suit .
To W. D. Howells , in Boston :
FARMINGTON AVENUE , HARTFORD , Mch .
We send best regards .
Your friend ever , SAML .
Susie Crane has built the loveliest study for me , you ever saw .
It is octagonal , with a peaked roof , each octagon filled with a spacious window , and it sits perched in complete isolation on top of an elevation that commands leagues of valley and city and retreating ranges of distant blue hills .
It is a cosy nest , with just room in it for a sofa and a table and three or four chairs -- and when the storms sweep down the remote valley and the lightning flashes above the hills beyond , and the rain beats upon the roof over my head , imagine the luxury of it !
It stands 500 feet above the valley and 2 1/2 miles from it .
To Mrs. Jane Clemens and Mrs. Moffett , in Fredonia :
ELMIRA , Sept. 2 , '74 .
MY DEAR HOWELLS , -- ...
..I enclose also a `` True Story '' which has no humor in it .
You can pay as lightly as you choose for that , if you want it , for it is rather out of my line .
I have not altered the old colored woman 's story except to begin at the beginning , instead of the middle , as she did -- and traveled both ways ... .
But the shorter MS. had been only a brief diversion .
The book was Tom Sawyer , as already mentioned , and the play a dramatization from The Gilded Age .
Clemens had all along intended to dramatize the story of Colonel Sellers , and was one day thunderstruck to receive word from California that a San Francisco dramatist had appropriated his character in a play written for John T. Raymond .
Clemens had taken out dramatic copyright on the book , and immediately stopped the performance by telegraph .
A good deal of discussion from time to time having arisen over the authorship of the Sellers play , as presented by Raymond , certain among the letters that follow may be found of special interest .
Meanwhile we find Clemens writing to Dr. John Brown , of Edinburgh , on these matters and events in general .
The book MS. , which he mentions as having put aside , was not touched again for nearly a year .
QUARRY FARM , NEAR ELMIRA , N. Y .
In the picture of me in the study you glimpse ( through the left-hand window ) the little rock bluff that rises behind the pond , and the bases of the little trees on top of it .
The small square window is over the fireplace ; the chimney divides to make room for it .
Without the stereoscope it looks like a framed picture .
All the study windows have Venetian blinds ; they long ago went out of fashion in America but they have not been replaced with anything half as good yet .
We revisit the Rutland Street home many a time in fancy , for we hold every individual in it in happy and grateful memory .
MY DEAR HOWELLS , -- All right , my boy , send proof sheets here .
I amend dialect stuff by talking and talking and talking it till it sounds right -- and I had difficulty with this negro talk because a negro sometimes ( rarely ) says `` goin '' and sometimes `` gwyne , '' and they make just such discrepancies in other words -- and when you come to reproduce them on paper they look as if the variation resulted from the writer's carelessness .
But I want to work at the proofs and get the dialect as nearly right as possible .
Clemens himself , in a statement that he wrote for the Hartford Post , but suppressed , probably at the request of his wife , gave a full history of the play 's origin , a matter of slight interest to-day .
`` Could n't you send me some such story as that colored one for our January number -- that is , within a month ? ''
When the month was nearly up he wrote :
But two hours later , when he had returned from one of the long walks which he and Twichell so frequently took together , he told a different story .
DEAR LIVY , You observe I still call this beloved old place by the name it had when I was young .
It is enough to make a body sick .
And we canvassed everybody .
Bailey Aldrich , Marquis of Ponkapog , came in , got nobly drunk , and told us all about how poor Osgood lost his earldom and was hanged for conspiring against the second Emperor -- but he did n't mention how near he himself came to being hanged , too , for engaging in the same enterprise .
He was as chaffy as he was sixty years ago , too , and swore the Archbishop and I never walked to Boston -- but there was never a day that Ponkapog would n't lie , so be it by the grace of God he got the opportunity .
I wish you could see old Cambridge and Ponkapog .
I love them as dearly as ever , but privately , my dear , they are not much improvement on idiots .
It is melancholy to hear them jabber over the same pointless anecdotes three and four times of an evening , forgetting that they had jabbered them over three or four times the evening before .
Ponkapog still writes poetry , but the old-time fire has mostly gone out of it .
Perhaps his best effort of late years is this :
It will hardly take rank as prophecy , though certainly true forecast in it is not wholly lacking .
To W. D. Howells , in Boston :
One of the famous Atlantic dinners came along in December .
`` Don't you dare to refuse that invitation , '' wrote Howells , `` to meet Emerson , Aldrich , and all those boys at the Parker House , at six o'clock , Tuesday , December 15th .
MY DEAR HOWELLS , -- I want you to ask Mrs. Howells to let you stay all night at the Parker House and tell lies and have an improving time , and take breakfast with me in the morning .
I will have a good room for you , and a fire .
Ca n't you tell her it always makes you sick to go home late at night , or something like that ?
That sort of thing rouses Mrs. Clemens 's sympathies , easily ; the only trouble is to keep them up .
Twichell and I talked till 2 or 3 in the morning , the night we supped at your house and it restored his health , on account of his being drooping for some time and made him much more robuster than what he was before .
Will Mrs. Howells let you ?
Yrs ever , S. L. C .
To W. D. Howells , in Boston :
When I said you and Aldrich had given me two new neck-ties , and that they were in a paper in my overcoat pocket , she was in a fever of happiness until she found I was going to frame them ; then all the venom in her nature gathered itself together , -- insomuch that I , being near to a door , went without , perceiving danger .
It had its beginning at the Atlantic dinner , where Aldrich had abused Clemens for never sending him any photographs of himself .
Clemens returned home and hunted up fifty-two different specimens , put each into an envelope , and began mailing them to him , one each morning .
When a few of them had arrived Aldrich wrote , protesting .
MY DEAR MOTHER AND SISTER , -- I Saw Gov .
Newell today and he said he was still moving in the matter of Sammy 's appointment -- [ As a West Point cadet . ]
-- and would stick to it till he got a result of a positive nature one way or the other , but thus far he did not know whether to expect success or defeat .
I ca n't `` encourage '' Orion .
Nobody can do that , conscientiously , for the reason that before one 's letter has time to reach him he is off on some new wild-goose chase .
Would you encourage in literature a man who , the older he grows the worse he writes ?
Would you encourage Orion in the glaring insanity of studying law ?
If he were packed and crammed full of law , it would be worthless lumber to him , for his is such a capricious and ill-regulated mind that he would apply the principles of the law with no more judgment than a child of ten years .
I know what I am saying .
I laid one of the plainest and simplest of legal questions before Orion once , and the helpless and hopeless mess he made of it was absolutely astonishing .
Nothing aggravates me so much as to have Orion mention law or literature to me .
Ever your friend , SAML .
DEAR MRS. HOWELLS , -- Mrs. Clemens is delighted to get the pictures , and so am I. I can perceive in the group , that Mr. Howells is feeling as I so often feel , viz : `` Well , no doubt I am in the wrong , though I do not know how or where or why -- but anyway it will be safest to look meek , and walk circumspectly for a while , and not discuss the thing . ''
And you look exactly as Mrs. Clemens does after she has said , `` Indeed I do not wonder that you can frame no reply : for you know only too well , that your conduct admits of no excuse , palliation or argument -- none ! ''
I shall just delight in that group on account of the good old human domestic spirit that pervades it -- bother these family groups that put on a state aspect to get their pictures taken in .
This is Susie 's birth-day .
Lizzie brought her in at 8.30 this morning ( before we were up ) hooded with a blanket , red curl-papers in her hair , a great red japonica , in one hand ( for Livy ) and a yellow rose-bud nestled in violets ( for my buttonhole ) in the other -- and she looked wonderfully pretty .
She delivered her memorials and received her birth-day kisses .
Livy laid her japonica , down to get a better `` holt '' for kissing -- which Susie presently perceived , and became thoughtful : then said sorrowfully , turning the great deeps of her eyes upon her mother : `` Do n't you care for you wow ? ''
To W. D. Howells , in Boston :
Well , he is welcome to the good time he had -- I had a deal better one .
My narrative has made Mrs. Clemens wish she could have been there.
-- When I think over what a splendid good sociable time I had in your house I feel ever so thankful to the wise providence that thwarted our several ably-planned and ingenious attempts to get to Lexington .
I am coming again before long , and then she shall be of the party .
Mrs. Clemens sent a note to Mrs. Howells , which will serve as a pendant to the foregoing .
If you find misspelled words in this note , you will remember my infirmity and not hold me responsible .
MY DEAR HOWELLS , -- An actor named D. H. Harkins has been here to ask me to put upon paper a 5-act play which he has been mapping out in his mind for 3 or 4 years .
He sat down and told me his plot all through , in a clear , bright way , and I was a deal taken with it ; but it is a line of characters whose fine shading and artistic development requires an abler hand than mine ; so I easily perceived that I must not make the attempt .
But I liked the man , and thought there was a good deal of stuff in him ; and therefore I wanted his play to be written , and by a capable hand , too .
So I suggested you , and said I would write and see if you would be willing to undertake it .
If you like the idea , he will call upon you in the course of two or three weeks and describe his plot and his characters .
Then if it does n't strike you favorably , of course you can simply decline ; but it seems to me well worth while that you should hear what he has to say .
You could also `` average '' him while he talks , and judge whether he could play your priest -- though I doubt if any man can do that justice .
The sinister typewriter did not find its way to Howells for nearly a year .
He wrote to them :
Three months later the machine was still in his possession .
Bliss had traded a twelve-dollar saddle for it , but apparently showed little enthusiasm in his new possession .
To W. D. Howells , in Boston :
Moreover the book is plenty long enough as it stands .
It is about 900 pages of MS , and may be 1000 when I shall have finished `` working up '' vague places ; so it would make from 130 to 150 pages of the Atlantic -- about what the Foregone Conclusion made , is n't it ?
MY DEAR HOWELLS , -- Just as soon as you consented I realized all the atrocity of my request , and straightway blushed and weakened .
I telegraphed my theatrical agent to come here and carry off the MS and copy it .
With the exception of the frog story and the `` True Story '' most of those included -- might be spared .
Clemens himself confessed to Howells that He wished , when it was too late , that he had destroyed a number of them .
The absurdity and injustice of the copyright laws both amused and irritated him , and in the course of time he would be largely instrumental in their improvement .
The only man who ever signed my petition with alacrity , and said that the fact that a thing was right was all-sufficient , was Rev .
With love to you all Yrs Ever S. L. CLEMENS .
I 've got another rattling good character for my novel !
That great work is mulling itself into shape gradually .
HARTFORD , Nov. 23 , '75 .
The `` story '' referred to may have been any one of several begun by him at this time .
His head was full of ideas for literature of every sort .
Many of his beginnings came to nothing , for the reason that he started wrong , or with no definitely formed plan .
Others of his literary enterprises were condemned by his wife for their grotesqueness or for the offense they might give in one way or another , however worthy the intention behind them .
Once he wrote a burlesque on family history `` The Autobiography of a Damned Fool . ''
`` Livy would n't have it , '' he said later , `` so I gave it up . ''
She was his public , his best public -- clearheaded and wise .
That he realized this , and was willing to yield , was by no means the least of his good fortunes .
We may believe that he did not always yield easily , and perhaps sometimes only out of love for her .
In the letter which he wrote her on her thirtieth birthday we realize something of what she had come to mean in his life .
Livy darling , six years have gone by since I made my first great success in life and won you , and thirty years have passed since Providence made preparation for that happy success by sending you into the world .
Every day we live together adds to the security of my confidence , that we can never any more wish to be separated than that we can ever imagine a regret that we were ever joined .
You are dearer to me to-day , my child , than you were upon the last anniversary of this birth-day ; you were dearer then than you were a year before -- you have grown more and more dear from the first of those anniversaries , and I do not doubt that this precious progression will continue on to the end .
Always Yours S. L. C .
MY DEAR HOWELLS , -- Indeed we have n't forgotten the Howellses , nor scored up a grudge of any kind against them ; but the fact is I was under the doctor 's hands for four weeks on a stretch and have been disabled from working for a week or so beside .
I thought I was well , about ten days ago , so I sent for a short-hand writer and dictated answers to a bushel or so of letters that had been accumulating during my illness .
Getting everything shipshape and cleared up , I went to work next day upon an Atlantic article , which ought to be worth $ 20 per page ( which is the price they usually pay for my work , I believe ) for although it is only 70 pages MS ( less than two days work , counting by bulk , ) I have spent 3 more days trimming , altering and working at it .
I shall put in one more day 's polishing on it , and then read it before our Club , which is to meet at our house Monday evening , the 24th inst .
I think it will bring out considerable discussion among the gentlemen of the Club -- though the title of the article will not give them much notion of what is to follow , -- this title being `` The Facts Concerning the Recent Carnival of Crime in Connecticut '' -- which reminds me that today 's Tribune says there will be a startling article in the current Atlantic , in which a being which is tangible bud invisible will figure-exactly the case with the sketch of mine which I am talking about !
However , mine can lie unpublished a year or two as well as not -- though I wish that contributor of yours had not interfered with his coincidence of heroes .
I am on the sick list again -- and was , day before yesterday -- but on the whole I am getting along .
He closed by urging that Bliss `` hurry out '' 'Tom Sawyer . '
`` That boy is going to make a prodigious hit . ''
MY DEAR HOWELLS , -- Thanks , and ever so many , for the good opinion of 'Tom Sawyer . '
Williams has made about 300 rattling pictures for it -- some of them very dainty .
Poor devil , what a genius he has and how he does murder it with rum .
He takes a book of mine , and without suggestion from anybody builds no end of pictures just from his reading of it .
There was never a man in the world so grateful to another as I was to you day before yesterday , when I sat down ( in still rather wretched health ) to set myself to the dreary and hateful task of making final revision of Tom Sawyer , and discovered , upon opening the package of MS that your pencil marks were scattered all along .
This was splendid , and swept away all labor .
Instead of reading the MS , I simply hunted out the pencil marks and made the emendations which they suggested .
I reduced the boy battle to a curt paragraph ; I finally concluded to cut the Sunday school speech down to the first two sentences , leaving no suggestion of satire , since the book is to be for boys and girls ; I tamed the various obscenities until I judged that they no longer carried offense .
So , at a single sitting I began and finished a revision which I had supposed would occupy 3 or 4. days and leave me mentally and physically fagged out at the end .
I was careful not to inflict the MS upon you until I had thoroughly and painstakingly revised it .
Therefore , the only faults left were those that would discover themselves to others , not me -- and these you had pointed out .
`` I 'd have that swearing out in an instant .
I suppose I didn't notice it because the locution was so familiar to my Western sense , and so exactly the thing that Huck would say . ''
Clemens changed the phrase to , `` They comb me all to thunder , '' and so it stands to-day .
To W. D. Howells , in Boston :
I read the `` Carnival of Crime '' proof in New York when worn and witless and so left some things unamended which I might possibly have altered had I been at home .
For instance , `` I shall always address you in your own S-n-i-v-e-l-i-n-g d-r-a-w-l , baby . ''
I saw that you objected to something there , but I did not understand what !
Was it that it was too personal ?
Should the language be altered ?
-- or the hyphens taken out ?
Wo n't you please fix it the way it ought to be , altering the language as you choose , only making it bitter and contemptuous ?
The `` skeleton novelette '' mentioned in the next letter refers to a plan concocted by Howells and Clemens , by which each of twelve authors was to write a story , using the same plot , `` blindfolded '' as to what the others had written .
Neither he nor Clemens gave up the idea for a long time .
It appears in their letters again and again , though perhaps it was just as well for literature that it was never carried out .
Well , yesterday I put in the Courant an editorial paragraph stating that Tam Sawyer is `` ready to issue , but publication is put off in order to secure English copyright by simultaneous publication there and here .
The English edition is unavoidably delayed . ''
Even if that reason were insufficient , there would still be a sufficient reason left , in the fact that Mr. Carlton seems to be the publisher of the magazine in which it is proposed to publish this horse-car matter .
Carlton insulted me in Feb. 1867 , and so when the day arrives that sees me doing him a civility I shall feel that I am ready for Paradise , since my list of possible and impossible forgivenesses will then be complete .
( Is that spelt right ?
-- somehow it does n't look right . )
With our very kindest regards to the whole family .
She was the author of numerous plays , some of which were successful , but her career as an actress was never brilliant .
To Dr. John Brown , in Edinburgh :
DEAR FRIEND THE DOCTOR , -- It was a perfect delight to see the well-known handwriting again !
But we so grieve to know that you are feeling miserable .
It must not last -- it can not last .
The regal summer is come and it will smile you into high good cheer ; it will charm away your pains , it will banish your distresses .
I wish you were here , to spend the summer with us .
We are perched on a hill-top that overlooks a little world of green valleys , shining rivers , sumptuous forests and billowy uplands veiled in the haze of distance .
We have no neighbors .
It is the quietest of all quiet places , and we are hermits that eschew caves and live in the sun .
Doctor , if you 'd only come !
To W. D. Howells , in Boston :
ELMIRA , August 23 , 1876 .
MY DEAR HOWELLS , -- I am glad you think I could do Hayes any good , for I have been wanting to write a letter or make a speech to that end .
I'll be careful not to do either , however , until the opportunity comes in a natural , justifiable and unlugged way ; and shall not then do anything unless I 've got it all digested and worded just right .
In which case I might do some good -- in any other I should do harm .
When a humorist ventures upon the grave concerns of life he must do his job better than another man or he works harm to his cause .
I will not , and do not , believe that there is a possibility of Hayes's defeat , but I want the victory to be sweeping ... ..
It seems odd to find myself interested in an election .
I never was before .
And I ca n't seem to get over my repugnance to reading or thinking about politics , yet .
But in truth I care little about any party 's politics -- the man behind it is the important thing .
To W. D. Howells , in Boston :
Now the favor I ask of you is that you will have the words `` Ah Sin , a Drama , '' printed in the middle of a note-paper page and send the same to me , with Bill .
We do n't want anybody to know that we are building this play .
I ca n't get this title page printed here without having to lie so much that the thought of it is disagreeable to one reared as I have been .
And yet the title of the play must be printed -- the rest of the application for copyright is allowable in penmanship .
Fortunately a good deal of experience of men enabled me to choose my residence wisely .
I live in the freest corner of the country .
There are no social disabilities between me and my Democratic personal friends .
We break the bread and eat the salt of hospitality freely together and never dream of such a thing as offering impertinent interference in each other 's political opinions .
WASHINGTON , D. C. May 11th , 1877 .
Howells condoled with him on his failure to see the President , `` but , '' he added , `` if you and I had both been there , our combined skill would have no doubt procured us to be expelled from the White House by Fred Douglass .
But the thing seems to be a complete failure as it was . ''
Douglass at this time being the Marshal of Columbia , gives special point to Howells 's suggestion .
FARMINGTON AVENUE , HARTFORD , June 3 , 1877 .
Ever Yours SAMUEL L. CLEMENS .
I am powerful glad to see that No .
1 reads a nation sight better in print than it did in MS .
I told Bentley we 'd send him the slips , each time , 6 weeks before day of publication .
We can do that ca n't we ?
Two months ahead would be still better I suppose , but I do n't know .
My old Plunkett family seemed wonderfully coarse and vulgar on the stage , but it was because they were played in such an outrageously and inexcusably coarse way .
The Chinaman is killingly funny .
I do n't know when I have enjoyed anything as much as I did him .
The people say there is n't enough of him in the piece .
That 's a triumph -- there 'll never be any more of him in it .
MY DEAR HOWELLS , -- It 's finished .
I was misled by hurried mis-paging .
There were ten pages of notes , and over 300 pages of MS when the play was done .
Did it in 42 hours , by the clock ; 40 pages of the Atlantic -- but then of course it 's very `` fat . ''
Those are the figures , but I do n't believe them myself , because the thing 's impossible .
If you 've got that paragraph by you yet , and if in your judgment it would be good to publish it , and if you absolutely would not mind doing it , then I think I 'd like to have you do it -- or else put some other words in my mouth that will be properer , and publish them .
But mind , do n't think of it for a moment if it is distasteful -- and doubtless it is .
I value your judgment more than my own , as to the wisdom of saying anything at all in this matter .
To say nothing leaves me in an injurious position -- and yet maybe I might do better to speak to the men themselves when I go to New York .
This was my latest idea , and it looked wise .
We unite in warm regards to you and yours .
Well , sunset came , and Ida the young and comely ( Charley Langdon 's wife ) and her little Julia and the nurse Nora , drove out at the gate behind the new gray horse and started down the long hill -- the high carriage receiving its load under the porte cochere .
Ida was seen to turn her face toward us across the fence and intervening lawn -- Theodore waved good-bye to her , for he did not know that her sign was a speechless appeal for help .
Theodore and I left the shrieking crowd behind and ran down the hill bare-headed and shouting .
A neighbor appeared at his gate -- a tenth of a second too late !
the buggy vanished past him like a thought .
My last glimpse showed it for one instant , far down the descent , springing high in the air out of a cloud of dust , and then it disappeared .
As I flew down the road my impulse was to shut my eyes as I turned them to the right or left , and so delay for a moment the ghastly spectacle of mutilation and death I was expecting .
I ran on and on , still spared this spectacle , but saying to myself : `` I shall see it at the turn of the road ; they never can pass that turn alive . ''
When I came in sight of that turn I saw two wagons there bunched together -- one of them full of people .
I said , `` Just so -- they are staring petrified at the remains . ''
It was down hill , mind you .
Ten feet further down hill neither Lewis nor any other man could have saved them , for they would have been on the abrupt `` turn , '' then .
But how this miracle was ever accomplished at all , by human strength , generalship and accuracy , is clean beyond my comprehension -- and grows more so the more I go and examine the ground and try to believe it was actually done .
I know one thing , well ; if Lewis had missed his aim he would have been killed on the spot in the trap he had made for himself , and we should have found the rest of the remains away down at the bottom of the steep ravine .
Ten minutes later Theodore and I arrived opposite the house , with the servants straggling after us , and shouted to the distracted group on the porch , `` Everybody safe ! ''
MY DEAR HOWELLS , -- I do n't really see how the story of the runaway horse could read well with the little details of names and places and things left out .
They are the true life of all narrative .
It would n't quite do to print them at this time .
We 'll talk about it when you come .
Delicacy -- a sad , sad false delicacy -- robs literature of the best two things among its belongings .
Family-circle narrative and obscene stories .
But no matter ; in that better world which I trust we are all going to I have the hope and belief that they will not be denied us .
The revenue cutter Colfax went after the Jonas Smith , thinking there was mutiny or other crime on board .
It occurs to me now that , since there is only mere suffering and misery and nobody to punish , it ceases to be a matter which ( a republican form of ) government will feel authorized to interfere in further .
Dam a republican form of government .
Clemens thought he had given up lecturing for good ; he was prosperous and he had no love for the platform .
But one day an idea popped into his head : Thomas Nast , the `` father of the American cartoon , '' had delivered a successful series of illustrated lectures -- talks for which he made the drawings as he went along .
His letter gives us the plan in full .
MY DEAR NAST , -- I did not think I should ever stand on a platform again until the time was come for me to say `` I die innocent . ''
But the same old offers keep arriving .
I have declined them all , just as usual , though sorely tempted , as usual .
My idea is not to fatten the lecture agents and lyceums on the spoils , but put all the ducats religiously into two equal piles , and say to the artist and lecturer , `` Absorb these . ''
I did not put in Philadelphia because Pugh owns that town , and last winter when I made a little reading-trip he only paid me $ 300 and pretended his concert ( I read fifteen minutes in the midst of a concert ) cost him a vast sum , and so he could n't afford any more .
I could get up a better concert with a barrel of cats .
Eugene Burton said he would sell $ 300 worth of the tickets himself.
Smith said he would sell $ 200 or $ 300 worth himself .
My plan for Asylum Hill Church would have ensured $ 150 from that quarter.
-- All this in the face of my `` Stipulation . ''
It was proposed to raise $ 1000 ; did my stipulation render the raising of $ 400 or $ 500 in a dozen churches impossible ?
I think our plan was a good one .
I do not doubt that Mr. Burton still approves of it , too .
I believe the objections come from other quarters , and not from him .
Mr. Twichell used the following words in last Sunday's sermon , ( if I remember correctly ) :
The speech was made at John Greenleaf Whittier 's seventieth birthday dinner , given by the Atlantic staff on the evening of December 17 , 1877 .
It was intended as a huge joke -- a joke that would shake the sides of these venerable Boston deities , Longfellow , Emerson , Holmes , and the rest of that venerated group .
Clemens had been a favorite at the Atlantic lunches and dinners -- a speech by him always an event .
This time he decided to outdo himself .
Clemens wrote contrite letters to Holmes , Emerson , and Longfellow , and received most gracious acknowledgments .
Emerson , indeed , had not heard the speech : His faculties were already blurred by the mental mists that would eventually shut him in .
Clemens wrote again to Howells , this time with less anguish .
HARTFORD , Friday , 1877 .
LETTERS FROM EUROPE , 1878-79 .
WRITING A NEW TRAVEL BOOK .
To Mrs. Jane Clemens , in Keokuk , Iowa :
Life has come to be a very serious matter with me .
I have a badgered , harassed feeling , a good part of my time .
It comes mainly of business responsibilities and annoyances , and the persecution of kindly letters from well meaning strangers -- to whom I must be rudely silent or else put in the biggest half of my time bothering over answers .
There are other things also that help to consume my time and defeat my projects .
Well , the consequence is , I can not write a book at home .
This cuts my income down .
Therefore , I have about made up my mind to take my tribe and fly to some little corner of Europe and budge no more until I shall have completed one of the half dozen books that lie begun , up stairs .
Please say nothing about this at present .
Clemens replied promptly , urging a visit to Hartford , adding a postscript for Mrs. Howells , characteristic enough to warrant preservation .
Sincerely yours S. L. CLEMENS .
The Howellses came , as invited , for a final reunion before the breaking up .
This was in the early half of March ; the Clemenses were to sail on the 11th of the following month .
In the letter that follows the mention of Annie and Sam refers , of course , to the children of Mrs. Moffett , who had been , Pamela Clemens .
The Moffetts and Websters were living in Fredonia at this time , and Clemens had been to pay them a good-by visit .
I find here a letter from Orion , submitting some new matter in his story for criticism .
When you write him , please tell him to do the best he can and bang away .
I can do nothing further in this matter , for I have but 3 days left in which to settle a deal of important business and answer a bushel and a half of letters .
I am very nearly tired to death .
We send our loving good-byes to all the household and hope to see you again after a spell .
While Livy and Miss Spaulding have been writing at this table , I have sat tilted back , near by , with a pipe and the last Atlantic , and read Charley Warner 's article with prodigious enjoyment .
I think it is exquisite .
I think it must be the roundest and broadest and completest short essay he has ever written .
It is clear , and compact , and charmingly done .
There has been no former mention in the letters of the coming of Twichell ; yet this had been a part of the European plan .
Material for the new book would grow faster with Twichell as a companion ; and these two in spite of their widely opposed views concerning Providence and the general scheme of creation , were wholly congenial comrades .
Twichell , in Hartford , expecting to receive the final summons to start , wrote : `` Oh , my !
do you realize , Mark , what a symposium it is to be ?
To begin with , I am thoroughly tired , and the rest will be worth everything .
To walk with you and talk with you for weeks together -- why , it 's my dream of luxury . ''
Twichell also made his reports home , some of which give us interesting pictures of his walking partner .
In one place he wrote : `` Mark is a queer fellow .
There is nothing he so delights in as a swift , strong stream .
You can hardly get him to leave one when once he is within the influence of its fascinations . ''
Twichell tells how at Kandersteg they were out together one evening where a brook comes plunging down from Gasternthal and how he pushed in a drift to see it go racing along the current .
`` When I got back to the path Mark was running down stream after it as hard as he could go , throwing up his hands and shouting in the wildest ecstasy , and when a piece went over a fall and emerged to view in the foam below he would jump up and down and yell .
He said afterward that he had not been so excited in three months . ''
To J. H. Twichell , in Hartford :
DEAR JOE , -- ...
..I have received your several letters , and we have prodigiously enjoyed them .
How I do admire a man who can sit down and whale away with a pen just the same as if it was fishing -- or something else as full of pleasure and as void of labor .
I ca n't do it ; else , in common decency , I would when I write to you .
Joe , if I can make a book out of the matter gathered in your company over here , the book is safe ; but I do n't think I have gathered any matter before or since your visit worth writing up .
I do wish you were in Rome to do my sightseeing for me .
Rome interests me as much as East Hartford could , and no more .
That is , the Rome which the average tourist feels an interest in ; but there are other things here which stir me enough to make life worth living .
Livy and Clara Spaulding are having a royal time worshiping the old Masters , and I as good a time gritting my ineffectual teeth over them .
In his letter to Howells he said : `` I wish I could give those sharp satires on European life which you mention , but of course a man ca n't write successful satire except he be in a calm , judicial good-humor ; whereas I hate travel , and I hate hotels , and I hate the opera , and I hate the old masters .
In truth , I do n't ever seem to be in a good-enough humor with anything to satirize it .
No , I want to stand up before it and curse it and foam at the mouth , or take a club and pound it to rags and pulp .
I have got in two or three chapters about Wagner 's operas , and managed to do it without showing temper , but the strain of another such effort would burst me ! ''
No 1a , Karlstrasse , 2e Stock .
But you see , that was simply fatigue .
Next morning the tribe fell in love with the rooms , with the weather , with Munich , and head over heels in love with Fraulein Dahlweiner .
We got a larger parlor -- an ample one -- threw two communicating bedrooms into one , for the children , and now we are entirely comfortable .
The only apprehension , at present , is that the climate may not be just right for the children , in which case we shall have to go to France , but it will be with the sincerest regret .
While it occurs to me , I must tell you Susie 's last .
She is sorely badgered with dreams ; and her stock dream is that she is being eaten up by bears .
She is a grave and thoughtful child , as you will remember .
Last night she had the usual dream .
This morning she stood apart ( after telling it , ) for some time , looking vacantly at the floor , and absorbed in meditation .
At last she looked up , and with the pathos of one who feels he has not been dealt by with even-handed fairness , said `` But Mamma , the trouble is , that I am never the bear , but always the person . ''
To Mrs. Jane Clemens and Mrs. Moffett , in America :
His `` pleasant work-room '' provided exercise , but no inspiration .
When he discovered he could not find his Swiss note-book he was ready to give up his travel-writing altogether .
In the letter that follows we find him much less enthusiastic concerning his own performances than over the story by Howells , which he was following in the Atlantic .
To W. D. Howells , in Boston :
Since then I 'm glad Providence knew better what to do with the Swiss note-book than I did , for I like my work , now , exceedingly , and often turn out over 30 MS pages a day and then quit sorry that Heaven makes the days so short .
One of my discouragements had been the belief that my interest in this tour had been so slender that I could n't gouge matter enough out of it to make a book .
I 've got 900 pages written ( not a word in it about the sea voyage ) yet I stepped my foot out of Heidelberg for the first time yesterday , -- and then only to take our party of four on our first pedestrian tour -- to Heilbronn .
I 've got them dressed elaborately in walking costume -- knapsacks , canteens , field-glasses , leather leggings , patent walking shoes , muslin folds around their hats , with long tails hanging down behind , sun umbrellas , and Alpenstocks .
They go all the way to Wimpfen by rail-thence to Heilbronn in a chance vegetable cart drawn by a donkey and a cow ; I shall fetch them home on a raft ; and if other people shall perceive that that was no pedestrian excursion , they themselves shall not be conscious of it.
-- This trip will take 100 pages or more , -- oh , goodness knows how many !
for the mood is everything , not the material , and I already seem to see 300 pages rising before me on that trip .
Then , I propose to leave Heidelberg for good .
Do n't you see , the book ( 1800 MS pages , ) may really be finished before I ever get to Switzerland ?
To W. D. Howells , in Boston :
Now just look at this letter of Orion 's .
Did you ever see the grotesquely absurd and the heart-breakingly pathetic more closely joined together ?
Mrs. Clemens said `` Raise his monthly pension . ''
So I wrote to Perkins to raise it a trifle .
You must put him in a book or a play right away .
You are the only man capable of doing it .
You might die at any moment , and your very greatest work would be lost to the world .
I could write Orion 's simple biography , and make it effective , too , by merely stating the bald facts -- and this I will do if he dies before I do ; but you must put him into romance .
This was the understanding you and I had the day I sailed .
I protested , and he got on his warpaint , couched his lance , and ran a bold tilt against total abstinence and the Red Ribbon fanatics .
It raised a fine row among the virtuous Keokukians .
, -- Yours has just arrived .
I enclose a draft on Hartford for $ 25 .
You will have abandoned the project you wanted it for , by the time it arrives , -- but no matter , apply it to your newer and present project , whatever it is .
You see I have an ineradicable faith in your unsteadfastness , -- but mind you , I did n't invent that faith , you conferred it on me yourself .
But fire away , fire away !
I do n't see why a changeable man should n't get as much enjoyment out of his changes , and transformations and transfigurations as a steadfast man gets out of standing still and pegging at the same old monotonous thing all the time .
That is to say , I do n't see why a kaleidoscope should n't enjoy itself as much as a telescope , nor a grindstone have as good a time as a whetstone , nor a barometer as good a time as a yardstick .
I don't feel like girding at you any more about fickleness of purpose , because I recognize and realize at last that it is incurable ; but before I learned to accept this truth , each new weekly project of yours possessed the power of throwing me into the most exhausting and helpless convulsions of profanity .
But fire away , now !
Your magic has lost its might .
I am able to view your inspirations dispassionately and judicially , now , and say `` This one or that one or the other one is not up to your average flight , or is above it , or below it . ''
He was of steadfast purpose , and he possessed the driving power which Orion Clemens lacked ; but the importance to him of some of the smaller matters of life , as shown in a letter like the following , bespeaks a certain simplicity of nature which he never outgrew :
MUNICH , Feb. 24 .
With love Ys Ever MARK .
ELMIRA , Sept. 15 , 1879 .
MY DEAR HOWELLS , -- When and where ?
Here on the farm would be an elegant place to meet , but of course you can not come so far .
So we will say Hartford or Belmont , about the beginning of November .
The date of our return to Hartford is uncertain , but will be three or four weeks hence , I judge .
I hope to finish my book here before migrating .
Your letter struck me while I was meditating a project to beguile you , and John Hay and Joe Twichell , into a descent upon Chicago which I dream of making , to witness the re-union of the great Commanders of the Western Army Corps on the 9th of next month .
My sluggish soul needs a fierce upstirring , and if it would not get it when Grant enters the meeting place I must doubtless `` lay '' for the final resurrection .
Can you and Hay go ?
At the same time , confound it , I doubt if I can go myself , for this book is n't done yet .
But I would give a heap to be there .
I mean to heave some holiness into the Hartford primaries when I go back ; and if there was a solitary office in the land which majestic ignorance and incapacity , coupled with purity of heart , could fill , I would run for it .
This naturally reminds me of Bret Harte -- but let him pass .
I have been hoping during several weeks that it might be my good fortune to receive an invitation to be present on that great occasion in Chicago ; but now that my desire is accomplished my business matters have so shaped themselves as to bar me from being so far from home in the first half of November .
It is with supreme regret that I lost this chance , for I have not had a thorough stirring up for some years , and I judged that if I could be in the banqueting hall and see and hear the veterans of the Army of the Tennessee at the moment that their old commander entered the room , or rose in his place to speak , my system would get the kind of upheaval it needs .
General Grant 's progress across the continent is of the marvelous nature of the returning Napoleon's progress from Grenoble to Paris ; and as the crowning spectacle in the one case was the meeting with the Old Guard , so , likewise , the crowning spectacle in the other will be our great captain 's meeting with his Old Guard -- and that is the very climax which I wanted to witness .
To Mrs. Clemens , in Hartford :
So we turned back and entered the house next to Jackson 's and talked something more than an hour and smoked many pipes and had a sociable good time .
His wife is very gentle and intelligent and pretty , and they have a cunning little girl nearly as big as Bay but only three years old .
They wanted me to come in and spend an evening , after the banquet , with them and Gen. Grant , after this grand pow-wow is over , but I said I was going home Friday .
Then they asked me to come Friday afternoon , when they and the general will receive a few friends , and I said I would .
Col. Grant said he and Gen. Sherman used the Innocents Abroad as their guide book when they were on their travels .
I stepped in next door and took Dr. Jackson to the hotel and we played billiards from 7 to 11.30 P.M. and then went to a beer-mill to meet some twenty Chicago journalists -- talked , sang songs and made speeches till 6 o'clock this morning .
Nobody got in the least degree `` under the influence , '' and we had a pleasant time .
Read awhile in bed , slept till 11 , shaved , went to breakfast at noon , and by mistake got into the servants ' hall .
I remained there and breakfasted with twenty or thirty male and female servants , though I had a table to myself .
CHICAGO , Nov. 12 , '79 .
One of the most illustrious individuals on that stage was `` Ole Abe , '' the historic war eagle .
He stood on his perch -- the old savage-eyed rascal -- three or four feet behind Gen. Sherman , and as he had been in nearly every battle that was mentioned by the orators his soul was probably stirred pretty often , though he was too proud to let on .
To Mrs. Clemens , in Hartford :
CHICAGO , Nov. 14 '79 .
Bless your soul , 't was immense .
I never was so proud in my life .
Lots and lots of people -- hundreds I might say -- told me my speech was the triumph of the evening -- which was a lie .
Ladies , Tom , Dick and Harry -- even the policemen -- captured me in the halls and shook hands , and scores of army officers said `` We shall always be grateful to you for coming . ''
General Pope came to bunt me up -- I was afraid to speak to him on that theatre stage last night , thinking it might be presumptuous to tackle a man so high up in military history .
Gen. Schofield , and other historic men , paid their compliments .
Sheridan was ill and could not come , but I 'm to go with a General of his staff and see him before I go to Col. Grant 's .
Gen. Augur -- well , I 've talked with them all , received invitations from them all -- from people living everywhere -- and as I said before , it 's a memorable night .
I would n't have missed it for anything in the world .
Truly Yours , S. L. CLEMENS .
To W. D. Howells , in Boston :
I would like to look into a child 's head , once , and see what its processes are .
MY DEAR HOWELLS , -- Am waiting for Patrick to come with the carriage .
Mrs. Clemens and I are starting ( without the children ) to stay indefinitely in Elmira .
The wear and tear of settling the house broke her down , and she has been growing weaker and weaker for a fortnight .
All that time -- in fact ever since I saw you -- I have been fighting a life-and-death battle with this infernal book and hoping to get done some day .
I required 300 pages of MS , and I have written near 600 since I saw you -- and tore it all up except 288 .
This I was about to tear up yesterday and begin again , when Mrs. Perkins came up to the billiard room and said , `` You will never get any woman to do the thing necessary to save her life by mere persuasion ; you see you have wasted your words for three weeks ; it is time to use force ; she must have a change ; take her home and leave the children here . ''
I am as soary ( and flighty ) as a rocket , to-day , with the unutterable joy of getting that Old Man of the Sea off my back , where he has been roosting for more than a year and a half .
Next time I make a contract before writing the book , may I suffer the righteous penalty and be burnt , like the injudicious believer .
I am mighty glad you are done your book ( this is from a man who , above all others , feels how much that sentence means ) and am also mighty glad you have begun the next ( this is also from a man who knows the felicity of that , and means straightway to enjoy it . )
The Undiscovered starts off delightfully -- I have read it aloud to Mrs. C. and we vastly enjoyed it .
My idea is to afford a realizing sense of the exceeding severity of the laws of that day by inflicting some of their penalties upon the King himself and allowing him a chance to see the rest of them applied to others -- all of which is to account for certain mildnesses which distinguished Edward VI 's reign from those that preceded and followed it .
Thursday , June 6th , 1880 .
Breakfast is frozen by this time , and Mrs. Clemens correspondingly hot .
I 've got a swollen ear ; so I take advantage of it to lie abed most of the day , and read and smoke and scribble and have a good time .
Last evening Livy said with deep concern , `` O dear , I believe an abscess is forming in your ear . ''
One wishes that Howells might have found value enough in the verses of Frank Soule to recommend them to Osgood .
To Clemens he wrote : `` You have touched me in regard to him , and I will deal gently with his poetry .
I can imagine him , and how he must have to struggle not to be hard or sour . ''
The `` Encyclopedical Scotchman '' mentioned in the preceding letter was the publisher Gebbie , who had a plan to engage Howells and Clemens to prepare some sort of anthology of the world 's literature .
The idea came to nothing , though the other plan mentioned -- for a library of humor -- in time grew into a book .
Sunday , Oct 24 '80 .
Jean got the stockings and is much obliged ; Mollie wants to know whom she most resembles , but I ca n't tell ; she has blue eyes and brown hair , and three chins , and is very fat and happy ; and at one time or another she has resembled all the different Clemenses and Langdons , in turn , that have ever lived .
So all Joe 's laborious hours were for naught !
It was as if he had come to borrow a dollar , and been offered a thousand before he could unfold his case ... .
It seems to me that it is better to have a good man 's flattering estimate of my influence -- and to keep it -- than to fool it away with trying to get him an office .
But when my brother -- on my wife 's side -- Mr. Charles J. Langdon -- late of the Chicago Convention -- desires me to speak a word for Mr. Fred Douglass , I am not asked `` to use my influence '' consequently I am not risking anything .
So I am writing this as a simple citizen .
I am not drawing on my fund of influence at all .
A simple citizen may express a desire with all propriety , in the matter of a recommendation to office , and so I beg permission to hope that you will retain Mr. Douglass in his present office of Marshall of the District of Columbia , if such a course will not clash with your own preferences or with the expediencies and interest of your administration .
I offer this petition with peculiar pleasure and strong desire , because I so honor this man 's high and blemishless character and so admire his brave , long crusade for the liberties and elevation of his race .
He is a personal friend of mine , but that is nothing to the point , his history would move me to say these things without that , and I feel them too .
I arrived home in time to make a most noble blunder -- invited Charley Warner here ( in Livy 's name ) to dinner with the Gerhardts , and told him Livy had invited his wife by letter and by word of mouth also .
I don't know where I got these impressions , but I came home feeling as one does who realizes that he has done a neat thing for once and left no flaws or loop-holes .
Well , Livy said she had never told me to invite Charley and she had n't dreamed of inviting Susy , and moreover there wasn't any dinner , but just one lean duck .
But Susy Warner 's intuitions were correct -- so she choked off Charley , and staid home herself -- we waited dinner an hour and you ought to have seen that duck when he was done drying in the oven .
Then I got up with a soul full of rage , and went in there and bent scowling over that person , and began a succession of rude and raspy questions -- and without even offering to sit down .
The Gerhardts were presently off to Paris , well provided with means to make their dreams reality ; in due time the letters will report them again .
`` You have pinned a proud feather in Uncle-Remus 's cap , '' replied Harris .
I have been thinking , yesterday and to-day ( plenty of chance to think , as I am abed with lumbago at our little summering farm among the solitudes of the Mountaintops , ) and I have concluded that I can answer one of your questions with full confidence -- thus : Make it a subscription book .
Mighty few books that come strictly under the head of literature will sell by subscription ; but if Uncle Remus wo n't , the gift of prophecy has departed out of me .
When a book will sell by subscription , it will sell two or three times as many copies as it would in the trade ; and the profit is bulkier because the retail price is greater ... ..
I think my wife would be twice as strong as she is , but for this wearing and wearying slavery of house-keeping .
However , she thinks she must submit to it for the sake of the children ; whereas , I have always had a tenderness for parents too , so , for her sake and mine , I sigh for the incendiary .
When the evening comes and the gas is lit and the wear and tear of life ceases , we want to keep house always ; but next morning we wish , once more , that we were free and irresponsible boarders .
To W. D. Howells , in Boston :
Clemens now and then found it necessary to pay a visit to Canada in the effort to protect his copyright .
He usually had a grand time on these trips , being lavishly entertained by the Canadian literary fraternity .
In November , 1881 , he made one of these journeys in the interest of The Prince and the Pauper , this time with Osgood , who was now his publisher .
In letters written home we get a hint of his diversions .
The Monsieur Frechette mentioned was a Canadian poet of considerable distinction .
`` Clara '' was Miss Clara Spaulding , of Elmira , who had accompanied Mr. and Mrs. Clemens to Europe in 1873 , and again in 1878 .
Later she became Mrs. John B. Staachfield , of New York City .
Her name has already appeared in these letters many times .
[ The above paragraph is written in the form of a rebus illustrated with various sketches . ]
I can not only look out upon the beautiful snow-storm , past the vigorous blaze of my fire ; and upon the snow-veiled buildings which I have sketched ; and upon the churchward drifting umbrellas ; and upon the buffalo-clad cabmen stamping their feet and thrashing their arms on the corner yonder : but I also look out upon the spot where the first white men stood , in the neighborhood of four hundred years ago , admiring the mighty stretch of leafy solitudes , and being admired and marveled at by an eager multitude of naked savages .
The discoverer of this region , and namer of it , Jacques Cartier , has a square named for him in the city .
I wish you were here ; you would enjoy your birthday , I think .
Among other things it turned out that he had been a Turkish ( native ) colonel , and had fought all through the Crimean war -- and so , for the first time , Joe got a picture of the Charge of the Six Hundred that made him see the living spectacle , the flash of flag and tongue-flame , the rolling smoke , and hear the booming of the guns ; and for the first time also , he heard the reasons for that wild charge delivered from the mouth of a master , and realized that nobody had `` blundered , '' but that a cold , logical , military brain had perceived this one and sole way to win an already lost battle , and so gave the command and did achieve the victory .
Joel Chandler Harris appears again in the letters of this period .
Twichell , during a trip South about this time , had called on Harris with some sort of proposition or suggestion from Clemens that Harris appear with him in public , and tell , or read , the Remus stories from the platform .
But Harris was abnormally diffident .
Clemens later pronounced him `` the shyest full-grown man '' he had ever met , and the word which Twichell brought home evidently did not encourage the platform idea .
It will be well worth your while to do this , because the author who goes to Canada unposted , will not know what course to pursue [ to secure copyright ] when he gets there ; he will find himself in a hopeless confusion as to what is the correct thing to do .
Now Osgood is the only man in America , who can lay out your course for you and tell you exactly what to do .
Therefore , you just come to New Orleans and have a talk with him .
QUINCY , ILL. May 17 , '82 .
Livy darling , I am desperately homesick .
But I have promised Osgood , and must stick it out ; otherwise I would take the train at once and break for home .
That world which I knew in its blossoming youth is old and bowed and melancholy , now ; its soft cheeks are leathery and wrinkled , the fire is gone out in its eyes , and the spring from its step .
It will be dust and ashes when I come again .
I have been clasping hands with the moribund -- and usually they said , `` It is for the last time . ''
To Mr. John Brown , in Edinburgh
To W. D. Howells , in Belmont , Mass .
To W. D. Howells , in London :
To W. D. Howells , in Switzerland :
LETTERS , 1883 , TO HOWELLS AND OTHERS .
A GUEST OF THE MARQUIS OF LORNE .
HARTFORD , March 1st , 1883 .
We have all read your two opening numbers in the Century , and consider them almost beyond praise .
I hear no dissent from this verdict .
I did not know there was an untouched personage in American life , but I had forgotten the auctioneer .
You have photographed him accurately .
I have been an utterly free person for a month or two ; and I do not believe I ever so greatly appreciated and enjoyed -- and realized the absence of the chains of slavery as I do this time .
Usually my first waking thought in the morning is , `` I have nothing to do to-day , I belong to nobody , I have ceased from being a slave . ''
Of course the highest pleasure to be got out of freedom , and having nothing to do , is labor .
But I take my time about it .
I work one hour or four as happens to suit my mind , and quit when I please .
And so these days are days of entire enjoyment .
I told Clark the other day , to jog along comfortable and not get in a sweat .
I said I believed you would not be able to enjoy editing that library over there , where you have your own legitimate work to do and be pestered to death by society besides ; therefore I thought if he got it ready for you against your return , that that would be best and pleasantest .
You remember Governor Jewell , and the night he told about Russia , down in the library .
He was taken with a cold about three weeks ago , and I stepped over one evening , proposing to beguile an idle hour for him with a yarn or two , but was received at the door with whispers , and the information that he was dying .
His case had been dangerous during that day only and he died that night , two hours after I left .
His taking off was a prodigious surprise , and his death has been most widely and sincerely regretted .
E. Dodge , the father-in-law of one of Jewell's daughters , dropped suddenly dead the day before Jewell died , but Jewell died without knowing that .
Jewell 's widow went down to New York , to Dodge 's house , the day after Jewell 's funeral , and was to return here day before yesterday , and she did -- in a coffin .
She fell dead , of heart disease , while her trunks were being packed for her return home .
Florence Strong , one of Jewell 's daughters , who lives in Detroit , started East on an urgent telegram , but missed a connection somewhere , and did not arrive here in time to see her father alive .
She was his favorite child , and they had always been like lovers together .
He always sent her a box of fresh flowers once a week to the day of his death ; a custom which he never suspended even when he was in Russia .
Mrs. Strong had only just reached her Western home again when she was summoned to Hartford to attend her mother 's funeral .
`` A little learneds are happies enough for to may to satisfy their fancies on the literature . ''
To Col. De Winton , in Ottawa , Canada :
DEAR COLONEL DE WINTON , -- I very much want to send a little book to her Royal Highness -- the famous Portuguese phrase book ; but I do not know the etiquette of the matter , and I would not wittingly infringe any rule of propriety .
It is a book which I perfectly well know will amuse her `` some at most '' if she has not seen it before , and will still amuse her `` some at least , '' even if she has inspected it a hundred times already .
So I will send the book to you , and you who know all about the proper observances will protect me from indiscretion , in case of need , by putting the said book in the fire , and remaining as dumb as I generally was when I was up there .
I do not rebind the thing , because that would look as if I thought it worth keeping , whereas it is only worth glancing at and casting aside .
P. S. Although the introduction dates a year back , the book is only just now issued .
A good long delay .
He returned to America in July .
Clemens sent him word of welcome , with glowing reports of his own undertakings .
The story on which he was piling up MS. was The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn , begun seven years before at Quarry Farm .
He had no great faith in it then , and though he had taken it up again in 1880 , his interest had not lasted to its conclusion .
This time , however , he was in the proper spirit , and the story would be finished .
ELMIRA , July 22 , '83 .
Also , in this letter , Howells speaks of an English nobleman to whom he has given a letter of introduction .
`` He seemed a simple , quiet , gentlemanly man , with a good taste in literature , which he evinced by going about with my books in his pockets , and talking of yours . ''
MY DEAR HOWELLS , -- How odd it seems , to sit down to write a letter with the feeling that you 've got time to do it .
But I 'm done work , for this season , and so have got time .
I 've done two seasons ' work in one , and have n't anything left to do , now , but revise .
I 've written eight or nine hundred MS pages in such a brief space of time that I must n't name the number of days ; I should n't believe it myself , and of course couldn't expect you to .
I used to restrict myself to 4 or 5 hours a day and 5 days in the week , but this time I 've wrought from breakfast till 5.15 p.m. six days in the week ; and once or twice I smouched a Sunday when the boss was n't looking .
Nothing is half so good as literature hooked on Sunday , on the sly .
I 'm powerful glad you are all back again ; and we will come up there if our little tribe will give us the necessary furlough ; and if we can't get it , you folks must come to us and give us an extension of time .
We get home Sept. 11 .
Good-by-letter from Clark , which explains for him .
P. S. I thought I had sent all our loves to all of you , but Mrs. Clemens says I have n't .
Damn it , a body ca n't think of everything ; but a woman thinks you can .
I better seal this , now -- else there 'll be more criticism .
My billiard table is stacked up with books relating to the Sandwich Islands : the walls axe upholstered with scraps of paper penciled with notes drawn from them .
I have saturated myself with knowledge of that unimaginably beautiful land and that most strange and fascinating people .
And I have begun a story .
Its hidden motive will illustrate a but-little considered fact in human nature ; that the religious folly you are born in you will die in , no matter what apparently reasonabler religious folly may seem to have taken its place meanwhile , and abolished and obliterated it .
I start Bill Ragsdale at 12 years of age , and the heroine at 4 , in the midst of the ancient idolatrous system , with its picturesque and amazing customs and superstitions , 3 months before the arrival of the missionaries and the erection of a shallow Christianity upon the ruins of the old paganism .
Then these two will become educated Christians , and highly civilized .
And then I will jump 15 years , and do Ragsdale 's leper business .
When we came to dramatize , we can draw a deal of matter from the story , all ready to our hand .
LONG ISLAND FARMER , TO HIS FRIEND AND PILGRIM BROTHER ,
MY DEAR HOWELLS , It took my breath away , and I have n't recovered it yet , entirely -- I mean the generosity of your proposal to read the proofs of Huck Finn .
This was the summer of the Blaine-Cleveland campaign .
From the next letter we gather something of the aspects of that memorable campaign , which was one of scandal and vituperation .
We learn , too , that the young sculptor , Karl Gerhardt , having completed a three years ' study in Paris , had returned to America a qualified artist .
As I said before , I think a man 's first duty is to his own honor ; not to his country and not to his party .
Do n't be offended ; I mean no offence .
I am not so concerned about the rest of the nation , but -- well , good-bye .
To Mr. Pierce , in Boston :
Politicians often carry a victory by springing some disgraceful and rascally mine under the feet of the adversary at the eleventh hour ; would it not be wholesome to vary this thing for once and spring as formidable a mine of a better sort under the enemy 's works ?
THE GREAT YEAR OF 1885 .
PUBLICATION OF `` HUCK FINN . ''
MY DEAR HOWELLS , -- To-night in Baltimore , to-morrow afternoon and night in Washington , and my four-months platform campaign is ended at last .
It has been a curious experience .
It has taught me that Cable 's gifts of mind are greater and higher than I had suspected .
Nat Goodwin was on the train yesterday .
He plays in Washington all the coming week .
He is very anxious to get our Sellers play and play it under changed names .
I said the only thing I could do would be to write to you .
Well , I 've done it .
Very Truly Yours S. L. CLEMENS .
Well , you sent even your daintiest and most delicate and fleeting points home to that audience -- absolute proof of good reading .
But you couldn't read worth a damn a few years ago .
I do not say this to flatter .
It is true I looked around for you when I was leaving , but you had already gone .
To save it from any possibility of getting mixed up in the failure , perhaps you had better send down and get it .
I told him , the other day , that an order of any kind from you would be his sufficient warrant for its delivery to you .
In two days General Grant has dictated 50 pages of foolscap , and thus the Wilderness and Appomattox stand for all time in his own words .
This makes the second volume of his book as valuable as the first .
`` I am exceedingly glad , '' wrote Howells , `` that you approve of my reading , for it gives me some hope that I may do something on the platform next winter ... .
but I would never read within a hundred miles of you , if I could help it .
You simply straddled down to the footlights and took that house up in the hollow of your hand and tickled it . ''
To W. D. Howells , in Boston :
To THE EDITOR OP ' THE SUN : -- SIR , -- The newspaper atmosphere is charged with objections to New York as a place of sepulchre for General Grant , and the objectors are strenuous that Washington is the right place .
They offer good reasons -- good temporary reasons -- for both of these positions .
But as long as American civilisation lasts New York will last .
I can not but think she has been well and wisely chosen as the guardian of a grave which is destined to become almost the most conspicuous in the world's history .
Twenty centuries from now New York will still be New York , still a vast city , and the most notable object in it will still be the tomb and monument of General Grant .
MY DEAR MR. BEECHER , -- My nephew Webster is in Europe making contracts for the Memoirs .
Before he sailed he came to me with a writing , directed to the printers and binders , to this effect :
I gave my permission .
There were weighty reasons why I should not only give my permission , but hold it a matter of honor to not dissolve the order or modify it at any time .
So I did all of that -- said the order should stand undisturbed to the end .
If a principal could dissolve his promise as innocently as he can dissolve his written order unguarded by his promise , I would send you a copy of the Memoirs instantly .
I did not foresee you , or I would have made an exception .
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Had he made a conquest so complete that even the taste of liquor was become an offense ?
Or was he so sore over what had been said about his habit that he wanted to persuade others and likewise himself that he had n't even ever had any taste for it ?
It sounded like the latter , but that 's no evidence .
The sick-room brought out the points of Gen. Grant 's character -- some of them particularly , to wit :
Well , I 've written all this , and it does n't seem to amount to anything .
But I do want to help , if I only could .
I will enclose some scraps from my Autobiography -- scraps about General Grant -- they may be of some trifle of use , and they may not -- they at least verify known traits of his character .
My Autobiography is pretty freely dictated , but my idea is to jack-plane it a little before I die , some day or other ; I mean the rude construction and rotten grammar .
It is the only dictating I ever did , and it was most troublesome and awkward work .
You may return it to Hartford .
HARTFORD , Oct. 18 , 1885 .
With reverence and affection , Sincerely yours , S. L. CLEMENS .
Her husband , John Marshall Clemens , had been a man of high moral character , honored by all who knew him , respected and apparently loved by his wife .
No one would ever have supposed that during all her years of marriage , and almost to her death , she carried a secret romance that would only be told at last in the weary disappointment of old age .
It is a curious story , and it came to light in this curious way :
My mother turned away , the fire all gone from her , and said , `` Let us go home . ''
Jane Clemens now lived with her son Orion and his wife , in Keokuk , where she was more contented than elsewhere .
In these later days her memory had become erratic , her realization of events about her uncertain , but there were times when she was quite her former self , remembering clearly and talking with her old-time gaiety of spirit .
The one that follows is a fair example .
It was written after a visit which Clemens and his family had paid to Keokuk .
The following to a Hartford lighting company is a fair example of these documents .
And so , people without a hall-mark of their own are always trying to get the loan of somebody else 's .
DEAR SIR , -- What is the trouble with you ?
If it is your viscera , you can not have them taken out and reorganized a moment too soon .
I mean , if they are inside .
But if you are composed of them , that is another matter .
Is it your brain ?
But it could not be your brain .
Possibly it is your skull : you want to look out for that .
Some people , when they get an idea , it pries the structure apart .
Your system of notation has got in there , and could n't find room , without a doubt that is what the trouble is .
Your skull was not made to put ideas in , it was made to throw potatoes at .
DEAR SIR , -- And so it has got around to you , at last ; and you also have `` taken the liberty . ''
When 1364 sweeter and better people , including the author , have `` tried '' to dramatize Tom Sawyer and did not arrive , what sort of show do you suppose you stand ?
That is a book , dear sir , which can not be dramatized .
One might as well try to dramatize any other hymn .
Tom Sawyer is simply a hymn , put into prose form to give it a worldly air .
Dear sir , I appreciate your courtesy in stretching your authority in the desire to do me a kindness , and I sincerely thank you for it .
But I have no use for that book ; and if I were even starving for it I would not pay duty on in either to get it or suppress it .
No doubt there are ways in which I might consent to go into partnership with thieves and fences , but this is not one of them .
This one revolts the remains of my self-respect ; turns my stomach .
I think I could companion with a highwayman who carried a shot-gun and took many risks ; yes , I think I should like that if I were younger ; but to go in with a big rich government that robs paupers , and the widows and orphans of paupers and takes no risk -- why the thought just gags me .
MY DEAR MADAM , -- It is an idea which many people have had , but it is of no value .
I have seen it tried out many and many a time .
I have seen a lady lecturer urged and urged upon the public in a lavishly complimentary document signed by Longfellow , Whittier , Holmes and some others of supreme celebrity , but -- there was nothing in her and she failed .
If there had been any great merit in her she never would have needed those men 's help and ( at her rather mature age , ) would never have consented to ask for it .
To Mrs. Orion Clemens , in Keokuk , Ia .
ON THE HILL NEAR ELMIRA , July 10 , '87 .
DEAR MOLLIE , -- This is a superb Sunday for weather -- very cloudy , and the thermometer as low as 65 .
The city in the valley is purple with shade , as seen from up here at the study .
The Cranes are reading and loafing in the canvas-curtained summer-house 50 yards away on a higher ( the highest ) point ; the cats are loafing over at `` Ellerslie '' which is the children 's estate and dwellinghouse in their own private grounds ( by deed from Susie Crane ) a hundred yards from the study , amongst the clover and young oaks and willows .
Livy is down at the house , but I shall now go and bring her up to the Cranes to help us occupy the lounges and hammocks -- whence a great panorama of distant hill and valley and city is seeable .
The children have gone on a lark through the neighboring hills and woods .
It is a perfect day indeed .
I have just been writing to a friend in Hartford ' who treated what I imagine was a similar case surgically last fall , and produced a permanent cure .
If this is a like case , Charley must go to him .
Among these were 'Pepys 's Diary ' , Suetonius 's 'Lives of the Twelve Caesars ' , and Thomas Carlyle 's 'French Revolution ' .
He had a passion for history , biography , and personal memoirs of any sort .
In his early life he had cared very little for poetry , but along in the middle eighties he somehow acquired a taste for Browning and became absorbed in it .
A Browning club assembled as often as once a week at the Clemens home in Hartford to listen to his readings of the master .
He was an impressive reader , and he carefully prepared himself for these occasions , indicating by graduated underscorings , the exact values he wished to give to words and phrases .
Those were memorable gatherings , and they must have continued through at least two winters .
I do n't seem to find the place ; but anyway she was as sorry as ever anybody could be that I could not go to Bridgeport , but there was no help for it .
And I , I have been not only sorry but very sincerely ashamed of having made an engagement to go without first making sure that I could keep it , and I do not know how to apologize enough for my heedless breach of good manners .
Samuel Clemens was one of the very few authors to copyright a book in England before the enactment of the international copyright law .
As early as 1872 he copyrighted 'Roughing It ' in England , and piratical publishers there respected his rights .
Finally , in 1887 , the inland revenue office assessed him with income tax , which he very willingly paid , instructing his London publishers , Chatto & Windus , to pay on the full amount he had received from them .
But when the receipt for his taxes came it was nearly a yard square with due postage of considerable amount .
To Mr. Chatto , of Chatto & Windus , in London :
If we were n't a little crowded this year by the typesetter , I 'd send a check large enough to buy a family Bible or some other useful thing like that .
However we go on and on , but the type-setter goes on forever -- at $ 3,000 a month ; which is much more satisfactory than was the case the first seventeen months , when the bill only averaged $ 2,000 , and promised to take a thousand years .
We 'll be through , now , in 3 or 4 months , I reckon , and then the strain will let up and we can breathe freely once more , whether success ensues or failure .
All the family send love to all of you and best Christmas wishes for your prosperity .
Sincerely Yours S. L. Clemens M. A .
With the exception of his brief return to the river in 1882 .
Nevertheless , he always kept a tender place in his heart for the old times and for old river comrades .
Major `` Jack '' Downing had been a Mississippi pilot of early days , but had long since retired from the river to a comfortable life ashore , in an Ohio town .
Clemens had not heard from him for years when a letter came which invited the following answer .
To Louis Pendleton , in Georgia :
We can use 4 men , but not constantly .
If they could work constantly it would complete the machine in 21 days , of course .
They will all be on hand and under wages , and each will get in all the work there is opportunity for , but by how much they can reduce the 85 days toward the 21 days , nobody can tell .
DEAR THEO , -- I am here in Twichell 's house at work , with the noise of the children and an army of carpenters to help .
Of course they do n't help , but neither do they hinder .
It 's like a boiler-factory for racket , and in nailing a wooden ceiling onto the room under me the hammering tickles my feet amazingly sometimes , and jars my table a good deal ; but I never am conscious of the racket at all , and I move my feet into position of relief without knowing when I do it .
I began here Monday morning , and have done eighty pages since .
I was so tired last night that I thought I would lie abed and rest , to-day ; but I could n't resist .
I mean to try to knock off tomorrow , but it 's doubtful if I do .
I want to finish the day the machine finishes , and a week ago the closest calculations for that indicated Oct. 22 -- but experience teaches me that their calculations will miss fire , as usual .
The other day the children were projecting a purchase , Livy and I to furnish the money -- a dollar and a half .
Jean discouraged the idea .
She said : `` We have n't got any money .
Children , if you would think , you would remember the machine is n't done . ''
It 's billiards to-night .
I wish you were here .
DEATH OF MR. CRANE .
CONCLUSION OF THE YANKEE .
In his fever of enthusiasm on that day when he had actually seen it in operation , he wrote a number of exuberant letters .
They were more or less duplicates , but as the one to his brother is of fuller detail and more intimate than the others , it has been selected for preservation here .
`` Oh , hell !
stop the machine -- something wrong -- it 's going to set a 30/1000 space ! ''
In two or three weeks we shall work the stiffness out of her joints and have her performing as smoothly and softly as human muscles , and then we shall speak out the big secret and let the world come and gaze .
To Mrs. Theodore Crane .
in Elmira , N. Y. :
To W. D. Howells , in Boston :
HARTFORD , Judy 13 , '89 .
DEAR MR. HALL , -- Upon reflection -- thus : tell Beard to obey his own inspiration , and when he sees a picture in his mind put that picture on paper , be it humorous or be it serious .
I want his genius to be wholly unhampered , I sha n't have fears as to the result .
They will be better pictures than if I mixed in and tried to give him points on his own trade .
Send this note and he 'll understand .
To W. D. Howells , in Boston :
DEAR HOWELLS , -- I , too , was as sorry as I could be ; yes , and desperately disappointed .
I even did a heroic thing : shipped my book off to New York lest I should forget hospitality and embitter your visit with it .
Not that I think you would n't like to read it , for I think you would ; but not on a holiday that 's not the time .
I see how you were situated -- another familiarity of Providence and wholly wanton intrusion -- and of course we could not help ourselves .
Well , just think of it : a while ago , while Providence 's attention was absorbed in disordering some time-tables so as to break up a trip of mine to Mr. Church 's on the Hudson , that Johnstown dam got loose .
I swear I was afraid to pray , for fear I should laugh .
Well , I 'm not going to despair ; we 'll manage a meet yet .
Howells 's approval of the Yankee came almost in the form of exultant shouts , one after reading each batch of proof .
First he wrote : `` It 's charming , original , wonderful !
good in fancy and sound to the core in morals . ''
And again , `` It 's a mighty great book , and it makes my heart burn with wrath .
It seems God did not forget to put a soul into you .
He shuts most literary men off with a brain , merely . ''
Then , a few days later : `` The book is glorious -- simply noble ; what masses of virgin truth never touched in print before ! ''
and , finally , `` Last night I read your last chapter .
As Stedman says of the whole book , it 's titanic . ''
HARTFORD , Sept. 22 , '89 .
DEAR HOWELLS , -- It is immensely good of you to grind through that stuff for me ; but it gives peace to Mrs. Clemens 's soul ; and I am as grateful to you as a body can be .
I am glad you approve of what I say about the French Revolution .
It is odd that even to this day Americans still observe that immortal benefaction through English and other monarchical eyes , and have no shred of an opinion about it that they did n't get at second-hand .
Well , my book is written -- let it go .
But if it were only to write over again there would n't be so many things left out .
They burn in me ; and they keep multiplying and multiplying ; but now they ca n't ever be said .
And besides , they would require a library -- and a pen warmed up in hell .
HARTFORD , Dec. 23 , '89 .
I am going to read to the Cadets at West Point Jan. 11 .
I go from here to New York the 9th , and up to the Point the 11th .
Ca n't you go with me ?
It 's great fun .
I 'm going to read the passages in the `` Yankee '' in which the Yankee 's West Point cadets figure -- and shall covertly work in a lecture on aristocracy to those boys .
I am to be the guest of the Superintendent , but if you will go I will shake him and we will go to the hotel .
He is a splendid fellow , and I know him well enough to take that liberty .
[ First page missing . ]
Indeed I have been misjudged , from the very first .
I have never tried in even one single instance , to help cultivate the cultivated classes .
I was not equipped for it , either by native gifts or training .
And I never had any ambition in that direction , but always hunted for bigger game -- the masses .
I have seldom deliberately tried to instruct them , but have done my best to entertain them .
To simply amuse them would have satisfied my dearest ambition at any time ; for they could get instruction elsewhere , and I had two chances to help to the teacher's one : for amusement is a good preparation for study and a good healer of fatigue after it .
My audience is dumb , it has no voice in print , and so I can not know whether I have won its approbation or only got its censure .
Yes , you see , I have always catered for the Belly and the Members , but have been served like the others -- criticized from the culture-standard -- to my sorrow and pain ; because , honestly , I never cared what became of the cultured classes ; they could go to the theatre and the opera -- they had no use for me and the melodeon .
LETTERS , 1890 , CHIEFLY TO JOS .
To Mr. John Brown , in Edinburgh , Scotland :
HARTFORD , Feby 11 , 1890 .
DEAR MR. BROWN , -- Both copies came , and we are reading and re-reading the one , and lending the other , to old time adorers of `` Rab and his Friends . ''
It is an exquisite book ; the perfection of literary workmanship .
It says in every line , `` Do n't look at me , look at him '' -- and one tries to be good and obey ; but the charm of the painter is so strong that one ca n't keep his entire attention on the developing portrait , but must steal side-glimpses of the artist , and try to divine the trick of her felicitous brush .
In this book the doctor lives and moves just as he was .
He was the most extensive slave-holder of his time , and the kindest ; and yet he died without setting one of his bondmen free .
We all send our very , very kindest regards .
T. Goodman , in California :
HARTFORD , March 31 , '90 .
There 's an improved Mergenthaler in New York ; Paige and Davis and I watched it two whole afternoons .
To M. H. Arnot , in Elmira , N. Y. :
I ought to explain that the grippe delayed us some weeks , and that we have since been waiting for Mr. Jones .
When he was ready , we were not ; and now we have been ready more than a month , while he has been kept in Washington by the Silver bill .
He said the other day that to venture out of the Capitol for a day at this time could easily chance to hurt him if the bill came up for action , meantime , although it could n't hurt the bill , which would pass anyway .
Mrs. Jones said she would send me two or three days ' notice , right after the passage of the bill , and that they would follow as soon as I should return word that their coming would not inconvenience us .
I suppose I ought to go to New York without waiting for Mr. Jones , but it would not be wise to go there without money .
The bill is still pending .
But no one at this time could say with certainty which typesetter would reap the harvest of millions .
It was only sure that at least one of them would , and the Mergenthaler people were willing to trade stock for stock with the Paige company in order to insure financial success for both , whichever won .
Clemens , with a faith that never faltered , declined this offer , a decision that was to cost him millions .
I do n't know where the Senator is ; but out on the Coast I reckon .
The year closed gloomily enough .
The type-setter seemed to be perfected , but capital for its manufacture was not forthcoming .
The publishing business of Charles L. Webster & Co. was returning little or no profit .
Clemens 's mother had died in Keokuk at the end of October , and his wife 's mother , in Elmira a month later .
Ball , closed it : `` Merry Xmas to you !
-- and I wish to God I could have one myself before I die . ''
And I was some years a Mississippi pilot , and familiarly knew all the different kinds of steam-boatmen -- a race apart , and not like other folk .
To W. D. Howells , in Boston :
Howells , always willing to help , visited the phonograph place , and a few days later reported results .
He wrote : `` I talked your letter into a fonograf in my usual tone at my usual gait of speech .
Then the fonograf man talked his answer in at his wonted swing and swell .
Then we took the cylinder to a type-writer in the next room , and she put the hooks into her ears and wrote the whole out .
I send you the result .
There is a mistake of one word .
I think that if you have the cheek to dictate the story into the fonograf , all the rest is perfectly easy .
It would n't fatigue me to talk for an hour as I did . ''
The `` little book '' mentioned in this letter was by Swedenborg , an author in whom the Boston literary set was always deeply interested .
It was written in 1878 .
Mrs. Clemens was poorly , and his own health was uncertain .
They believed that some of the European baths would help them .
In Europe life could be simpler and vastly cheaper .
He was offered a thousand dollars apiece for six European letters , by the McClure syndicate and W. M. Laffan , of the Sun .
This would at least give him a start on the other side .
The family began immediately their sad arrangements for departure .
Hall ( manager Chas .
L. Webster & Co. ) , N. Y. :
We went ashore at 5 p. m. yesterday , dear heart , and walked a short mile to St. Geuix , a big village , and took quarters at the principal inn ; had a good dinner and afterwards along walk out of town on the banks of the Guiers till 7.30 .
Livy darling , we sailed from St. Pierre de Boef six hours ago , and are now approaching Tournon , where we shall not stop , but go on and make Valence , a City Of 25,000 people .
It 's too delicious , floating with the swift current under the awning these superb sunshiny days in deep peace and quietness .
Some of these curious old historical towns strangely persuade me , but it is so lovely afloat that I do n't stop , but view them from the outside and sail on .
We get abundance of grapes and peaches for next to nothing .
Livy darling , I did n't write yesterday .
We left La Voulte in a driving storm of cold rain -- could n't write in it -- and at 1 p. m. when we were not thinking of stopping , we saw a picturesque and mighty ruin on a high hill back of a village , and I was seized with a desire to explore it ; so we landed at once and set out with rubbers and umbrella , sending the boat ahead to St. Andeol , and we spent 3 hours clambering about those cloudy heights among those worn and vast and idiotic ruins of a castle built by two crusaders 650 years ago .
The work of these asses was full of interest , and we had a good time inspecting , examining and scrutinizing it .
All the hills on both sides of the Rhone have peaks and precipices , and each has its gray and wasted pile of mouldy walls and broken towers .
The Romans displaced the Gauls , the Visigoths displaced the Romans , the Saracens displaced the Visigoths , the Christians displaced the Saracens , and it was these pious animals who built these strange lairs and cut each other 's throats in the name and for the glory of God , and robbed and burned and slew in peace and war ; and the pauper and the slave built churches , and the credit of it went to the Bishop who racked the money out of them .
These are pathetic shores , and they make one despise the human race .
We had a curious experience today .
A little after I had sealed and directed my letter to you , in which I said we should make Avignon before 4 , we got lost .
We ceased to encounter any village or ruin mentioned in our `` particularizes '' and detailed Guide of the Rhone -- went drifting along by the hour in a wholly unknown land and on an uncharted river !
Confound it , we stopped talking and did nothing but stand up in the boat and search the horizons with the glass and wonder what in the devil had happened .
And at last , away yonder at 5 o'clock when some east towers and fortresses hove in sight we could n't recognize them for Avignon -- yet we knew by the broken bridge that it was Avignon .
It was very sweet of you to write me , dear , and I thank you ever so much .
With greatest love and kisses ,
Bade good-bye to the river trip and gave away the boat yesterday evening .
We had ten great days in her .
I love you , sweetheart .
My arm is so much better that I was able to make a speech last night to 250 Americans .
But when they threw my portrait on the screen it was a sorrowful reminder , for it was from a negative of 15 years ago , and had n't a gray hair in it .
And now that my arm is better , I have stolen a couple of days and finished up a couple of McClure letters that have been lying a long time .
Postscript by Mrs. Clemens written on Mr. Clemens 's letter :
SUSY DEAR , -- I have been delighted to note your easy facility with your pen and proud to note also your literary superiorities of one kind and another -- clearness of statement , directness , felicity of expression , photographic ability in setting forth an incident -- style -- good style -- no barnacles on it in the way of unnecessary , retarding words ( the Shipman scrapes off the barnacles when he wants his racer to go her best gait and straight to the buoy . )
You should write a letter every day , long or short -- and so ought I , but I do n't .
For the summer , however , they returned to Germany , and located at Bad-Nauheim .
Clemens presently decided to make a trip to America to give some personal attention to business matters .
For one thing , his publishing-house , in spite of prosperity , seemed constantly to be requiring more capital , and then a Chicago company had been persuaded by Paige to undertake the manufacture of the type-setter .
It was the beginning of a series of feverish trips which he would make back and forth across the ocean during the next two years .
If you can meet me when the ship arrives , you can help me to get away from the reporters ; and maybe you can take me to your own or some other lodgings where they ca n't find me .
But if the hour is too early or too late for you , I shall obscure myself somewhere till I can come to the office .
The Twichells were in Europe that summer , and came to Bad-Nauheim .
The next letter records a pleasant incident .
The Prince of Wales of that day later became King Edward VII .
BAD-NAUHEIM , Aug. 23 , '92 .
Livy says , I have said enough bad things , and better send all our loves to you and Charley and Ida and all the children and shut up .
Which I do -- and shut up .
They reached Florence on the 26th , and four days later we find Clemens writing again to Mrs. Crane , detailing everything at length .
Little comment on this letter is required ; it fully explains itself .
Perhaps a word of description from one of his memoranda will not be out of place .
Of the villa he wrote : `` It is a plain , square building , like a box , and is painted light green and has green window-shutters .
It stands in a commanding position on the artificial terrace of liberal dimensions , which is walled around with masonry .
From the walls the vineyards and olive groves of the estate slant away toward the valley ... .
Roses overflow the retaining walls and the battered and mossy stone urn on the gate-post , in pink and yellow cataracts , exactly as they do on the drop-curtains in the theaters .
The house is a very fortress for strength . ''
Even with the work and fuss of settling the house Livy has improved -- and the best is yet to come .
There is going to be absolute seclusion here -- a hermit life , in fact .
We ( the rest of us ) shall run over to the Ross's frequently , and they will come here now and then and see Livy -- that is all .
Mr. Fiske is away -- nobody knows where -- and the work on his house has been stopped and his servants discharged .
Therefore we shall merely go Rossing -- as far as society is concerned -- sha n't circulate in Florence until Livy shall be well enough to take a share in it .
This present house is modern .
It is not much more than two centuries old ; but parts of it , and also its foundations are of high antiquity .
The fine beautiful family portraits -- the great carved ones in the large ovals over the doors of the big hall -- carry one well back into the past .
One of them is dated 1305 -- he could have known Dante , you see .
Another is dated 1343 -- he could have known Boccaccio and spent his afternoons in Fiesole listening to the Decameron tales .
Another is dated 1463 -- he could have met Columbus ... ..
One person is satisfied with the villa , anyway .
Jean prefers it to all Europe , save Venice .
Jean is eager to get at the Italian tongue again , now , and I see that she has forgotten little or nothing of what she learned of it in Rome and Venice last spring .
To Mrs. Crane , in Elmira :
I told Arthur to leave out the former squib or paragraph and use only the Californian 's Story .
Tell him this is because I am going to use that in the book I am now writing .
I have been in bed two or three days with a cold , but I got up an hour ago , and I believe I am all right again .
I am having several short things type- '' writered . ''
I will send them to you presently .
I like the Century and Harper 's , but I do n't know that I have any business to object to the Cosmopolitan if they pay as good rates .
I suppose a man ought to stick to one magazine , but that may be only superstition .
What do you think ?
His interest in Joan had been first awakened when , as a printer 's apprentice in Hannibal , he had found blowing along the street a stray leaf from some printed story of her life .
That fragment of history had pictured Joan in prison , insulted and mistreated by ruffians .
It had aroused all the sympathy and indignation in the boy , Sam Clemens ; also , it had awakened his interest in history , and , indeed , in all literature .
The Story contains 3,800 to 4,000 words .
Good-bye and all good fortune attend you and yours -- and upon you all I leave my benediction .
Hall , in New York :
DEAR MR. HALL , -- You were to cable me if you sold any machine royalties -- so I judge you have not succeeded .
Now here is my idea for getting out .
Such a deal would make it easy for a big firm to pour in a big cash capital and jump L. A. L. up to enormous prosperity .
Then your one-third would be a fortune -- and I hope to see that day !
I enclose an authority to use with Whitmore in case you have sold any royalties .
But if you ca n't make this deal do n't make any .
Wait a little and see if you ca n't make the deal .
Do make the deal if you possibly can .
And if any presence shall be necessary in order to complete it I will come over , though I hope it can be done without that .
VILLA VIVIANI , SETTIGNANO ( FLORENCE )
`` This same quartermaster was celebrated among the English in Mesopotamia for an entry which he made in his log-book-after a perilous storm ; 'The windy and watery elements raged .
Tears and prayers was had recourse to , but was of no manner of use .
So we hauled up the anchor and got round the point . '
I think Mr. Clemens is right in feeling that he should get out of business , that he is not fitted for it ; it worries him too much .
Hoping you will see a change for the better and begin to reap the fruit of your long and hard labor .
The first number should pay -- and all subsequent ones -- 25 cents a number .
Cost of first number ( 20,000 copies ) $ 2,000 .
Give most of them away , sell the rest .
Advertising and other expenses -- cost unknown .
Send one to all newspapers -- it would get a notice -- favorable , too .
Yours Sincerely S. L. C .
The Shelley article mentioned in this letter was the `` Defense of Harriet Sheller , '' one of the very best of his essays .
How he could have written this splendid paper at a time of such distraction passes comprehension .
Furthermore , it is clear that he had revised , indeed rewritten , the long story of Pudd'nhead Wilson .
Cash liabilities -- ( so much ) Cash assets -- ( so much )
Hall , in New York :
Apparently everything is at last settled as to the giveaway of L. A. L. , and the papers will be signed and the transfer made to-morrow morning .
With worlds and worlds of love and kisses to you all ,
We were 25 hours going to Chicago ; we were there 24 hours ; we were 30 hours returning .
Brisk work , but all of it enjoyable .
We insisted on leaving the car at Philadelphia so that our waiter and cook ( to whom Mr. R. gave $ 10 apiece , ) could have their Christmas-eve at home .
Dr. Oliver Wendell Holmes never goes out now ( he is in his 84th year , ) but he came out this time -- said he wanted to `` have a time '' once more with me .
Corbett boxed 3 rounds with the middle-weight Australian champion -- oh , beautiful to see !
-- then the show was over and we struggled out through a perfect wash of humanity .
When we reached the street I found I had left my arctics in the box .
I had to have them , so Simmons said he would go back and get them , and I did n't dissuade him .
I could n't see how he was going to make his way a single yard into that solid oncoming wave of people -- yet he must plow through it full 50 yards .
He was back with the shoes in 3 minutes !
`` Mind-cure -- simply mind-cure . ''
I detailed to him the conversation of that time -- with the stately argument furnished by Boyesen in the fact that a patient had actually been killed by a mind-curist ; and Howells 's own smart remark that when the mind-curist is done with you , you have to call in a `` regular '' at last because the former ca n't procure you a burial permit .
At last he gave in -- he said he remembered that talk , but had now been a mind-curist so long it was difficult for him to realize that he had ever been anything else .
Mrs. H. came skipping in , presently , the very person , to a dot , that she used to be , so many years ago .
When the anchor is down , then I shall say :
Clemens would seem to have believed that the business would resume , and for a time Rogers appears to have comforted him in his hope , but we can not believe that it long survived .
Young Hall , who had made such a struggle for its salvation , was eager to go on , but he must presently have seen the futility of any effort in that direction .
One stranger out in New York State sent me a dollar bill and thought he would like to get up a dollar-subscription for me .
And Poultney Bigelow 's note came promptly , with his check for $ 1,000 .
I had been meeting him every day at the Club and liking him better and better all the time .
I could n't take his money , of course , but I thanked him cordially for his good will .
Now and then a good and dear Joe Twichell or Susy Warner condoles with me and says `` Cheer up -- do n't be downhearted , '' and some other friend says , `` I am glad and surprised to see how cheerful you are and how bravely you stand it '' -- and none of them suspect what a burden has been lifted from me and how blithe I am inside .
Except when I think of you , dear heart -- then I am not blithe ; for I seem to see you grieving and ashamed , and dreading to look people in the face .
For in the thick of the fight there is cheer , but you are far away and can not hear the drums nor see the wheeling squadrons .
You only seem to see rout , retreat , and dishonored colors dragging in the dirt -- whereas none of these things exist .
There is temporary defeat , but no dishonor -- and we will march again .
Charley Warner said to-day , `` Sho , Livy is n't worrying .
So long as she 's got you and the children she does n't care what happens .
She knows it is n't her affair . ''
Which did n't convince me .
ETRETAT , Sunday , Sept. 9 , '94 .
DEAR MR. ROGERS , I drove the quill too hard , and I broke down -- in my head .
It has now been three days since I laid up .
When I wrote you a week ago I had added 10,000 words or thereabout to Joan .
Next day I added 1,500 which was a proper enough day 's work though not a full one ; but during Tuesday and Wednesday I stacked up an aggregate of 6,000 words -- and that was a very large mistake .
My head has n't been worth a cent since .
169 RUE DE L'UNIVERSITE , PARIS , Dec. 22 ; '94 .
DEAR MR. ROGERS , -- I seemed to be entirely expecting your letter , and also prepared and resigned ; but Lord , it shows how little we know ourselves and how easily we can deceive ourselves .
It hit me like a thunder-clap .
It knocked every rag of sense out of my head , and I went flying here and there and yonder , not knowing what I was doing , and only one clearly defined thought standing up visible and substantial out of the crazy storm-drift that my dream of ten years was in desperate peril , and out of the 60,000 or 90,000 projects for its rescue that came floating through my skull , not one would hold still long enough for me to examine it and size it up .
Have you ever been like that ?
Not so much so , I reckon .
By bedtime Mrs. Clemens had reasoned me into a fairly rational and contented state of mind ; but of course it did n't last long .
So I went on thinking -- mixing it with a smoke in the dressing room once an hour -- until dawn this morning .
Result -- a sane resolution ; no matter what your answer to my cable might be , I would hold still and not sail until I should get an answer to this present letter which I am now writing , or a cable answer from you saying `` Come '' or `` Remain . ''
169 RUE DE L'UNIVERSITE , PARIS , Dec. 27 , '94 .
We shall try to find a tenant for our Hartford house ; not an easy matter , for it costs heavily to live in .
We can never live in it again ; though it would break the family 's hearts if they could believe it .
To H. H. Rogers , in New York City :
There 's one thing which makes it difficult for me to soberly realize that my ten year dream is actually dissolved ; and that is , that it reveries my horoscope .
The proverb says , `` Born lucky , always lucky , '' and I am very superstitious .
As a small boy I was notoriously lucky .
It was usual for one or two of our lads ( per annum ) to get drowned in the Mississippi or in Bear Creek , but I was pulled out in a 2/3 drowned condition 9 times before I learned to swim , and was considered to be a cat in disguise .
When the `` Pennsylvania '' blew up and the telegraph reported my brother as fatally injured ( with 60 others ) but made no mention of me , my uncle said to my mother `` It means that Sam was somewhere else , after being on that boat a year and a half -- he was born lucky . ''
Yes , I was somewhere else .
I am so superstitious that I have always been afraid to have business dealings with certain relatives and friends of mine because they were unlucky people .
All my life I have stumbled upon lucky chances of large size , and whenever they were wasted it was because of my own stupidity and carelessness .
And so I have felt entirely certain that that machine would turn up trumps eventually .
It disappointed me lots of times , but I could n't shake off the confidence of a life-time in my luck .
DEAR MR. ROGERS , -- After I wrote you , two or three days ago I thought I would make a holiday of the rest of the day -- the second deliberate holiday since I had the gout .
On the first holiday I wrote a tale of about 6,000 words , which was 3 days ' work in one ; and this time I did 8,000 before midnight .
I got nothing out of that first holiday but the recreation of it , for I condemned the work after careful reading and some revision ; but this time I fared better -- I finished the Huck Finn tale that lies in your safe , and am satisfied with it .
Yours sincerely , S. L. CLEMENS .
To H. H. Rogers , in New York City :
Yours sincerely , S. L. CLEMENS .
`` Brusnahan , '' of the foregoing letter , was an employee of the New York Herald , superintendent of the press-room -- who had invested some of his savings in the type-setter .
According to Mrs. Clemens 's present plans -- subject to modification , of course -- we sail in May ; stay one day , or two days in New York , spend June , July and August in Elmira and prepare my lectures ; then lecture in San Francisco and thereabouts during September and sail for Australia before the middle of October and open the show there about the middle of November .
We do n't take the girls along ; it would be too expensive and they are quite willing to remain behind anyway .
To H. H. Rogers , in New York City :
DEAR MR. ROGERS , -- Had a roaring success at the Elmira reformatory Sunday night .
But here , last night , I suffered defeat -- There were a couple of hundred little boys behind me on the stage , on a lofty tier of benches which made them the most conspicuous objects in the house .
And there was nobody to watch them or keep them quiet .
Why , with their scufflings and horse-play and noise , it was just a menagerie .
Besides , a concert of amateurs had been smuggled into the program ( to precede me , ) and their families and friends ( say ten per cent of the audience ) kept encoring them and they always responded .
So it was 20 minutes to 9 before I got the platform in front of those 2,600 people who had paid a dollar apiece for a chance to go to hell in this fashion .
I think it was a good stroke of luck that knocked me on my back here at Napier , instead of some hotel in the centre of a noisy city .
Here we have the smooth and placidly-complaining sea at our door , with nothing between us and it but 20 yards of shingle -- and hardly a suggestion of life in that space to mar it or make a noise .
Away down here fifty-five degrees south of the Equator this sea seems to murmur in an unfamiliar tongue -- a foreign tongue -- tongue bred among the ice-fields of the Antarctic -- a murmur with a note of melancholy in it proper to the vast unvisited solitudes it has come from .
It was very delicious and solacing to wake in the night and find it still pulsing there .
I wish you were here -- land , but it would be fine !
No doubt I shall be on the platform next Monday .
A week later we shall reach Wellington ; talk there 3 nights , then sail back to Australia .
We sailed for New Zealand October 30 .
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .
In my despair and unassuageable misery I upbraid myself for ever parting with her .
But there is no use in that .
Since it was to happen it would have happened .
For and in behalf of Helen Keller , stone blind and deaf , and formerly dumb .
DEAR MRS. ROGERS , -- Experience has convinced me that when one wishes to set a hard-worked man at something which he might n't prefer to be bothered with , it is best to move upon him behind his wife .
If she can't convince him it is n't worth while for other people to try .
J. H. Twichell , in Hartford :
The letters to Mr. Rogers were , for the most part , on matters of business , but in one of them he said : `` I am going to write with all my might on this book , and follow it up with others as fast as I can in the hope that within three years I can clear out the stuff that is in me waiting to be written , and that I shall then die in the promptest kind of a way and no fooling around . ''
And in one he wrote : `` You are the best friend ever a man had , and the surest . ''
LONDON , Feb. 23 , '97 .
This mood will pass , some day -- there is history for it .
But it can not pass until my wife comes up out of the submergence .
She was always so quick to recover herself before , but now there is no rebound , and we are dead people who go through the motions of life .
Indeed I am a mud image , and it will puzzle me to know what it is in me that writes , and has comedy-fancies and finds pleasure in phrasing them .
It is a law of our nature , of course , or it would n't happen ; the thing in me forgets the presence of the mud image and goes its own way , wholly unconscious of it and apparently of no kinship with it .
I have finished my book , but I go on as if the end were indefinitely away -- as indeed it is .
There is no hurry -- at any rate there is no limit .
LUCERNE , Aug. 22 , '97 .
J. H. Twichell , in Hartford :
P. S. This is not a private letter .
I am getting tired of private letters .
J. H. Twichell , in Hartford :
DEAR JOE , -- Above is our private ( and permanent ) address for the winter .
You need n't send letters by London .
Clara is working faithfully at her music , Jean at her usual studies , and we all send love .
`` Oh , I know him very well -- I recognize him by his pictures ; and I should be very glad to let him stay , but I have n't any choice , because of the strictness of the orders . ''
DEAR MR. ROGERS , -- I throw up the sponge .
I pull down the flag .
Let us begin on the debts .
I can not bear the weight any longer .
It totally unfits me for work .
I have lost three entire months now .
In that time I have begun twenty magazine articles and books -- and flung every one of them aside in turn .
The debts interfered every time , and took the spirit out of any work .
And yet I have worked like a bond slave and wasted no time and spared no effort -- --
Rogers wrote , proposing a plan for beginning immediately upon the debts .
Clemens replied enthusiastically , and during the next few weeks wrote every few days , expressing his delight in liquidation .
HOTEL METROPOLE , VIENNA , Jan. 22 , '98 .
We all send you and all of you our love .
J. H. Twichell , in Hartford :
DEAR JOE , There 's that letter that I began so long ago -- you see how it is : ca n't get time to finish anything .
I pile up lots of work , nevertheless .
There may be idle people in the world , but I 'm not one of them .
I say `` Private '' up there because I 've got an adventure to tell , and you must n't let a breath of it get out .
First I thought I would lay it up along with a thousand others that I 've laid up for the same purpose -- to talk to you about , but -- those others have vanished out of my memory ; and that must not happen with this .
The other night I lectured for a Vienna charity ; and at the end of it Livy and I were introduced to a princess who is aunt to the heir apparent of the imperial throne -- a beautiful lady , with a beautiful spirit , and very cordial in her praises of my books and thanks to me for writing them ; and glad to meet me face to face and shake me by the hand -- just the kind of princess that adorns a fairy tale and makes it the prettiest tale there is .
Livy was in a state of mind !
She said it was too theatrically ridiculous ; and that I would never be able to keep my mouth shut ; that I would be sure to let it out and it would get into the papers -- and she tried to make me promise -- '' Promise what ? ''
I said -- '' to be quiet about this ?
Indeed I wo n't -- it 's the best thing that ever happened ; I'll tell it , and add to it ; and I wish Joe and Howells were here to make it perfect ; I ca n't make all the rightful blunders myself -- it takes all three of us to do justice to an opportunity like this .
I would just like to see Howells get down to his work and explain , and lie , and work his futile and inventionless subterfuges when that princess comes raging in here and wanting to know . ''
But Livy could not hear fun -- it was not a time to be trying to be funny -- we were in a most miserable and shameful situation , and if --
Just then the door spread wide and our princess and 4 more , and 3 little princes flowed in !
Our princess , and her sister the Archduchess Marie Therese ( mother to the imperial Heir and to the young girl Archduchesses present , and aunt to the 3 little princes ) -- and we shook hands all around and sat down and had a most sociable good time for half an hour -- and by and by it turned out that we were the right ones , and had been sent for by a messenger who started too late to catch us at the hotel .
We were invited for 2 o'clock , but we beat that arrangement by an hour and a half .
We send lots and lots of love .
It seems incredible that , after that experience and its attending disaster , he should have been tempted again .
But scarcely was the ink dry on the receipts from his creditors when he was once more borne into the clouds on the prospect of millions , perhaps even billions , to be made from a marvelous carpet-pattern machine , the invention of Sczezepanik , an Austrian genius .
That Clemens appreciated his own tendencies is shown by the parenthetic line with which he opens his letter on the subject to Mr. Rogers .
Certainly no man was ever a more perfect prototype of Colonel Sellers than the creator of that lovely , irrepressible visionary .
DEAR MR. ROGERS , -- ( I feel like Col .
`` We have to do a good deal of guess-work here , because we can not get hold of just the statistics we want .
Still , we have some good statistics -- and I will use those for a test .
DEAR JOE , -- You are living your war-days over again in Dave , and it must be a strong pleasure , mixed with a sauce of apprehension -- enough to make it just schmeck , as the Germans say .
Dave will come out with two or three stars on his shoulder-straps if the war holds , and then we shall all be glad it happened .
I have never enjoyed a war-even in written history -- as I am enjoying this one .
For this is the worthiest one that was ever fought , so far as my knowledge goes .
It is a worthy thing to fight for one 's freedom ; it is another sight finer to fight for another man 's .
And I think this is the first time it has been done .
Speaking of Mrs. Leiter , there is a noble dame in Vienna , about whom they retail similar slanders .
She said in French -- she is weak in French -- that she had been spending a Sunday afternoon in a gathering of the `` demimonde . ''
Meaning the unknown land , that mercantile land , that mysterious half-world which underlies the aristocracy .
But these Malaproperies are always inventions -- they do n't happen .
Yours with all our loves .
I think this verdict will not be popular `` above . ''
A man is either a free agent or he is n't .
If a man is a free agent , this prisoner is responsible for what he has done ; but if a man is not a free agent , if the deed was ordained from above , there is no rational way of making this prisoner even partially responsible for it , and the German court can not condemn him without manifestly committing a crime .
Logic is logic ; and by disregarding its laws even Emperors as capable and acute as William II can be beguiled into making charges which should not be ventured upon except in the shelter of plenty of lightning-rods .
To W. D. Howells , in New York :
It 's quite true -- I do n't read you `` as much as I ought , '' nor anywhere near half as much as I want to ; still I read you all I get a chance to .
I saved up your last story to read when the numbers should be complete , but before that time arrived some other admirer of yours carried off the papers .
I will watch admirers of yours when the Silver Wedding journey begins , and that will not happen again .
The last chance at a bound book of yours was in London nearly two years ago -- the last volume of your short things , by the Harpers .
I read the whole book twice through and some of the chapters several times , and the reason that that was as far as I got with it was that I lent it to another admirer of yours and he is admiring it yet .
Your admirers have ways of their own ; I do n't know where they get them .
Sincerely yours , S. L. CLEMENS .
To W. D. Howells , in New York :
For 60 cents a week the telephone reads the morning news to you at home ; gives you the stocks and markets at noon ; gives you lessons in 3 foreign languages during 3 hours ; gives you the afternoon telegrams ; and at night the concerts and operas .
Of course even the clerks and seamstresses and bootblacks and everybody else are subscribers .
Mrs. Clemens says it is 60 cents a month . )
I am renewing my youth .
I made 4 speeches at one banquet here last Saturday night .
And I 've been to a lot of football matches .
LONDON , July 3 , '99
News came of the death of Robert Ingersoll .
Clemens had been always one of his most ardent admirers , and a warm personal friend .
To Ingersoll 's niece he sent a word of heartfelt sympathy .
To W. D. Howells , in America :
DEAR HOWELLS , -- Get your lecture by heart -- it will pay you .
I learned a trick in Vienna -- by accident -- which I wish I had learned years ago .
I meant to read from a Tauchnitz , because I knew I had n't well memorized the pieces ; and I came on with the book and read a few sentences , then remembered that the sketch needed a few words of explanatory introduction ; and so , lowering the book and now and then unconsciously using it to gesture with , I talked the introduction , and it happened to carry me into the sketch itself , and then I went on , pretending that I was merely talking extraneous matter and would come to the sketch presently .
It was a beautiful success .
I knew the substance of the sketch and the telling phrases of it ; and so , the throwing of the rest of it into informal talk as I went along limbered it up and gave it the snap and go and freshness of an impromptu .
I was to read several pieces , and I played the same game with all of them , and always the audience thought I was being reminded of outside things and throwing them in , and was going to hold up the book and begin on the sketch presently -- and so I always got through the sketch before they were entirely sure that it had begun .
I did the same thing in Budapest and had the same good time over again .
It 's a new dodge , and the best one that was ever invented .
You 'll never lose your audience -- not even for a moment .
Their attention is fixed , and never wavers .
And that is not the case where one reads from book or MS. , or where he stands up without a note and frankly exposes the fact , by his confident manner and smooth phrasing , that he is not improvising , but reciting from memory .
And in the heat of telling a thing that is memorised in substance only , one flashes out the happiest suddenly-begotten phrases every now and then !
Such a phrase has a life and sparkle about it that twice as good a one could not exhibit if prepared beforehand , and it `` fetches '' an audience in such an enthusing and inspiring and uplifting way that that lucky phrase breeds another one , sure .
On the same day he sent word to Howells of the good luck which now seemed to be coming his way .
The Joan of Arc introduction was the same that today appears in his collected works under the title of Saint Joan of Arc .
Oh , I know how you feel !
I 've been in hell myself .
You are there tonight .
By difference in time you are at luncheon , now -- and not eating it .
Nothing is so lonesome as gadding around platforming .
I have declined 45 lectures to-day-England and Scotland .
I wanted the money , but not the torture : Good luck to you !
And yet at the same time , with curious and senile inconsistency , the State has allowed the man to choose his own assassin -- in one detail -- the patent-medicine detail -- making itself the protector of that perilous business , collecting money out of it , and appointing no committee of experts to examine the medicines and forbid them when extra dangerous .
Really , when a man can prove that he is not a jackass , I think he is in the way to prove that he is no legitimate member of the race .
I love to see the holy ones air their smug pieties and admire them and smirk over them , and at the same moment frankly and publicly show their contempt for the pieties of the Boer -- confidently expecting the approval of the country and the pulpit , and getting it .
I believe that in the next chapter my notion of the Boer was rightly conceived .
He is popularly called uncivilized , I do not know why .
Happiness , food , shelter , clothing , wholesale labor , modest and rational ambitions , honesty , kindliness , hospitality , love of freedom and limitless courage to fight for it , composure and fortitude in time of disaster , patience in time of hardship and privation , absence of noise and brag in time of victory , contentment with a humble and peaceful life void of insane excitements -- if there is a higher and better form of civilization than this , I am not aware of it and do not know where to look for it .
I suppose we have the habit of imagining that a lot of artistic , intellectual and other artificialities must be added , or it is n't complete .
We and the English have these latter ; but as we lack the great bulk of these others , I think the Boer civilization is the best of the two .
My idea of our civilization is that it is a shabby poor thing and full of cruelties , vanities , arrogancies , meannesses , and hypocrisies .
As for the word , I hate the sound of it , for it conveys a lie ; and as for the thing itself , I wish it was in hell , where it belongs .
To Mr. Ann , in London :
Ys sincerely , S. L. C .
J. H. Twichell , in Hartford :
WELLINGTON COURT , KNIGHTSBRIDGE , Mch .
DEAR JOE , -- Henry Robinson 's death is a sharp wound to me , and it goes very deep .
I had a strong affection for him , and I think he had for me .
Every Friday , three-fourths of the year for 16 years he was of the billiard-party in our house .
When we come home , how shall we have billiard-nights again -- with no Ned Bunce and no Henry Robinson ?
I believe I could not endure that .
We must find another use for that room .
Susy is gone , George is gone , Libby Hamersley , Ned Bunce , Henry Robinson .
The friends are passing , one by one ; our house , where such warm blood and such dear blood flowed so freely , is become a cemetery .
But not in any repellent sense .
Our dead are welcome there ; their life made it beautiful , their death has hallowed it , we shall have them with us always , and there will be no parting .
It was a moving address you made over Ward Cheney -- that fortunate , youth !
Like Susy , he got out of life all that was worth the living , and got his great reward before he had crossed the tropic frontier of dreams and entered the Sahara of fact .
The deep consciousness of Susy 's good fortune is a constant comfort to me .
In July the Clemenses left the small apartment at 30 Wellington Court and established a summer household a little way out of London , at Dollis Hill .
To-day the place has been given to the public under the name of Gladstone Park , so called for the reason that in an earlier time Gladstone had frequently visited there .
It was a beautiful spot , a place of green grass and spreading oaks .
In a letter in which Mrs. Clemens wrote to her sister she said : `` It is simply divinely beautiful and peaceful ; the great , old trees are beyond everything .
I believe nowhere in the world do you find such trees as in England . ''
Clemens wrote to Twichell : `` From the house you can see little but spacious stretches of hay-fields and green turf ... ..
Yet the massed , brick blocks of London are reachable in three minutes on a horse .
By rail we can be in the heart of London , in Baker Street , in seventeen minutes -- by a smart train in five . ''
SIR , -- It has often been claimed that the London postal service was swifter than that of New York , and I have always believed that the claim was justified .
But a doubt has lately sprung up in my mind .
I live eight miles from Printing House Square ; the Times leaves that point at 4 o'clock in the morning , by mail , and reaches me at 5 in the afternoon , thus making the trip in thirteen hours .
Why , hang it , it occurs to me that by the time we reach New York you Twichells will be invading Europe and once more we shall miss the connection .
This is thoroughly exasperating .
Are n't we ever going to meet again ?
With no end of love from all of us , MARK .
We discover in the foregoing letter that the long European residence was drawing to an end .
More than nine years had passed since the closing of the Hartford house -- eventful years that had seen failure , bereavement , battle with debt , and rehabilitated fortunes .
To Sylvester Baxter , in Boston :
Very truly yours , S. L. CLEMENS .
LETTERS OF 1901 , CHIEFLY TO TWICHELL .
ASSASSINATION OF PRESIDENT McKINLEY .
He did not believe that he could reform the world , but at least he need not withhold his protest against those things which stirred his wrath .
He began by causing the arrest of a cabman who had not only overcharged but insulted him ; he continued by writing openly against the American policy in the Philippines , the missionary propaganda which had resulted in the Chinese uprising and massacre , and against Tammany politics .
Not all of his efforts were in the line of reform ; he had become a sort of general spokesman which the public flocked to hear , whatever the subject .
On the occasion of a Lincoln Birthday service at Carnegie Hall he was chosen to preside , and he was obliged to attend more dinners than were good for his health .
His letters of this period were mainly written to his old friend Twichell , in Hartford .
Howells , who lived in New York , he saw with considerable frequency .
I 'm going to stick close to my desk for a month , now , hoping to write a small book .
You are supposing that I am supposing that I am moved by a Large Patriotism , and that I am distressed because our President has blundered up to his neck in the Philippine mess ; and that I am grieved because this great big ignorant nation , which does n't know even the A B C facts of the Philippine episode , is in disgrace before the sarcastic world -- drop that idea !
I care nothing for the rest -- I am only distressed and troubled because I am befouled by these things .
When I search myself away down deep , I find this out .
Whatever a man feels or thinks or does , there is never any but one reason for it -- and that is a selfish one .
Nevertheless , psychic investigation always interested him , and he was good-naturedly willing to explore , even hoping , perhaps , to be convinced that individuality continues beyond death .
The letter which follows indicates his customary attitude in relation to spiritualistic research .
The experiments here mentioned , however , were not satisfactory .
Someone has told me that Mrs. Piper is discredited .
I can not be sure , but I think it was Mr. Myers , President of the London Psychical Research Society -- we heard of his death yesterday .
He was a spiritualist .
I am afraid he was a very easily convinced man .
We visited two mediums whom he and Andrew Lang considered quite wonderful , but they were quite transparent frauds .
AMONG THE ADIRONDACK LAKES , July 19 , 1901 .
The whole scheme of things is turned wrong end to .
Life should begin with age and its privileges and accumulations , and end with youth and its capacity to splendidly enjoy such advantages .
As things are now , when in youth a dollar would bring a hundred pleasures , you ca n't have it .
When you are old , you get it and there is nothing worth buying with it then .
Very truly yours , S. L. CLEMENS .
DEAR JOE , -- As you say , it is impracticable -- in my case , certainly .
For me to assist in an appeal to that Congress of land-thieves and liars would be to bring derision upon it ; and for me to assist in an appeal for cash to pass through the hands of those missionaries out there , of any denomination , Catholic or Protestant , would n't do at all .
They would n't handle money which I had soiled , and I would n't trust them with it , anyway .
They would devote it to the relief of suffering -- I know that -- but the sufferers selected would be converts .
The missionary-utterances exhibit no humane feeling toward the others , but in place of it a spirit of hate and hostility .
And it is natural ; the Bible forbids their presence there , their trade is unlawful , why should n't their characters be of necessity in harmony with -- but never mind , let it go , it irritates me .
I go yachting a fortnight up north in a 20-knot boat 225 feet long , with the owner , ( Mr. Rogers ) , Tom Reid , Dr. Rice , Col. A. G. Paine and one or two others .
Judge Howland would go , but ca n't get away from engagements ; Professor Sloane would go , but is in the grip of an illness .
Come -- will you go ?
If you can manage it , drop a post-card to me c/o H.H .
Rogers , 26 Broadway .
I shall be in New York a couple of days before we sail -- July 31 or Aug. 1 , perhaps the latter , -- and I think I shall stop at the Hotel Grosvenor , cor .
10th St and 5th ave .
AMPERSAND , N. Y. , Aug. 28 .
Love from us all to you all .
To Miss Picard , in St.-Die , France :
RIVERDALE-ON-THE-HUDSON , February 22 , 1902 .
You must not try to resign , for the laws of the Club do not allow that .
You must console yourself by remembering that you are in the best of company ; that nobody knows of your membership except myself -- that no Member knows another 's name , but only her country ; that no taxes are levied and no meetings held ( but how dearly I should like to attend one ! )
Sincerely yours , S. L. CLEMENS .
After that concession , it was time for him to get alarmed and shirk -- for he was pointing straight for the only rational and possible next-station on that piece of road the irresponsibility of man to God .
At York Harbor , Maine , where they had taken a cottage for the summer -- a pretty place , with Howells not far distant , at Kittery Point -- Mrs. Clemens 's health gave way .
This was at a period when telegraphic communication was far from reliable .
The old-time Western Union had fallen from grace ; its `` system '' no longer justified the best significance of that word .
The new day of reorganization was coming , and it was time for it .
`` THE PINES '' YORK HARBOR , MAINE .
`` Because , you know , a rule which required him to forward to the cemetery to-day a dispatch due three years ago , would be as good a rule as one which should require him to forward a telegram to me to-day which he knew had lost all its value an hour or two before he started it .
The construction of such a rule would discredit an idiot ; in fact an idiot -- I mean a common ordinary Christian idiot , you understand -- would be ashamed of it , and for the sake of his reputation would n't make it .
What do you think ? ''
I will explain that the reason her Majesty tried to do her friend a friendly office through me instead of through someone else was , not that I was particularly the right or best person for the office , but because I was not a stranger .
It is true that I am a stranger to some of the monarchs -- mainly through their neglect of their opportunities -- but such is not the case in the present instance .
The latter fact is a high compliment to me , and perhaps I ought to conceal it .
J. H. Twichell , in Hartford :
A power of love to you all !
DEAR MACALISTER , -- Yours arrived last night , and God knows I was glad to get it , for I was afraid I had blundered into an offence in some way and forfeited your friendship -- a kind of blunder I have made so many times in my life that I am always standing in a waiting and morbid dread of its occurrence .
Certainly there is a blistering and awful reality about a well-arranged unreality .
It is quite within the possibilities that two or three nights like that night of mine could drive a man to suicide .
He would refuse to examine the figures ; they would revolt him so , and he could go to his death unaware that there was nothing serious about them .
I can not get that night out of my head , it was so vivid , so real , so ghastly .
In any other year of these 33 the relief would have been simple : go where you can cut your cloth to fit your income .
You ca n't do that when your wife ca n't be moved , even from one room to the next .
Two weeks ago Jean was taken down again -- this time with measles , and I have n't been able to go to her and she has n't been able to come to me .
But Mrs. Clemens is making nice progress , and can stand alone a moment or two at a time .
DEAR BRANDER , -- I 'm still in bed , but the days have lost their dulness since I broke into Sir Walter and lost my temper .
I finished Guy Mannering -- that curious , curious book , with its mob of squalid shadows jabbering around a single flesh-and-blood being -- Dinmont ; a book crazily put together out of the very refuse of the romance-artist 's stage properties -- finished it and took up Quentin Durward , and finished that .
NEW YORK , June 8 , 1903 .
I hope this letter is not an impertinence .
I have just been turning about , with my head full of Spenser and Shakespeare and `` Gil Blas , '' looking for something in our own present day literature to which I could surrender myself as to those five gripping old writings .
And nothing could I find until I took up `` Life on the Mississippi , '' and `` Huckleberry Finn , '' and , just now , the `` Connecticut Yankee . ''
It is n't the first time I have read any of these three , and it 's because I know it wo n't be the last , because these books are the only ones written in my lifetime that claim my unreserved interest and admiration and , above all , my feelings , that I 've felt I had to write this letter .
I like to think that `` Tom Sawyer '' and `` Huckleberry Finn '' will be looked upon , fifty or a hundred years from now , as the picture of buoyant , dramatic , human American life .
I feel , deep in my own heart , pretty sure that they will be .
They wo n't be looked on then as the work of a `` humorist '' any more than we think of Shakespeare as a humorist now .
But Shakespeare was a humorist and so , thank Heaven !
And this achievement , the achievement of putting something into literature that was not there before , is , I should think , the most that any writer can ever hope to do .
It is the one mark of distinction between the `` lonesome '' little group of big men and the vast herd of medium and small ones .
Very truly yours , SAMUEL MERWIN .
P. S. Your letter has arrived .
It makes me proud and glad -- what Kipling says .
I hope Fate will fetch him to Florence while we are there .
I would rather see him than any other man .
Mrs. Clemens stood the voyage to Italy very well and , in due time , the family were installed in the Villa Reale di Quarto , the picturesque old Palace of Cosimo , a spacious , luxurious place , even if not entirely cheerful or always comfortable during the changeable Tuscan winter .
Congratulated in a letter from MacAlister in being in the midst of Florentine sunshine , he answered : `` Florentine sunshine ?
Bless you , there is n't any .
We have heavy fogs every morning , and rain all day .
This house is not merely large , it is vast -- therefore I think it must always lack the home feeling . ''
On many of the between-days I did some work , but only of an idle and not necessarily necessary sort , since it will not see print until I am dead .
I shall continue this ( an hour per day ) but the rest of the year I expect to put in on a couple of long books ( half-completed ones . )
No more magazine-work hanging over my head .
VILLA DI QUARTO , FLORENCE , March 14 , '04 .
Your friend , S. L. CLEMENS .
Speaking of Livy reminds me that your inquiry arrives at a good time ( unberufen ) It has been weeks ( I do n't know how many ! )
since we could have said a hopeful word , but this morning Katy came the minute the day-nurse came on watch and said words of a strange and long-forgotten sound : `` Mr. Clemens , Mrs. Clemens is really and truly better !
-- anybody can see it ; she sees it herself ; and last night at 9 o'clock she said it . ''
VILLA DI QUARTO , FLORENCE , May 12 , '04 .
DEAR GILDER , -- A friend of ours ( the Baroness de Nolda ) was here this afternoon and wanted a note of introduction to the Century , for she has something to sell to you in case you 'll want to make her an offer after seeing a sample of the goods .
I said `` With pleasure : get the goods ready , send the same to me , I will have Jean type-write them , then I will mail them to the Century and tonight I will write the note to Mr. Gilder and start it along .
Also write me a letter embodying what you have been saying to me about the goods and your proposed plan of arranging and explaining them , and I will forward that to Gilder too . ''
With love to you and yours , S. L. C .
I suppose you will get a prize , because you have created the most prodigious and in all ways most wonderful Fair the planet has ever seen .
Very well , you have indeed earned it : and with it the gratitude of the State and the nation .
To W. D. Howells , in New York .
DEAR HOWELLS , -- Last night at 9.20 I entered Mrs. Clemens 's room to say the usual goodnight -- and she was dead -- tho ' no one knew it .
She had been cheerfully talking , a moment before .
She was sitting up in bed -- she had not lain down for months -- and Katie and the nurse were supporting her .
They supposed she had fainted , and they were holding the oxygen pipe to her mouth , expecting to revive her .
I bent over her and looked in her face , and I think I spoke -- I was surprised and troubled that she did not notice me .
Then we understood , and our hearts broke .
How poor we are today !
But how thankful I am that her persecutions are ended .
I would not call her back if I could .
J. R. Twichell , in Hartford :
By implication you prove the whole annual pension-scoop , concealing the fact that the bulk of the money goes to people who in no way deserve it .
You imply that all the batteners upon this bribery-fund are Republicans .
An indiscreet confession , since about half of them must have been Democrats before they were bought .
It means , if it means anything , that our outlying properties will all be given up by the Democrats , and our flag hauled down .
Not only the properties stolen by Mr. McKinley and Mr. Roosevelt , but the properties honestly acquired ?
Joe , did you believe that hardy statement when you made it ?
Yet you made it , and there it stands in permanent print .
Now what moral law would suffer if we should give up the stolen ones ?
Do not throw these enlightenments aside , but study them , let them raise you to higher planes and make you better .
You taught me in my callow days , let me pay back the debt now in my old age out of a thesaurus with wisdom smelted from the golden ores of experience .
Ever yours for sweetness and light MARK .
J. H. Twichell , in Hartford :
DEAR JOE , -- I have a Puddn'head maxim :
`` When a man is a pessimist before 48 he knows too much ; if he is an optimist after it , he knows too little . ''
It is with contentment , therefore , that I reflect that I am better and wiser than you .
Joe , you seem to be dealing in `` bulks , '' now ; the `` bulk '' of the farmers and U. S. Senators are `` honest . ''
As regards purchase and sale with money ?
Is that the only measure of honesty ?
Are n't there a dozen kinds of honesty which ca n't be measured by the money-standard ?
Treason is treason -- and there 's more than one form of it ; the money-form is but one of them .
When a person is disloyal to any confessed duty , he is plainly and simply dishonest , and knows it ; knows it , and is privately troubled about it and not proud of himself .
Judged by this standard -- and who will challenge the validity of it ?
-- there is n't an honest man in Connecticut , nor in the Senate , nor anywhere else .
I do not even except myself , this time .
I give you my word of honor ( private ) I am not .
For seven years I have suppressed a book which my conscience tells me I ought to publish .
I hold it a duty to publish it .
There are other difficult duties which I am equal to , but I am not equal to that one .
Yes , even I am dishonest .
Not in many ways , but in some .
Forty-one , I think it is .
We are certainly all honest in one or several ways -- every man in the world -- though I have reason to think I am the only one whose black-list runs so light .
Sometimes I feel lonely enough in this lofty solitude .
Did England rise against the infamy of the Boer war ?
No -- rose in favor of it .
Did America rise against the infamy of the Phillipine war ?
No -- rose in favor of it .
Did Russia rise against the infamy of the present war ?
No -- sat still and said nothing .
Has the Kingdom of God advanced in Russia since the beginning of time ?
DEAR COL. HIGGINSON , -- I early learned that you would be my neighbor in the Summer and I rejoiced , recognizing in you and your family a large asset .
I hope for frequent intercourse between the two households .
I shall have my youngest daughter with me .
The other one will go from the rest-cure in this city to the rest-cure in Norfolk Conn and we shall not see her before autumn .
We have not seen her since the middle of October .
Jean ( the youngest daughter ) went to Dublin and saw the house and came back charmed with it .
I know the Thayers of old -- manifestly there is no lack of attractions up there .
Mrs. Thayer and I were shipmates in a wild excursion perilously near 40 years ago .
To Robert Fulton , in Reno , Nevada :
Those were the days !
They will come no more .
Youth will come no more .
They were so full to the brim with the wine of life ; there have been no others like them .
It chokes me up to think of them .
Would you like me to come out there and cry ?
It would not beseem my white head .
UP IN NEW HAMPSHIRE , May 27 , 1905 .
So I have done it .
I have struck out 700 words and inserted 5 MS pages of new matter ( 650 words ) , and now Adam 's Diary is dam good -- sixty times as good as it ever was before .
Clemens was invited by Colonel George Harvey to dine with the Russian emissaries , Baron Rosen and Sergius Witte .
He declined , but his telegram so pleased Witte that he asked permission to publish it , and announced that he would show it to the Czar .
TO COLONEL HARVEY , -- I am still a cripple , otherwise I should be more than glad of this opportunity to meet those illustrious magicians who with the pen have annulled , obliterated , and abolished every high achievement of the Japanese sword and turned the tragedy of a tremendous war into a gay and blithesome comedy .
If I may , let me in all respect and honor salute them as my fellow-humorists , I taking third place , as becomes one who was not born to modesty , but by diligence and hard work is acquiring it .
Nor still another unsent form , perhaps more characteristic than either of the foregoing .
Telegram ( unsent ) .
To Col. George Harvey , in New York :
To Mrs. Crane , Quarry Farm :
He did not delay in his beginning , and a few weeks later was sending word to his publisher about it .
DEAR MR. DUNEKA , -- ...
I 've made a poor guess as to number of words .
I think there must be 20,000 .
My usual page of MS. contains about 130 words ; but when I am deeply interested in my work and dead to everything else , my hand-writing shrinks and shrinks until there 's a great deal more than 130 on a page -- oh , yes , a deal more .
Well , I discover , this morning , that this tale is written in that small hand .
After discovering , about the middle of the book , that Cathy was Susy Clemens , I put her picture with my MS. , to be reproduced .
After the book was finished it was discovered that Susy had a dim model of Soldier Boy in her arms ; I had forgotten all about that toy .
The summer homes of these refugees are sprinkled , a mile apart , among the forest-clad hills , with access to each other by firm smooth country roads which are so embowered in dense foliage that it is always twilight in there , and comfortable .
The forests are spider-webbed with these good roads , they go everywhere ; but for the help of the guide-boards , the stranger would not arrive anywhere .
The village -- Dublin -- is bunched together in its own place , but a good telephone service makes its markets handy to all those outliars .
I have spelt it that way to be witty .
The village executes orders on , the Boston plan -- promptness and courtesy .
Since I stopped work I have had a two months ' holiday .
The summer has been my working time for 35 years ; to have a holiday in it ( in America ) is new for me .
I have not broken it , except to write `` Eve 's Diary '' and `` A Horse 's Tale '' -- short things occupying the mill 12 days .
He did not care for Havana cigars , but smoked the fragrant , inexpensive domestic tobacco with plenty of `` pep '' in it , as we say today .
Now and then he had an opportunity to head off some liberal friend , who wrote asking permission to contribute to his cigar collection , as instance the following .
Hoping that you three are well and happy and will be coming back before the winter sets in .
Well , that is my idea , as I have said : first , excite the audience with a spoonful of information about Fulton , then quiet down with a barrel of illustration drawn by memory from my books -- and if you do n't say anything the house will think they never heard of it before , because people do n't really read your books , they only say they do , to keep you from feeling bad .
Next , excite the house with another spoonful of Fultonian fact , then tranquilize them again with another barrel of illustration .
And so on and so on , all through the evening ; and if you are discreet and do n't tell them the illustrations do n't illustrate anything , they wo n't notice it and I will send them home as well-informed about Robert Fulton as I am myself .
Do n't be afraid ; I know all about audiences , they believe everything you say , except when you are telling the truth .
The seat chosen for the writer of these notes was to be at the front of the stage in order that the lecturer might lean over now and then and pretend to be asking information concerning Fulton .
I was not entirely happy in the thought of this showy honor , and breathed more freely when this plan was abandoned and the part assigned to General Grant .
To-morrow I mean to dictate a chapter which will get my heirs and assigns burnt alive if they venture to print it this side of 2006 A.D. -- which I judge they wo n't .
There 'll be lots of such chapters if I live 3 or 4 years longer .
The edition of A.D. 2006 will make a stir when it comes out .
I shall be hovering around taking notice , along with other dead pals .
DUBLIN , Oct. 5 , 1906 .
`` Of all sad words of tongue or pen , The saddest are these : It might have been .
Ah , say not so !
as life grows longer , leaner , thinner , We recognize , O God , it might have Bynner ! ''
You will reform , now , Alden .
You will cease from these economies , and you will be discharged .
But in your retirement you will carry with you the admiration and earnest good wishes of the oppressed and toiling scribes .
This will be better than bread .
Let this console you when the bread fails .
This was mainly a joke .
We drove to the Capitol and he delivered his letter to `` Uncle Joe '' by hand .
`` Uncle Joe '' could not give him the privilege of the floor ; the rules had become more stringent .
He declared they would hang him if he did such a thing .
In 1909 , Champ Clark , and those others who had gathered around him that afternoon , passed a measure that added fourteen years to the copyright term .
Some day somebody will recruit my 200 -- my dear beguilesome Knights of the Golden Fleece -- and you will see them make good their ominous name .
The author , J. Howard Moore , sent a copy of his book , The Universal Kinship , with a letter in which he said : `` Most humorists have no anxiety except to glorify themselves and add substance to their pocket-books by making their readers laugh .
You have shown , on many occasions , that your mission is not simply to antidote the melancholy of a world , but includes a real and intelligent concern for the general welfare of your fellowman . ''
Usually the books were Tom Sawyer and Huck Finn , the morals of which were not regarded as wholly exemplary .
But in 1907 a small library , in a very small town , attained a day 's national notoriety by putting the ban on Eve 's Diary , not so much on account of its text as for the chaste and exquisite illustrations by Lester Ralph .
When the reporters came in a troop to learn about it , the author said : `` I believe this time the trouble is mainly with the pictures .
I did not draw them .
I wish I had -- they are so beautiful . ''
Sincerely yours , S. L. CLEMENS .
He had taken a house at Tuxedo for the summer , desiring to be near New York City , and in the next letter he writes Mr. Rogers concerning his London plans .
We discover , also , in this letter that he has begun work on the Redding home and the cost is to come entirely out of the autobiographical chapters then running in the North American Review .
It may be of passing interest to note here that he had the usual house-builder 's fortune .
He received thirty thousand dollars for the chapters ; the house cost him nearly double that amount .
To H. H. Rogers , in New York :
Oh , you were indeed the only one -- there was n't even the remotest chance of competition with you , dear !
Ah , you are a decoration , you little witch !
To Mrs. Elinor Glyn , in New York :
Lang 's suggestion would seem to have been a welcome one .
To Father Fitz-Simon , in Washington :
DEAR FATHER FITZ-SIMON , -- Marriage -- yes , it is the supreme felicity of life , I concede it .
And it is also the supreme tragedy of life .
The deeper the love the surer the tragedy .
And the more disconsolating when it comes .
Make the most of the sunshine !
and I hope it will last long -- ever so long .
I do not really want to be present ; yet for friendship 's sake and because I honor you so , I would be there if I could .
With love to you both , Ever yours , S. L. C .
To W. D. Howells , Kittery Point , Maine :
DEAR HOWELLS , -- Wo n't you and Mrs. Howells and Mildred come and give us as many days as you can spare , and examine John 's triumph ?
It is the most satisfactory house I am acquainted with , and the most satisfactorily situated .
It 's a ghastly long distance to come , and I would n't travel such a distance to see anything short of a memorial museum , but if you can't come now you can at least come later when you return to New York , for the journey will be only an hour and a half per express-train .
Things are gradually and steadily taking shape inside the house , and nature is taking care of the outside in her ingenious and wonderful fashion -- and she is competent and asks no help and gets none .
I have retired from New York for good , I have retired from labor for good , I have dismissed my stenographer and have entered upon a holiday whose other end is in the cemetery .
To -- -- -- , Buffalo , N. Y .
REDDING , CONN , Aug. 28 , '08 .
The `` largest visible influence . ''
The following letter was in reply to one inclosing a newspaper clipping reporting a performance of The Prince and the Pauper , given by Chicago school children .
To Mrs. Hookway , in Chicago :
To W. D. Howells , in New York :
I shall need your assent and the assent of about a dozen other authors .
Also the assent of all the large firms of the 300 publishers .
These authors and publishers will furnish said assent I am sure .
Not even the pirates will be able to furnish a serious objection , I think .
`` Instruction for what ? ''
`` The blue-pencil 3 was an afterthought .
There are n't any stamps for afterthoughts ; the sums vary , according to inspiration , and they whirl in the one that suggests itself at the last moment .
Sometimes they go several times higher than this one .
This one only means hog 3 cents more .
And so if you 've got 51 cents about you , or can borrow it -- ''
After seeing the Oxford pageant file by the grand stand , picture after picture , splendor after splendor , three thousand five hundred strong , the most moving and beautiful and impressive and historically-instructive show conceivable , you are not to think I would miss the London pageant of next year , with its shining host of 15,000 historical English men and women dug from the misty books of all the vanished ages and marching in the light of the sun -- all alive , and looking just as they were used to look !
Mr. Lascelles spent yesterday here on the farm , and told me all about it .
I shall be in the middle of my 75th year then , and interested in pageants for personal and prospective reasons .
Yours very truly , S. L. CLEMENS .
To Champ Clark , in Washington :
STORMFIELD , REDDING , CONN. , June 5 , '09 .
DEAR BETSY , -- I 've been writing `` Letters from the Earth , '' and if you will come here and see us I will -- what ?
Put the MS in your hands , with the places to skip marked ?
I wo n't trust you quite that far .
I 'll read messages to you .
This book will never be published -- in fact it couldn't be , because it would be felony to soil the mails with it , for it has much Holy Scripture in it of the kind that ... ca n't properly be read aloud , except from the pulpit and in family worship .
Paine enjoys it , but Paine is going to be damned one of these days , I suppose .
BAY HOUSE , Jan. 11 , 1910 .
`` Helen '' of this letter was Mr. and Mrs. Allen 's young daughter , a favorite companion of his walks and drives .
This letter had been written by the hand of his `` secretary , '' Helen Allen : writing had become an effort to him .
Yet we did not suspect how rapidly the end was approaching and only grew vaguely alarmed .
A week later , however , it became evident that his condition was critical .
DEAR PAINE , -- ... .
I have been having a most uncomfortable time for the past 4 days with that breast-pain , which turns out to be an affection of the heart , just as I originally suspected .
The news from New York is to the effect that non-bronchial weather has arrived there at last , therefore if I can get my breast trouble in traveling condition I may sail for home a week or two earlier than has heretofore been proposed :
Touching with glory the world , And flooding the large upper room Where a sick man sleeps .
Slowly he opens his eyes , After long weariness , smiles , And stretches arms overhead , While those about him take heart .
The name was changed from Eschol to Beriah to accommodate an Eschol Sellers who rose up out of the vasty deeps of uncharted space and preferred his request -- backed by threat of a libel suit -- then went his way appeased , and came no more .
In the play Beriah had to be dropped to satisfy another member of the race , and Mulberry was substituted in the hope that the objectors would be tired by that time and let it pass unchallenged .
So far it has occupied the field in peace ; therefore we chance it again , feeling reasonably safe , this time , under shelter of the statute of limitations .
THE WEATHER IN THIS BOOK .
No weather will be found in this book .
This is an attempt to pull a book through without weather .
It being the first attempt of the kind in fictitious literature , it may prove a failure , but it seemed worth the while of some dare-devil person to try it , and the author was in just the mood .
Many a reader who wanted to read a tale through was not able to do it because of delays on account of the weather .
Nothing breaks up an author 's progress like having to stop every few pages to fuss-up the weather .
Thus it is plain that persistent intrusions of weather are bad for both reader and author .
Of course weather is necessary to a narrative of human experience .
But it ought to be put where it will not be in the way ; where it will not interrupt the flow of the narrative .
And it ought to be the ablest weather that can be had , not ignorant , poor-quality , amateur weather .
Weather is a literary specialty , and no untrained hand can turn out a good article of it .
The present author can do only a few trifling ordinary kinds of weather , and he can not do those very good .
So it has seemed wisest to borrow such weather as is necessary for the book from qualified and recognized experts -- giving credit , of course .
This weather will be found over in the back part of the book , out of the way .
The reader is requested to turn over and help himself from time to time as he goes along .
It is a matchless morning in rural England .
On a fair hill we see a majestic pile , the ivied walls and towers of Cholmondeley Castle , huge relic and witness of the baronial grandeurs of the Middle Ages .
This is one of the seats of the Earl of Rossmore , K. G. G. C. B. K. C. M. G. , etc.
, who possesses twenty-two thousand acres of English land , owns a parish in London with two thousand houses on its lease-roll , and struggles comfortably along on an income of two hundred thousand pounds a year .
The father and founder of this proud old line was William the Conqueror his very self ; the mother of it was not inventoried in history by name , she being merely a random episode and inconsequential , like the tanner 's daughter of Falaise .
In a breakfast room of the castle on this breezy fine morning there are two persons and the cooling remains of a deserted meal .
One of these persons is the old lord , tall , erect , square-shouldered , white-haired , stern-browed , a man who shows character in every feature , attitude , and movement , and carries his seventy years as easily as most men carry fifty .
The other person is his only son and heir , a dreamy-eyed young fellow , who looks about twenty-six but is nearer thirty .
Candor , kindliness , honesty , sincerity , simplicity , modesty -- it is easy to see that these are cardinal traits of his character ; and so when you have clothed him in the formidable components of his name , you somehow seem to be contemplating a lamb in armor : his name and style being the Honourable Kirkcudbright Llanover Marjorihanks Sellers Viscount-Berkeley , of Cholmondeley Castle , Warwickshire .
( Pronounced K'koobry Thlanover Marshbanks Sellers Vycount Barkly , of Chumly Castle , Warrikshr . )
He is standing by a great window , in an attitude suggestive of respectful attention to what his father is saying and equally respectful dissent from the positions and arguments offered .
The father walks the floor as he talks , and his talk shows that his temper is away up toward summer heat .
`` Soft-spirited as you are , Berkeley , I am quite aware that when you have once made up your mind to do a thing which your ideas of honor and justice require you to do , argument and reason are ( for the time being , ) wasted upon you -- yes , and ridicule ; persuasion , supplication , and command as well .
To my mind -- '' `` Father , if you will look at it without prejudice , without passion , you must concede that I am not doing a rash thing , a thoughtless , wilful thing , with nothing substantial behind it to justify it .
I did not create the American claimant to the earldom of Rossmore ; I did not hunt for him , did not find him , did not obtrude him upon your notice .
He found himself , he injected himself into our lives -- '' `` And has made mine a purgatory for ten years with his tiresome letters , his wordy reasonings , his acres of tedious evidence , -- '' `` Which you would never read , would never consent to read .
Yet in common fairness he was entitled to a hearing .
That hearing would either prove he was the rightful earl -- in which case our course would be plain -- or it would prove that he was n't -- in which case our course would be equally plain .
I have read his evidences , my lord .
I have conned them well , studied them patiently and thoroughly .
The chain seems to be complete , no important link wanting .
I believe he is the rightful earl . ''
`` And I a usurper -- a -- nameless pauper , a tramp !
Consider what you are saying , sir . ''
`` Father , if he is the rightful earl , would you , could you -- that fact being established -- consent to keep his titles and his properties from him a day , an hour , a minute ? ''
`` You are talking nonsense -- nonsense -- lurid idiotcy !
Now , listen to me .
I will make a confession -- if you wish to call it by that name .
I did not read those evidences because I had no occasion to -- I was made familiar with them in the time of this claimant 's father and of my own father forty years ago .
This fellow 's predecessors have kept mine more or less familiar with them for close upon a hundred and fifty years .
The truth is , the rightful heir did go to America , with the Fairfax heir or about the same time -- but disappeared -- somewhere in the wilds of Virginia , got married , end began to breed savages for the Claimant market ; wrote no letters home ; was supposed to be dead ; his younger brother softly took possession ; presently the American did die , and straightway his eldest product put in his claim -- by letter -- letter still in existence -- and died before the uncle in-possession found time -- or maybe inclination -- to -- answer .
The infant son of that eldest product grew up -- long interval , you see -- and he took to writing letters and furnishing evidences .
Well , successor after successor has done the same , down to the present idiot .
It was a succession of paupers ; not one of them was ever able to pay his passage to England or institute suit .
The Fairfaxes kept their lordship alive , and so they have never lost it to this day , although they live in Maryland ; their friend lost his by his own neglect .
You perceive now , that the facts in this case bring us to precisely this result : morally the American tramp is rightful earl of Rossmore ; legally he has no more right than his dog .
There now -- are you satisfied ? ''
There was a pause , then the son glanced at the crest carved in the great oaken mantel and said , with a regretful note in his voice : `` Since the introduction of heraldic symbols , -- the motto of this house has been 'Suum cuique ' -- to every man his own .
By your own intrepidly frank confession , my lord , it is become a sarcasm : If Simon Lathers -- '' `` Keep that exasperating name to yourself !
For ten years it has pestered my eye -- and tortured my ear ; till at last my very footfalls time themselves to the brain-racking rhythm of Simon Lathers !
And now , to make its presence in my soul eternal , immortal , imperishable , you have resolved to -- to -- what is it you have resolved to do ? ''
`` To go to Simon Lathers , in America , and change places with him . ''
Deliver the reversion of the earldom into his hands ? ''
`` That is my purpose . ''
`` Make this tremendous surrender without even trying the fantastic case in the Lords ? ''
`` Ye -- s -- '' with hesitation and some embarrassment .
`` By all that is amazing , I believe you are insane , my son .
See here -- have you been training with that ass again -- that radical , if you prefer the term , though the words are synonymous -- Lord Tanzy , of Tollmache ? ''
The son did not reply , and the old lord continued : `` Yes , you confess .
That puppy , that shame to his birth and caste , who holds all hereditary lordships and privilege to be usurpation , all nobility a tinsel sham , all aristocratic institutions a fraud , all inequalities in rank a legalized crime and an infamy , and no bread honest bread that a man does n't earn by his own work -- work , pah ! ''
-- and the old patrician brushed imaginary labor-dirt from his white hands .
`` You have come to hold just those opinions yourself , suppose , '' -- he added with a sneer .
A faint flush in the younger man 's cheek told that the shot had hit and hurt ; but he answered with dignity : `` I have .
I say it without shame -- I feel none .
And now my reason for resolving to renounce my heirship without resistance is explained .
I wish to retire from what to me is a false existence , a false position , and begin my life over again -- begin it right -- begin it on the level of mere manhood , unassisted by factitious aids , and succeed or fail by pure merit or the want of it .
I will go to America , where all men are equal and all have an equal chance ; I will live or die , sink or swim , win or lose as just a man -- that alone , and not a single helping gaud or fiction back of it . ''
My lord took them , and the servant disappeared .
`` Yes , this time I will .
For the sake of the cat : ''
Come , this one 's interesting .
Why , Berkeley , his breezy impudence is -- is -- why , it 's colossal , it 's sublime . ''
The Colonel and his wife were on their feet in a moment , and the next moment were joyfully wringing the hands of a stoutish , discouraged-looking man whose general aspect suggested that he was fifty years old , but whose hair swore to a hundred .
`` Well , yes , if a body may call it that ; though it 's a pretty strong term for 'dobies and jackass rabbits , boiled beans and slap-jacks , depression , withered hopes , poverty in all its varieties -- ''
Office established in the time of the Revolution , last century .
The musket-flints for the military posts were supplied from the capitol .
They do it yet ; for although the flint-arm has gone out and the forts have tumbled down , the decree has n't been repealed -- been overlooked and forgotten , you see -- and so the vacancies where old Ticonderoga and others used to stand , still get their six quarts of gun-flints a year just the same . ''
`` And the work -- the work !
Do you have to attend all the sittings ? ''
Washington was dazed by this most unexpected demonstration .
`` Tut-tut , it 's a great , it 's a staving preferment , and just opulent with influence here . ''
`` That 's nothing ; you can make speeches . ''
`` It 's just as good as done , my boy , just as good as done .
We 'll hitch teams together , you and I , and we 'll make things hum ! ''
Sellers returned , now , with her composure restored , and began to ask after Hawkins 's wife , and about his children , and the number of them , and so on , and her examination of the witness resulted in a circumstantial history of the family 's ups and downs and driftings to and fro in the far West during the previous fifteen years .
There was a message , now , from out back , and Colonel Sellers went out there in answer to it .
Hawkins took this opportunity to ask how the world had been using the Colonel during the past half-generation .
`` Just the same old scheming , generous , good-hearted , moonshiny , hopeful , no-account failure he always was , and still everybody likes him just as well as if he was the shiningest success . ''
`` Here 's old Dan'l and old Jinny , that the sheriff sold south one of the times that we got bankrupted before the war -- they came wandering back after the peace , worn out and used up on the cotton plantations , helpless , and not another lick of work left in their old hides for the rest of this earthly pilgrimage -- and we so pinched , oh so pinched for the very crumbs to keep life in us , and he just flung the door wide , and the way he received them you 'd have thought they had come straight down from heaven in answer to prayer .
I took him one side and said , 'Mulberry we ca n't have them -- we 've nothing for ourselves -- we ca n't feed them . '
He looked at me kind of hurt , and said , 'Turn them out ?
-- and they 've come to me just as confident and trusting as -- as -- why Polly , I must have bought that confidence sometime or other a long time ago , and given my note , so to speak -- you do n't get such things as a gift -- and how am I going to go back on a debt like that ?
And you see , they 're so poor , and old , and friendless , and -- ' But I was ashamed by that time , and shut him off , and somehow felt a new courage in me , and so I said , softly , 'We 'll keep them -- the Lord will provide . '
He was glad , and started to blurt out one of those over-confident speeches of his , but checked himself in time , and said humbly , 'I will , anyway . '
It was years and years and years ago .
Well , you see those old wrecks are here yet . ''
`` Well , here 's to him , and hoping he 'll make another strike soon . ''
He continued to gaze at the chair fascinated , magnetized ; and for once in his life that continental stretch of dry prairie which stood for his imagination was afire , and across it was marching a slanting flamefront that joined its wide horizons together and smothered the skies with smoke .
He was experiencing what one or another drowsing , geographically ignorant alien experiences every day in the year when he turns a dull and indifferent eye out of the car window and it falls upon a certain station-sign which reads `` Stratford-on-Avon ! ''
Sellers went gossiping comfortably along :
`` Oh , they like to hear him talk , especially if their load is getting rather heavy on one shoulder and they want to shift it .
He 's all air , you know , -- breeze , you may say -- and he freshens them up ; it 's a trip to the country , they say .
Many a time he 's made General Grant laugh -- and that 's a tidy job , I can tell you , and as for Sheridan , his eye lights up and he listens to Mulberry Sellers the same as if he was artillery .
You see , the charm about Mulberry is , he is so catholic and unprejudiced that he fits in anywhere and everywhere .
It makes him powerful good company , and as popular as scandal .
You go to the White House when the President 's holding a general reception -- sometime when Mulberry 's there .
Why , dear me , you ca n't tell which of them it is that 's holding that reception . ''
`` Well , he certainly is a remarkable man -- and he always was .
Is he religious ? ''
`` He -- '' She stopped , and was lost for a moment or two in thinking , then she said , with simplicity , `` I think he was a Mohammedan or something last week . ''
The colonel rose and tip-toed his way across the room , closed a door that was slightly ajar , tip-toed his way to his seat again , and said , under his breath :
Folly -- listen to me ; and get a good grip on your breath , for you are going to need it .
Within three days I shall have completed my method , and then -- let the world stand aghast , for it shall see marvels .
Washington , within three days -- ten at the outside -- you shall see me call the dead of any century , and they will arise and walk .
-- they shall walk forever , and never die again .
Walk with all the muscle and spring of their pristine vigor . ''
Great Scott , look here .
I shall have a monopoly ; they 'll all belong to me , wo n't they ?
Two thousand policemen in the city of New York .
Wages , four dollars a day .
I 'll replace them with dead ones at half the money .
`` Oh , prodigious !
I never thought of that .
F-o-u-r thousand dollars a day .
Now I do begin to see !
But will dead policemen answer ? ''
`` Well , if you put it that way -- ''
`` Put it any way you want to .
Modify it to suit yourself , and my lads shall still be superior .
They wo n't eat , they wo n't drink -- do n't need those things ; they wo n't wink for cash at gambling dens and unlicensed rum-holes , they wo n't spark the scullery maids ; and moreover the bands of toughs that ambuscade them on lonely beats , and cowardly shoot and knife them will only damage the uniforms and not live long enough to get more than a momentary satisfaction out of that . ''
`` Why , Colonel , if you can furnish policemen , then of course -- ''
`` Not so very bad , either . ''
`` Good ; we 'll catch him .
Let 's lay a plan . ''
Which arm has he lost ? ''
`` But he wo n't know who -- will he ? ''
`` Knowledge of human curiosity .
Strong trait , very strong trait . ''
`` It 's no great loss .
Simon Lathers was a poor well-meaning useless thing and no account , and his brother never was worth shucks . ''
`` Goodness gracious , well , I never !
What am I to call you then ? ''
`` He will telegraph , dear . ''
Next afternoon , while Hawkins , by request , draped Andrew Jackson's portrait with crape , the rightful earl , wrote off the family bereavement to the usurper in England -- a letter which we have already read .
He also , by letter to the village authorities at Duffy 's Corners , Arkansas , gave order that the remains of the late twins be embalmed by some St. Louis expert and shipped at once to the usurper -- with bill .
Then he drafted out the Rossmore arms and motto on a great sheet of brown paper , and he and Hawkins took it to Hawkins 's Yankee furniture-mender and at the end of an hour came back with a couple of stunning hatchments , which they nailed up on the front of the house -- attractions calculated to draw , and they did ; for it was mainly an idle and shiftless negro neighborhood , with plenty of ragged children and indolent dogs to spare for a point of interest like that , and keep on sparing them for it , days and days together .
Oh , yes , I 've been having a darling good time .
And do you know , not one of these collegians has had the cruelty to ask me how I came by my new name .
With some , this is due to charity , but with the others it is n't .
They refrain , not from native kindness but from educated discretion .
Here was the most beautiful young creature he had ever seen in his life .
It was Sally Sellers Lady Gwendolen ; she had come in the night .
And it seemed to him that her clothes were the prettiest and the daintiest he had ever looked upon , and the most exquisitely contrived and fashioned and combined , as to decorative trimmings , and fixings , and melting harmonies of color .
It was only a morning dress , and inexpensive , but he confessed to himself , in the English common to Cherokee Strip , that it was a `` corker . ''
And now , as he perceived , the reason why the Sellers household poverties and sterilities had been made to blossom like the rose , and charm the eye and satisfy the spirit , stood explained ; here was the magician ; here in the midst of her works , and furnishing in her own person the proper accent and climaxing finish of the whole .
`` Why , father , I 've never seen him . ''
`` It 's a grand old line , major , a sublime old line , and deserves to be mourned for , almost royally ; almost imperially , I may say .
Er -- Lady Gwendolen -- but she 's gone ; never mind ; I wanted my Peerage ; I 'll fetch it myself , presently , and show you a thing or two that will give you a realizing idea of what our house is .
I 've been glancing through Burke , and I find that of William the Conqueror 's sixty-four natural ah -- my dear , would you mind getting me that book ?
It 's on the escritoire in our boudoir .
Yes , as I was saying , there 's only St. Albans , Buccleugh and Grafton ahead of us on the list -- all the rest of the British nobility are in procession behind us .
Ah , thanks , my lady .
Now then , we turn to William , and we find -- letter for XYZ ?
Oh , splendid -- when 'd you get it ? ''
`` Certainly -- that 'll fetch him .
Worded right , if he 's a man -- got any of the feelings of a man , sympathies and all that , he 'll be here inside of twenty-four hours .
Pen and paper -- come , we 'll get right at it . ''
`` Yes , his idea is plain , now .
He seems to be a man that ca n't be candid and straightforward .
He acts as if he thought we -- shucks , I wish he had come out like a man and told us what hotel he -- ''
`` Because you wo n't be holding the ash barrel down , it 'll be me .
You'll be coming in with an officer and a requisition in plain clothes -- the officer , I mean -- the minute you see him arrive and open up a talk with me . ''
`` All the windows , all of them .
Let him have his choice -- I 'm indifferent , now that I have located him .
You go and stand on the corner and wait ; I 'll prospect the hotel . ''
Arrived in his room Lord Berkeley made preparations for that first and last and all-the-time duty of the visiting Englishman -- the jotting down in his diary of his `` impressions '' to date .
His preparations consisted in ransacking his `` box '' for a pen .
There was a plenty of steel pens on his table with the ink bottle , but he was English .
The English people manufacture steel pens for nineteen-twentieths of the globe , but they never use any themselves .
They use exclusively the pre-historic quill .
My lord not only found a quill pen , but the best one he had seen in several years -- and after writing diligently for some time , closed with the following entry :
`` All attempts to mingle with the common people and became permanently one of them are going to fail , unless I can get rid of it , disappear from it , and re-appear with the solid protection of a new name .
I am astonished and pained to see how eager the most of these Americans are to get acquainted with a lord , and how diligent they are in pushing attentions upon him .
They lack English servility , it is true -- but they could acquire it , with practice .
My quality travels ahead of me in the most mysterious way .
I write my family name without additions , on the register of this hotel , and imagine that I am going to pass for an obscure and unknown wanderer , but the clerk promptly calls out , 'Front !
show his lordship to four-eighty-two ! '
and before I can get to the lift there is a reporter trying to interview me as they call it .
This sort of thing shall cease at once .
I will hunt up the American Claimant the first thing in the morning , accomplish my mission , then change my lodging and vanish from scrutiny under a fictitious name . ''
The cry passed on , and the banging .
Lord Berkeley sprang out of bed and moved with all possible speed toward the clothes-press in the darkness and the gathering smoke , but fell over a chair and lost his bearings .
He groped desperately about on his hands , and presently struck his head against the table and was deeply grateful , for it gave him his bearings again , since it stood close by the door .
He seized his most precious possession ; his journaled Impressions of America , and darted from the room .
Presently one of the gaping and adoring half-circle of boys ventured a timid question .
My lord answered it .
The boys glanced wonderingly at each other and from somewhere fell the comment :
The young man muses -- maps out his course .
His letter of credit is burned ; he will borrow the small bills and the silver in these pockets , apply part of it to advertising for the owner , and use the rest for sustenance while he seeks work .
He sends out for the morning paper , next , and proceeds to read about the fire .
The biggest line in the display-head announces his own death !
The body of the account furnishes all the particulars ; and tells how , with the inherited heroism of his caste , he went on saving women and children until escape for himself was impossible ; then with the eyes of weeping multitudes upon him , he stood with folded arms and sternly awaited the approach of the devouring fiend ; `` and so standing , amid a tossing sea of flame and on-rushing billows of smoke , the noble young heir of the great house of Rossmore was caught up in a whirlwind of fiery glory , and disappeared forever from the vision of men . ''
`` What is it ? ''
`` Rossmore , do n't -- do n't trifle with me .
Do you mean that ?
Can you do it ? ''
`` Why , yes , I am sorry for my heartlessness , and you smitten with this new family affliction .
Of course you must materialize him first -- I quite understand that . ''
`` Nothing would do Graham Bell but I must try it ; said the mere fact of my trying it would secure public confidence , and get it a chance to show what it could do .
I told him that in theory a dry battery was just a curled darling and no mistake , but when it come to practice , sho !
-- and here 's the result .
What should you say , Washington Hawkins ?
You 've seen me try that button twice .
-- that 's the idea .
Did I know what I was talking about , or did n't I ? ''
`` No , Marse Sellers did n't . ''
`` Members of the family is just what they become -- THE members of the family , in fact .
And sometimes master and mistress of the household .
These two are mighty good and loving and faithful and honest , but hang it , they do just about as they please , they chip into a conversation whenever they want to , and the plain fact is , they ought to be killed . ''
`` What , Colonel ? ''
`` Any of them burnt up ? ''
`` Goodness knows -- given to her , no doubt , by spoony young flats and sappy old bald-heads in the front row .
All the papers were full of it .
She struck for higher pay and got it .
Well , she got burnt out again and lost all her diamonds , and it gave her such a lift that she went starring . ''
`` I think she 's a fool .
If I had $ 60,000 worth of diamonds I wouldn't trust them in a hotel . ''
They set the baskets on the table in what was formerly the library , drawing-room and workshop -- now the Hall of Audience -- and went up stairs to the lumber room to see if they could find a British flag to use as a part of the outfit proper to the lying in state .
A moment later , Lady Rossmore came in from the street and caught sight of the baskets just as old Jinny crossed her field of vision .
She quite lost her patience and said :
She was alone with the ashes -- alone before she could take half a breath .
Then she went after Mulberry Sellers , purposing to make short work with his program , whatever it might be ; `` for , '' said she , `` when his sentimentals are up , he 's a numskull , and there 's no knowing what extravagance he 'll contrive , if you let him alone . ''
He had found the flag and was bringing it .
When she heard that his idea was to have the remains `` lie in state , and invite the government and the public , '' she broke it up .
`` There -- he is as comfortable , now , as we can make him in the circumstances .
Except -- yes , we must strain a point there -- one must do as one would wish to be done by -- he must have it . ''
`` Have what , dear ? ''
`` All at once ? ''
`` On the installment plan , '' suggested Hawkins , gravely , and proud of being able to help .
`` You do n't want to break that childless old man 's heart . ''
`` Because to send -- and find out the truth -- would rob him of the one precious thing left him , the uncertainty , the dim hope that maybe , after all , his boy escaped , and he will see him again some day . ''
`` No help for me now , for henceforth I could n't draw that money without identification , and that is become legally impossible .
No resources to fall back on .
It is work or starve from now to the end .
I am ready -- and not afraid ! ''
Well , the charge is , that our press has but little of that old world quality , reverence .
Let us be candidly grateful that it is so .
With its limited reverence it at least reveres the things which this nation reveres , as a rule , and that is sufficient : what other people revere is fairly and properly matter of light importance to us .
Our press does not reverence kings , it does not reverence so called nobilities , it does not reverence established ecclesiastical slaveries , it does not reverence laws which rob a younger son to fatten an elder one , it does not reverence any fraud or sham or infamy , howsoever old or rotten or holy , which sets one citizen above his neighbor by accident of birth : it does not reverence any law or custom , howsoever old or decayed or sacred , which shuts against the best man in the land the best place in the land and the divine right to prove property and go up and occupy it .
In the sense of the poet Goethe -- that meek idolater of provincial three carat royalty and nobility -- our press is certainly bankrupt in the `` thrill of awe '' -- otherwise reverence ; reverence for nickel plate and brummagem .
Let us sincerely hope that this fact will remain a fact forever : for to my mind a discriminating irreverence is the creator and protector of human liberty -- even as the other thing is the creator , nurse , and steadfast protector of all forms of human slavery , bodily and mental .
`` I would say , for the information of the strangers present here , that in accordance with our custom the subject of this meeting will be debated at the next meeting of the club .
This is in order to enable our members to prepare what they may wish to say upon the subject with pen and paper , for we are mainly mechanics and unaccustomed to speaking .
We are obliged to write down what we desire to say . ''
`` How grand that is ! ''
said Tracy , as he wended homeward .
`` What a civilization it is , and what prodigious results these are !
and brought about almost wholly by common men ; not by Oxford-trained aristocrats , but men who stand shoulder to shoulder in the humble ranks of life and earn the bread that they eat .
Again , I 'm glad I came .
I have found a country at last where one may start fair , and breast to breast with his fellow man , rise by his own efforts , and be something in the world and be proud of that something ; not be something created by an ancestor three hundred years ago . ''
At the end of a week things were beginning to wear rather a startling look .
He had hunted everywhere for work , descending gradually the scale of quality , until apparently he had sued for all the various kinds of work a man without a special calling might hope to be able to do , except ditching and the other coarse manual sorts -- and had got neither work nor the promise of it .
He settled up at once and went forth to find less sumptuous lodgings .
He had to wander far and seek with diligence , but he succeeded .
They made him pay in advance -- four dollars and a half ; this secured both bed and food for a week .
The good-natured , hardworked landlady took him up three flights of narrow , uncarpeted stairs and delivered him into his room .
There were two double-bedsteads in it , and one single one .
He would be allowed to sleep alone in one of the double beds until some new boarder should come , but he would n't be charged extra .
`` Why , of course you have n't -- what am I thinking of ?
Plenty of room on the Plains without chalking , I 'll be bound .
Well , you just chalk out a place the size of a blanket anywhere on the tin that ai n't already marked off , you know , and that 's your property .
You and your bed-mate take turnabout carrying up the blanket and pillows and fetching them down again ; or one carries them up and the other fetches them down , you fix it the way you like , you know .
You 'll like the boys , they 're everlasting sociable -- except the printer .
He 's the one that sleeps in that single bed -- the strangest creature ; why , I do n't believe you could get that man to sleep with another man , not if the house was afire .
Mind you , I 'm not just talking , I know .
The boys tried him , to see .
They took his bed out one night , and so when he got home about three in the morning -- he was on a morning paper then , but he 's on an evening one now -- there was n't any place for him but with the iron-moulder ; and if you 'll believe me , he just set up the rest of the night -- he did , honest .
They say he's cracked , but it ai n't so , he 's English -- they 're awful particular .
You wo n't mind my saying that .
You -- you 're English ? ''
`` I thought so .
I could tell it by the way you mispronounce the words that 's got a 's in them , you know ; such as saying loff when you mean laff -- but you 'll get over that .
He 's a right down good fellow , and a little sociable with the photographer 's boy and the caulker and the blacksmith that work in the navy yard , but not so much with the others .
The fact is , though it 's private , and the others do n't know it , he 's a kind of an aristocrat , his father being a doctor , and you know what style that is -- in England , I mean , because in this country a doctor ai n't so very much , even if he 's that .
But over there of course it 's different .
So this chap had a falling out with his father , and was pretty high strung , and just cut for this country , and the first he knew he had to get to work or starve .
Well , he 'd been to college , you see , and so he judged he was all right -- did you say anything ? ''
`` And there 's where he was mistaken .
Why , he mighty near starved .
And I reckon he would have starved sure enough , if some jour ' printer or other had n't took pity on him and got him a place as apprentice .
So he learnt the trade , and then he was all right -- but it was a close call .
Once he thought he had got to haul in his pride and holler for his father and -- why , you 're sighing again .
Is anything the matter with you ?
-- does my clatter -- ''
The young Englishman made the awkward bow common to his nationality and time of life in circumstances of delicacy and difficulty , and these were of that sort ; for , being taken by surprise , his natural , lifelong self sprang to the front , and that self of course would not know just how to act when introduced to a chambermaid , or to the heiress of a mechanics' boarding house .
His other self -- the self which recognized the equality of all men -- would have managed the thing better , if it had n't been caught off guard and robbed of its chance .
The young girl paid no attention to the bow , but put out her hand frankly and gave the stranger a friendly shake and said :
Then she marched to the one washstand in the room , tilted her head this way and that before the wreck of a cheap mirror that hung above it , dampened her fingers with her tongue , perfected the circle of a little lock of hair that was pasted against her forehead , then began to busy herself with the slops .
The landlady took her tranquil departure , without commanding either of the young people to vacate the room .
The young man wondered a little that a mother who seemed so honest and respectable should be so thoughtless , and was reaching for his hat , intending to disembarrass the girl of his presence ; but she said :
`` In a shoe factory ; and you call her a young lady ? ''
`` Then all women are ladies ? ''
`` Why , no . ''
`` Well , then , let a man in his right mind try to conceive of Darwin feeling flattered by the notice of a princess .
It 's so grotesque that it -- well , it paralyzes the imagination .
Yet that Memnon was flattered by the notice of that statuette ; he says so -- says so himself .
The system that can make a god disown his godship and profane it -- oh , well , it 's all wrong , it 's all wrong and ought to be abolished , I should say . ''
The mention of Darwin brought on a literary discussion , and this topic roused such enthusiasm in Barrow that he took off his coat and made himself the more free and comfortable for it , and detained him so long that he was still at it when the noisy proprietors of the room came shouting and skylarking in and began to romp , scuffle , wash , and otherwise entertain themselves .
He lingered yet a little longer to offer the hospitalities of his room and his book shelf to Tracy and ask him a personal question or two :
`` What do you work at for your living ? ''
`` Oh , anything -- I mean I would work at , anything I could get to do , but thus far I have n't been able to find an occupation . ''
`` The old man 's been waiting for that .
He would n't have missed that chance for anything . ''
`` No , I 'm not . ''
`` Well , now if you will not think me too curious , how did you come to mount that hat ?
Where 'd you get it ? ''
`` Oh , very well , '' said Barrow , `` the rest of the outfit , is well enough , and while it 's not too conspicuous , it is n't quite like the clothes that anybody else wears .
When you meet your man he'll recognize the rest of his suit .
That 's a mighty embarrassing hat , you know , in a centre of civilization like this .
I do n't believe an angel could get employment in Washington in a halo like that . ''
`` You 've never been out on the plains ? ''
`` You mean Nat Brady ? ''
`` Brady is a tinner .
He 's a young journeyman tinner who was getting along all right till he fell sick and lost his job .
He was very popular before he lost his job ; everybody in the house liked Brady .
The old man was rather especially fond of him , but you know that when a man loses his job and loses his ability to support himself and to pay his way as he goes , it makes a great difference in the way people look at him and feel about him . ''
Finally , Tracy had a happy thought .
He said , `` Why the thing for me to do , of course , is to join a trade-union . ''
`` Oh , yes , the English swallow a good deal better than other people . ''
`` What is it they swallow best ? ''
`` Ai n't it , really ? ''
`` Do n't you know the secret of his birth ? ''
`` His father was a wax-figger . ''
`` Well , as many as I need . ''
`` Do n't trouble the young fellow , I can tell you what would happen . ''
`` The Earl of Rossmore !
Do you know him ? ''
`` Will he though ?
Where 'll you have it sent ? ''
But Tracy did n't propose to do this .
He had acquired the boy's admiration and deferential respect , and he was n't willing to throw these precious things away , a result sure to follow if he should give the address of that boarding house .
So he said again that he would call and get the telegram , and went his way .
The cablegram was actually gone home !
the thought of it gave him an immense uplift .
He walked with a lighter tread .
His heart was full of happiness .
He threw aside all hesitances and confessed to himself that he was glad through and through that he was going to give up this experiment and go back to his home again .
His eagerness to get his father 's answer began to grow , now , and it grew with marvelous celerity , after it began .
He waited an hour , walking about , putting in his time as well as he could , but interested in nothing that came under his eye , and at last he presented himself at the office again and asked if any answer had come yet .
`` Come with me .
I 'll give you a jolly evening . ''
The homeward tramp was accomplished in brooding silence .
It was a silence most grateful to Tracy 's feelings .
He would n't have broken it for anything ; for he was ashamed of himself all the way through to his spine .
He kept saying to himself :
`` What is it you object to in Tompkins 's speech , Barrow ? ''
`` Do you really think he would ? ''
`` This was balm , this was healing , this was rest and peace and comfort . ''
`` But I thought you were opposed to nobilities . ''
`` O , -- er -- why , certainly not . ''
`` And you would n't blame Tompkins , or yourself , or me , or anybody , for accepting an earldom if it was offered ? ''
`` Indeed I would n't . ''
The boarders gathered to the spot , interested .
`` Speak out , '' said Tracy .
`` What is it you want ? ''
`` I refuse to stop and think .
It does n't interest me .
If it interests you , speak out . ''
`` I 've -- been robbed ! ''
Tracy 's spirit was rising again .
He proposed to impress these people :
`` Wait a minute , your lordship , '' said Marsh , bowing low , `` where is your lordship going ? ''
`` Thank your kind heart , madam , but I 've not lost my mind ; and if I can have the mere privilege of stepping to the telegraph office -- ''
A brisk fire of exclamations broke out --
When he had finished his breakfast , Barrow took him to his room , furnished him a pipe , and said cheerily :
`` Come , this is a good sign -- curiosity .
Oh , there 's hope for you yet . ''
`` Well , they are not the achievement of a single intellect , a single talent -- it takes two to do these miracles .
They are collaborations ; the one artist does the figure , the other the accessories .
The figure-artist is a German shoemaker with an untaught passion for art , the other is a simple hearted old Yankee sailor-man whose possibilities are strictly limited to his ship , his cannon and his patch of petrified sea .
They work these things up from twenty-five-cent tintypes ; they get six dollars apiece for them , and they can grind out a couple a day when they strike what they call a boost -- that is , an inspiration . ''
`` I can honestly say I have never seen anything just like them before . ''
-- '' still say to himself again as he had , said a hundred times before , the art of the Saltmarsh-Handel is an art apart , there is nothing in the heavens above or in the earth beneath that resembles it , -- ''
`` Look at his work yourself !
Fourteen portraits in a row .
And no two of them alike . ''
The captain 's face was knocked expressionless by this remark .
It remained quite vacant while he muttered to himself -- '' Technique -- technique -- polytechnique -- pyro-technique ; that 's it , likely -- fireworks too much color . ''
Then he spoke up with serenity and confidence , and said :
`` Unquestionably your confederate -- I mean your -- your fellow-craftsman -- is a great colorist -- ''
`` Why , you said it was your dog . ''
`` Why captain ! ''
`` I guess that must be hearsay . ''
`` My souls but she 's a stunner , that hearse !
The hackman will just go all to pieces when he sees that wo n't he Andy ? ''
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ..
The Unqualified Member from Cherokee Strip was in a state of deep dejection .
For a good while , now , he had been leading a sort of life which was calculated to kill ; for it had consisted in regularly alternating days of brilliant hope and black disappointment .
The brilliant hopes were created by the magician Sellers , and they always promised that now he had got the trick , sure , and would effectively influence that materialized cowboy to call at the Towers before night .
The black disappointments consisted in the persistent and monotonous failure of these prophecies .
`` Very well ; so far , so good .
Now for the basis of the feeling .
It is not that your heart , your affections are concerned ; that is to say , it is not that you want the materializee Itself .
You concede that ? ''
`` Have you ever been in my laboratory ? ''
`` Hang it , that ai n't it .
Somebody 's been singing around here . ''
( momentary outburst of terrific catfight which drowns out one word . )
`` O , thanks , thanks ; you are just as generous as ever .
Ah , it 's the grandest invention of the age ! ''
`` Yes it is so -- but I never -- er -- I do n't quite see why a body -- ''
`` Should want to save it up ?
Well , I 'll tell you .
Do you see this little invention here ?
-- it 's a decomposer -- I call it a decomposer .
I give you my word of honor that if you show me a house that produces a given quantity of sewer-gas in a day , I 'll engage to set up my decomposer there and make that house produce a hundred times that quantity of sewer-gas in less than half an hour . ''
`` But is n't it dangerous ? ''
`` Well , no , not a first rate one .
Polly 's prejudiced , and she wo n't let me put it in here ; but I 'm playing my cards to get it adopted in the President 's house , and then it 'll go -- do n't you doubt it .
I shall not need this one for the present , Washington ; you may take it down to some boarding-house and give it a trial if you like . ''
Washington shuddered slightly at the suggestion , then his face took on a dreamy look and he dropped into a trance of thought .
After a little , Sellers asked him what he was grinding in his mental mill .
`` Well , I 've looked the ground over , and concluded that the methods of the Russian patriots , while good enough considering the way the boys are hampered , are not the best ; at least not the quickest .
They are trying to revolutionize Russia from within ; that 's pretty slow , you know , and liable to interruption all the time , and is full of perils for the workers .
Do you know how Peter the Great started his army ?
He didn't start it on the family premises under the noses of the Strelitzes ; no , he started it away off yonder , privately , -- only just one regiment , you know , and he built to that .
The first thing the Strelitzes knew , the regiment was an army , their position was turned , and they had to take a walk .
Just that little idea made the biggest and worst of all the despotisms the world has seen .
The same idea can unmake it .
I 'm going to prove it .
I 'm going to get out to one side and work my scheme the way Peter did . ''
`` Well , it 's what they say anyway .
But I think , myself , it 's a lie .
And it does n't seem right to slander a whole nation that way , anyhow .
Now , then , you see what the material is , there in Siberia , for a republic . ''
He paused , and his breast began to heave and his eye to burn , under the impulse of strong emotion .
Then his words began to stream forth , with constantly increasing energy and fire , and he rose to his feet as if to give himself larger freedom .
`` The minute I organize that republic , the light of liberty , intelligence , justice , humanity , bursting from it , flooding from it , flaming from it , will concentrate the gaze of the whole astonished world as upon the miracle of a new sun ; Russia 's countless multitudes of slaves will rise up and march , march !
-- eastward , with that great light transfiguring their faces as they come , and far back of them you will see-what will you see ?
-- a vacant throne in an empty land !
It can be done , and by God I will do it ! ''
`` You see , Washington , it is an error which I am by nature not liable to .
Only excitable people , impulsive people , are exposed to it .
But the circumstances of the present case -- I being a democrat by birth and preference , and an aristocrat by inheritance and relish -- ''
`` Tracy -- Howard Tracy . ''
`` But a thousand pardons , dear sir , I am forgetting courtesies due to a guest and stranger .
Let me introduce my friend General Hawkins -- General Hawkins , our new Senator -- Senator from the latest and grandest addition to the radiant galaxy of sovereign States , Cherokee Strip '' -- ( to himself , `` that name will shrivel him up ! ''
-- but it did n't , in the least , and the Colonel resumed the introduction piteously disheartened and amazed ) , -- `` Senator Hawkins , Mr. Howard Tracy , of -- er -- ''
`` Are you an artist ? ''
asked the colonel ; and added to himself , `` now I'm going to catch him . ''
No shuffling , no evasion , no embarrassment , even under this crucial test .
The Colonel was nonplussed .
He led Tracy to a chromo which had suffered damage in a former owner 's hands through being used as a lamp mat , and said , with a flourish of his hand toward the picture --
Meantime the earl and Hawkins were holding a troubled and anxious private consultation .
`` The wrong one ?
How do you account for the clothes ? ''
`` Oh , do n't talk like that , Colonel ; it takes the heart all out of me , and makes me ashamed of the part I am proposing to -- ''
`` Because you are not a financier .
Say he has committed a thousand crimes .
Certainly that 's a low estimate .
By the look of him , even in his unfinished condition , he has committed all of a million .
But call it only a thousand to be perfectly safe ; five thousand reward , multiplied by a thousand , gives us a dead sure cash basis of -- what ?
Five million dollars ! ''
`` But why should n't it escape ? ''
`` Well , I should consider it a pretty serious calamity . ''
`` I wish I knew , but I do n't .
I am clear knocked out by this new detail -- this unforeseen necessity of working a subject down gradually from his condition of ancestor to his ultimate result as posterity .
But I 'll make him hump himself , anyway . ''
Oh , that 's a young artist ; young Englishman , named Tracy ; very promising -- favorite pupil of Hans Christian Andersen or one of the other old masters -- Andersen I 'm pretty sure it is ; he 's going to half-sole some of our old Italian masterpieces .
Been talking to him ? ''
As soon as she was safely out , the Colonel said , in a suppressed voice :
Tracy made slow progress with his work , for his mind wandered a good deal .
Many things were puzzling him .
Finally a light burst upon him all of a sudden -- seemed to , at any rate -- and he said to himself , `` I 've got the clew at last -- this man 's mind is off its balance ; I do n't know how much , but it 's off a point or two , sure ; off enough to explain this mess of perplexities , anyway .
These dreadful chromos which he takes for old masters ; these villainous portraits -- which to his frantic mind represent Rossmores ; the hatchments ; the pompous name of this ramshackle old crib -- Rossmore Towers ; and that odd assertion of his , that I was expected .
How could I be expected ?
that is , Lord Berkeley .
He knows by the papers that that person was burned up in the New Gadsby .
Why , hang it , he really does n't know who he was expecting ; for his talk showed that he was not expecting an Englishman , or yet an artist , yet I answer his requirements notwithstanding .
He seems sufficiently satisfied with me .
Yes , he is a little off ; in fact I am afraid he is a good deal off , poor old gentleman .
But he 's interesting -- all people in about his condition are , I suppose .
I hope he 'll like my work ; I would like to come every day and study him .
And when I write my father -- ah , that hurts !
I must n't get on that subject ; it is n't good for my spirits .
Somebody coming -- I must get to work .
It 's the old gentleman again .
Maybe my clothes are suspicious ; and they are -- for an artist .
If my conscience would allow me to make a change , but that is out of the question .
I wonder what he 's making those passes in the air for , with his hands .
I seem to be the object of them .
Can he be trying to mesmerize me ?
I do n't quite like it .
There 's something uncanny about it . ''
Tracy 's thought flew to his boarding-house , and he answered with decision .
She had put in her idle moments during the last little while back , in designing a particularly rare and capable gown for herself , and this morning she set about making it up ; but she was absent minded , and made an irremediable botch of it .
When she saw what she had done , she knew the reason of it and the meaning of it ; and she put her work away from her and said she would accept the sign .
And from that time forth she came no more away from the Audience Chamber , but remained there and waited .
After luncheon she waited again .
Then a great joy welled up in her heart , for she saw him coming .
So she flew back up stairs thankful , and could hardly wait for him to miss the principal brush , which she had mislaid down there , but knew where she had mislaid it .
However , all in good time the others were called in and couldn't find the brush , and then she was sent for , and she could n't find it herself for some little time ; but then she found it when the others had gone away to hunt in the kitchen and down cellar and in the woodshed , and all those other places where people look for things whose ways they are not familiar with .
So she gave him the brush , and remarked that she ought to have seen that everything was ready for him , but it hadn't seemed necessary , because it was so early that she was n't expecting -- but she stopped there , surprised at herself for what she was saying ; and he felt caught and ashamed , and said to himself , `` I knew my impatience would drag me here before I was expected , and betray me , and that is just what it has done ; she sees straight through me -- and is laughing at me , inside , of course . ''
`` Whatever a man 's age may be , he can reduce it several years by putting a bright-colored flower in his button-hole .
I have often noticed that .
Is that your sex 's reason for wearing a boutonniere ? ''
The painter had his share of the rapture ; he had his six glimpses , and they smote him with waves of pleasure that assaulted him , beat upon him , washed over him deliciously , and drowned out all consciousness of what he was doing with his brush .
So there were six places in his canvas which had to be done over again .
`` We are all that way in the beginning -- all the line , '' said Sellers , undisturbed .
`` We all start as moonfaced fools , then later we tadpole along into horse-faced marvels of intellect and character .
It is by that sign and by that fact that I detect the resemblance here and know this portrait to be genuine and perfect .
Yes , all our family are fools at first . ''
`` This young man seems to meet the hereditary requirement , certainly . ''
`` I mean for explaining it to me .
Go on , please . ''
`` As I was saying , fool is printed all over the face . ''
A person that 's always taking a firm stand about something or other -- kind of a Gibraltar stand , he thinks , for unshakable fidelity and everlastingness -- and then , inside of a little while , he begins to wobble ; no more Gibraltar there ; no , sir , a mighty ordinary commonplace weakling wobbling -- around on stilts .
That 's Lord Berkeley to a dot , you can see it look at that sheep !
But , -- why are you blushing like sunset !
Dear sir , have I unwittingly offended in some way ? ''
Why , look at him -- look at this simpering self-righteous mug !
There is your answer .
It 's the very thing he would think of .
And he would start in to do it , too . ''
`` Some time I want to ask your advice about a little matter , Mr. Tracy .
You see , I 've got that young lord 's remaims -- my goodness , how you jump ! ''
`` Out to dinner , papa . ''
`` If you prefer , I will send word to the Thompsons that I -- ''
`` I 've got it , my love , so that you wo n't be robbed of your holiday and at the same time we 'll be pretty satisfactorily fixed for a good time here .
You send Belle Thompson here -- perfectly beautiful creature , Tracy , perfectly beautiful ; I want you to see that girl ; why , you 'll just go mad ; you 'll go mad inside of a minute ; yes , you send her right along , Gwendolen , and tell her -- why , she 's gone ! ''
He turned -- she was already passing out at the gate .
He muttered , `` I wonder what 's the matter ; I do n't know what her mouth 's doing , but I think her shoulders are swearing .
Well , '' said Sellers blithely to Tracy , `` I shall miss her -- parents always miss the children as soon as they 're out of sight , it's only a natural and wisely ordained partiality -- but you 'll be all right , because Miss Belle will supply the youthful element for you and to your entire content ; and we old people will do our best , too .
We shall have a good enough time .
And you 'll have a chance to get better acquainted with Admiral Hawkins .
That 's a rare character , Mr. Tracy -- one of the rarest and most engaging characters the world has produced .
You 'll find him worth studying .
I 've studied him ever since he was a child and have always found him developing .
I really consider that one of the main things that has enabled me to master the difficult science of character-reading was the livid interest I always felt in that boy and the baffling inscrutabilities of his ways and inspirations . ''
A deep-drawn yard-long sigh from the distraught and dreaming artist , followed by a murmured , `` Miserable , oh , miserable ! ''
Dinner was kept waiting for a while for Miss Thompson , but as Gwendolen had not delivered the invitation to her the waiting did no good , and the household presently went to the meal without her .
Poor old Sellers tried everything his hospitable soul could devise to make the occasion an enjoyable one for the guest , and the guest tried his honest best to be cheery and chatty and happy for the old gentleman 's sake ; in fact all hands worked hard in the interest of a mutual good time , but the thing was a failure from the start ; Tracy 's heart was lead in his bosom , there seemed to be only one prominent feature in the landscape and that was a vacant chair , he could n't drag his mind away from Gwendolen and his hard luck ; consequently his distractions allowed deadly pauses to slip in every now and then when it was his turn to say something , and of course this disease spread to the rest of the conversation -- wherefore , instead of having a breezy sail in sunny waters , as anticipated , everybody was bailing out and praying for land .
What could the matter be ?
Tracy alone could have told , the others could n't even invent a theory .
`` He 's gone , '' she said to herself despairingly , and listlessly opened the door and stepped within .
She was content now ; and out from her happy eyes there went a light that told a secret to another pair of eyes there and got a secret in return .
In just that infinitely small fraction of a second those two great confessions were made , received , and perfectly understood .
All anxiety , apprehension , uncertainty , vanished out of these young people 's hearts and left them filled with a great peace .
He heard Sellers coming , and got himself to rights .
Sellers took a seat , and said :
`` Yes -- not bring him down to date . ''
`` I 'll never forget you for this , Hawkins , '' said the old gentleman in a voice which he found it hard to control .
`` You are making a great sacrifice for me , and one which you can ill afford , but I 'll never forget your generosity , and if I live you shall not suffer for it , be sure of that . ''
`` Lady '' Gwendolen !
The pleasantness of that sound was all gone ; it was an offense to her ear now .
`` I am not through yet .
I am going to purge myself of the last vestiges of artificiality and pretence , and then start fair on your own honest level and be worthy mate to you thenceforth .
My father honestly thinks he is an earl .
Well , leave him his dream , it pleases him and does no one any harm : It was the dream of his ancestors before him .
It has made fools of the house of Sellers for generations , and it made something of a fool of me , but took no deep root .
I am done with it now , and for good .
Forty-eight hours ago I was privately proud of being the daughter of a pinchbeck earl , and thought the proper mate for me must be a man of like degree ; but to-day -- oh , how grateful I am for your love which has healed my sick brain and restored my sanity !
-- I could make oath that no earl's son in all the world -- ''
`` Oh , -- well , but -- but -- ''
`` Let me see .
Yes , my father 's earldom is pure moonshine .
Look at those dreadful things on the wall .
You have of course supposed them to be portraits of his ancestors , earls of Rossmore .
Well , they are not .
They are chromos of distinguished Americans -- all moderns ; but he has carried them back a thousand years by re-labeling them .
Andrew Jackson there , is doing what he can to be the late American earl ; and the newest treasure in the collection is supposed to be the young English heir -- I mean the idiot with the crape ; but in truth it 's a shoemaker , and not Lord Berkeley at all . ''
`` Howard Tracy , are you jealous of that dead man ? ''
Oh , dear no -- but I 've thrown aside our sham one for good . ''
Tracy wrote his father before he sought his bed .
He wrote a letter which he believed would get better treatment than his cablegram received , for it contained what ought to be welcome news ; namely , that he had tried equality and working for a living ; had made a fight which he could find no reason to be ashamed of , and in the matter of earning a living had proved that he was able to do it ; but that on the whole he had arrived at the conclusion that he could not reform the world single-handed , and was willing to retire from the conflict with the fair degree of honor which he had gained , and was also willing to return home and resume his position and be content with it and thankful for it for the future , leaving further experiment of a missionary sort to other young people needing the chastening and quelling persuasions of experience , the only logic sure to convince a diseased imagination and restore it to rugged health .
Then he approached the subject of marriage with the daughter of the American Claimant with a good deal of caution and much painstaking art .
He said praiseful and appreciative things about the girl , but did n't dwell upon that detail or make it prominent .
The thing which he made prominent was the opportunity now so happily afforded , to reconcile York and Lancaster , graft the warring roses upon one stem , and end forever a crying injustice which had already lasted far too long .
One could infer that he had thought this thing all out and chosen this way of making all things fair and right because it was sufficiently fair and considerably wiser than the renunciation-scheme which he had brought with him from England .
One could infer that , but he did n't say it .
In fact the more he read his letter over , the more he got to inferring it himself .
The case was simple .
Sally wanted to believe that Tracy 's preference was disinterested ; so she was always applying little tests of one sort or another , hoping and expecting that they would bring out evidence which would confirm or fortify her belief .
Poor Tracy did not know that these experiments were being made upon him , consequently he walked promptly into all the traps the girl set for him .
These traps consisted in apparently casual references to social distinction , aristocratic title and privilege , and such things .
Often Tracy responded to these references heedlessly and not much caring what he said provided it kept the talk going and prolonged the seance .
He did n't suspect that the girl was watching his face and listening for his words as one who watches the judge 's face and listens for the words which will restore him to home and friends and freedom or shut him away from the sun and human companionship forever .
He did n't suspect that his careless words were being weighed , and so he often delivered sentence of death when it would have been just as handy and all the same to him to pronounce acquittal .
Daily he broke the girl 's heart , nightly he sent her to the rack for sleep .
He couldn't understand it .
Some people would have put this and that together and perceived that the weather never changed until one particular subject was introduced , and that then it always changed .
And they would have looked further , and perceived that that subject was always introduced by the one party , never the other .
They would have argued , then , that this was done for a purpose .
If they could not find out what that purpose was in any simpler or easier way , they would ask .
She disengaged herself from his arms and gave him a look of deep reproach .
`` What have you done ?
I will tell you what you have done .
You have unwittingly revealed -- oh , for the twentieth time , though I could not believe it , would not believe it !
-- that it is not me you love , but that foolish sham my father 's imitation earldom ; and you have broken my heart ! ''
The girl was almost disarmed , for a moment .
Then she flared up again .
She was about to soften again , but his closing remark made her bring her foot down with smart vexation , and she cried out :
`` An earl 's son to do that !
Why , he were a man !
A man to love !
-- oh , more , a man to worship ! ''
The fat was in the fire again .
The girl felt so outraged that it was difficult for her to speak .
This was a hard blow , and staggered him .
He said , dejectedly :
`` Oh , may I ?
God bless you . ''
He was gone ; and none too soon ; her lips were already quivering , and now she broke down .
Through her sobbings her words broke from time to time .
`` Oh , he is gone .
I have lost him , I shall never see him any more .
And he did n't kiss me good-bye ; never even offered to force a kiss from me , and he knowing it was the very , very last , and I expecting he would , and never dreaming he would treat me so after all we have been to each other .
Oh , oh , oh , oh , what shall I do , what shall I do !
He is a dear , poor , miserable , good-hearted , transparent liar and humbug , but oh , I do love him so -- ! ''
After a little she broke into speech again .
`` How dear he is !
and I shall miss him so , I shall miss him so !
Why wo n't he ever think to forge a message and fetch it ?
-- but no , he never will , he never thinks of anything ; he 's so honest and simple it would n't ever occur to him .
Oh , what did possess him to think he could succeed as a fraud -- and he has n't the first requisite except duplicity that I can see .
Oh , dear , I 'll go to bed and give it all up .
Oh , I wish I had told him to come and tell me whenever he did n't get any telegram -- and now it 's all my own fault if I never see him again .
How my eyes must look ! ''
The time kept slipping along -- Hawkins did not return -- Sellers could not venture to wait longer ; so he attacked the bottle himself , and proceeded to note the effects .
Hawkins got back at last ; took one comprehensive glance at the lecturer , and went down and headed off the procession .
The ladies were grieved to hear that the champion had been taken suddenly ill and violently so , but glad to hear that it was hoped he would be out again in a few days .
`` Do n't cry , my child , do n't cry so ; you know your old father did it by mistake and did n't mean a bit of harm ; you know he would n't intentionally do anything to make you ashamed for the world ; you know he was trying to do good and only made the mistake through ignorance , not knowing the right doses and Washington not there to help .
Do n't cry so , dear , it breaks my old heart to see you , and think I 've brought this humiliation on you and you so dear to me and so good .
I wo n't ever do it again , indeed I wo n't ; now be comforted , honey , that 's a good child . ''
But when she was n't on duty at the bedside the crying went on just the same ; then the mother would try to comfort her , and say :
`` Do n't cry , dear , he never meant any harm ; it was all one of those happens that you ca n't guard against when you are trying experiments , that way .
You see I do n't cry .
It 's because I know him so well .
I could never look anybody in the face again if he had got into such an amazing condition as that a-purpose ; but bless you his intention was pure and high , and that makes the act pure , though it was higher than was necessary .
We 're not humiliated , dear , he did it under a noble impulse and we do n't need to be ashamed .
There , do n't cry any more , honey . ''
`` Yes -- Snodgrass .
The other 's his nom de plume . ''
`` Well , you see , his father was a physician , and he -- he -- well he was an idolater of his profession , and he -- well , he was a very eccentric man , and -- ''
`` Yes -- Mrs. Spinal Meningitis Snodgrass . ''
`` I do n't blame you , Sally -- indeed I have n't a word of blame for you for being blinded by -- your affection -- blinded to these minor defects which are so manifest to others who -- ''
Do you call these minor defects ?
What are murder and arson , pray ? ''
`` Sally , it is n't hearsay evidence .
That is the serious part of it .
I knew that family -- personally . ''
`` Oh , how preposterous !
There are not enough people in Cherokee Strip to give anybody a reputation , good or bad .
There is n't a quorum .
Why the whole population consists of a couple of wagon loads of horse thieves . ''
`` Good gracious , then you 're dead ! ''
`` Hang those ashes , I 'm tired of them ; I 'll give them to my father . ''
`` Well , you must have found twenty or thirty thousand dollars in those clothes , in money or certificates of deposit . ''
`` Well , is n't he down stairs getting acquainted with Sally ?
That 's all safe . ''
The Sellerses were to go to England with their new allies for a brief visit , but when it was time to take the train from Washington , the colonel was missing .
Meantime , watch for a sign from me .
Eight days from now , we shall be wide asunder ; for I shall be on the border of the Pacific , and you far out on the Atlantic , approaching England .
That day , if I am alive and my sublime discovery is proved and established , I will send you greeting , and my messenger shall deliver it where you are , in the solitudes of the sea ; for I will waft a vast sun-spot across the disk like drifting smoke , and you will know it for my love-sign , and will say `` Mulberry Sellers throws us a kiss across the universe . ''
A brief though violent thunderstorm which had raged over the city was passing away ; but still , though the rain had ceased more than an hour before , wild piles of dark and coppery clouds , in which a fierce and rayless glow was laboring , gigantically overhung the grotesque and huddled vista of dwarf houses , while in the distance , sheeting high over the low , misty confusion of gables and chimneys , spread a pall of dead , leprous blue , suffused with blotches of dull , glistening yellow , and with black plague-spots of vapor floating and faint lightnings crinkling on its surface .
Thunder , still muttering in the close and sultry air , kept the scared dwellers in the street within , behind their closed shutters ; and all deserted , cowed , dejected , squalid , like poor , stupid , top-heavy things that had felt the wrath of the summer tempest , stood the drenched structures on either side of the narrow and crooked way , ghastly and picturesque , under the giant canopy .
Rain dripped wretchedly in slow drops of melancholy sound from their projecting eaves upon the broken flagging , lay there in pools or trickled into the swollen drains , where the fallen torrent sullenly gurgled on its way to the river .
`` The Brazen Android. ''
THIS BOOK IS INSCRIBED By the Author , In Memory of the Curious Time When We Two WERE MILLIONAIRES FOR TEN DAYS .
This book is merely a personal narrative , and not a pretentious history or a philosophical dissertation .
It is a record of several years of variegated vagabondizing , and its object is rather to help the resting reader while away an idle hour than afflict him with metaphysics , or goad him with science .
Still , there is information in the volume ; information concerning an interesting episode in the history of the Far West , about which no books have been written by persons who were on the ground in person , and saw the happenings of the time with their own eyes .
I allude to the rise , growth and culmination of the silver-mining fever in Nevada -a curious episode , in some respects ; the only one , of its peculiar kind , that has occurred in the land ; and the only one , indeed , that is likely to occur in it .
Yes , take it all around , there is quite a good deal of information in the book .
I regret this very much ; but really it could not be helped : information appears to stew out of me naturally , like the precious ottar of roses out of the otter .
Sometimes it has seemed to me that I would give worlds if I could retain my facts ; but it can not be .
The more I calk up the sources , and the tighter I get , the more I leak wisdom .
Therefore , I can only claim indulgence at the hands of the reader , not justification .
My Brother appointed Secretary of Nevada -- I Envy His Prospective Adventures -- Am Appointed Private Secretary Under Him -- My Contentment Complete -- Packed in One Hour -- Dreams and Visions -- On the Missouri River -- A Bully Boat CHAPTER II .
Arrive at St. Joseph -- Only Twenty-five Pounds Baggage Allowed -- Farewell to Kid Gloves and Dress Coats -- Armed to the Teeth -- The `` Allen '' -- A Cheerful Weapon -- Persuaded to Buy a Mule -- Schedule of Luxuries -- We Leave the `` States '' -- '' Our Coach '' -- Mails for the Indians -- Between a Wink and an Earthquake -- A Modern Sphynx and How She Entertained Us -- A Sociable Heifer CHAPTER III .
`` The Thoroughbrace is Broke '' -- Mails Delivered Properly -- Sleeping Under Difficulties -- A Jackass Rabbit Meditating , and on Business -- A Modern Gulliver -- Sage-brush -- Overcoats as an Article of Diet -- Sad Fate of a Camel -- Warning to Experimenters CHAPTER IV .
Making Our Bed -- Assaults by the Unabridged -- At a Station -- Our Driver a Great and Shining Dignitary -- Strange Place for a Frontyard -- Accommodations -- Double Portraits -- An Heirloom -- Our Worthy Landlord -- '' Fixings and Things '' -- An Exile -- Slumgullion -- A Well Furnished Table -- The Landlord Astonished -- Table Etiquette -- Wild Mexican Mules -- Stage-coaching and Railroading CHAPTER V. New Acquaintances -- The Cayote -- A Dog 's Experiences -- A Disgusted Dog -- The Relatives of the Cayote -- Meals Taken Away from Home CHAPTER VI .
The Division Superintendent -- The Conductor -- The Driver -- One Hundred and Fifty Miles ' Drive Without Sleep -- Teaching a Subordinate -- Our Old Friend Jack and a Pilgrim -- Ben Holliday Compared to Moses CHAPTER VII .
Overland City -- Crossing the Platte -- Bemis 's Buffalo Hunt -- Assault by a Buffalo -- Bemis 's Horse Goes Crazy -- An Impromptu Circus -- A New Departure -- Bemis Finds Refuge in a Tree -- Escapes Finally by a Wonderful Method CHAPTER VIII .
The Pony Express -- Fifty Miles Without Stopping -- '' Here he Comes '' -- Alkali Water -- Riding an Avalanche -- Indian Massacre CHAPTER IX .
Among the Indians -- An Unfair Advantage -- Laying on our Arms -- A Midnight Murder -- Wrath of Outlaws -- A Dangerous , yet Valuable Citizen CHAPTER X .
History of Slade -- A Proposed Fist-fight -- Encounter with Jules -- Paradise of Outlaws -- Slade as Superintendent -- As Executioner -- A Doomed Whisky Seller -- A Prisoner -- A Wife 's Bravery -- An Ancient Enemy Captured -- Enjoying a Luxury -- Hob-nobbing with Slade -- Too Polite -- A Happy Escape CHAPTER XI .
Slade in Montana -- '' On a Spree '' -- In Court -- Attack on a Judge -- Arrest by the Vigilantes -- Turn out of the Miners -- Execution of Slade -- Lamentations of His Wife -- Was Slade a Coward ?
A Mormon Emigrant Train -- The Heart of the Rocky Mountains -- Pure Saleratus -- A Natural Ice-House -- An Entire Inhabitant -- In Sight of `` Eternal Snow '' -- The South Pass -- The Parting Streams -- An Unreliable Letter Carrier -- Meeting of Old Friends -- A Spoiled Watermelon -- Down the Mountain -- A Scene of Desolation -- Lost in the Dark -- Unnecessary Advice -- U.S .
Troops and Indians -- Sublime Spectacle -- Another Delusion Dispelled -- Among the Angels CHAPTER XIII .
Mormons and Gentiles -- Exhilarating Drink , and its Effect on Bemis -- Salt Lake City -- A Great Contrast -- A Mormon Vagrant -- Talk with a Saint -- A Visit to the `` King '' -- A Happy Simile CHAPTER XIV .
Mormon Contractors -- How Mr. Street Astonished Them -- The Case Before Brigham Young , and How he Disposed of it -- Polygamy Viewed from a New Position CHAPTER XV .
A Gentile Den -- Polygamy Discussed -- Favorite Wife and D. 4 -- Hennery for Retired Wives -- Children Need Marking -- Cost of a Gift to No .
6 -- A Penny-whistle Gift and its Effects -- Fathering the Foundlings -- It Resembled Him -- The Family Bedstead CHAPTER XVI The Mormon Bible -- Proofs of its Divinity -- Plagiarism of its Authors -- Story of Nephi -- Wonderful Battle -- Kilkenny Cats Outdone CHAPTER XVII .
Three Sides to all Questions -- Everything `` A Quarter '' -- Shriveled Up -- Emigrants and White Shirts at a Discount -- '' Forty-Niners '' -- Above Par -- Real Happiness CHAPTER XVIII .
Alkali Desert -- Romance of Crossing Dispelled -- Alkali Dust -- Effect on the Mules -- Universal Thanksgiving CHAPTER XIX .
The Digger Indians Compared with the Bushmen of Africa -- Food , Life and Characteristics -- Cowardly Attack on a Stage Coach -- A Brave Driver -- The Noble Red Man CHAPTER XX .
The Great American Desert -- Forty Miles on Bones -- Lakes Without Outlets -- Greely 's Remarkable Ride -- Hank Monk , the Renowned Driver -- Fatal Effects of `` Corking '' a Story -- Bald-Headed Anecdote CHAPTER XXI .
Alkali Dust -- Desolation and Contemplation -- Carson City -- Our Journey Ended -- We are Introduced to Several Citizens -- A Strange Rebuke -- A Washoe Zephyr at Play -- Its Office Hours -- Governor 's Palace -- Government Offices -- Our French Landlady Bridget O'Flannigan -- Shadow Secrets -- Cause for a Disturbance at Once -- The Irish Brigade -- Mrs. O'Flannigan 's Boarders -- The Surveying Expedition -- Escape of the Tarantulas CHAPTER XXII .
The Son of a Nabob -- Start for Lake Tahoe -- Splendor of the Views -- Trip on the Lake -- Camping Out -- Reinvigorating Climate -- Clearing a Tract of Land -- Securing a Title -- Outhouse and Fences CHAPTER XXIII .
A Happy Life -- Lake Tahoe and its Moods -- Transparency of the Waters -- A Catastrophe -- Fire !
-- A Magnificent Spectacle -- Homeless Again -- We take to the Lake -- A Storm -- Return to Carson CHAPTER XXIV .
Resolve to Buy a Horse -- Horsemanship in Carson -- A Temptation -- Advice Given Me Freely -- I Buy the Mexican Plug -- My First Ride -- A Good Bucker -- I Loan the Plug -- Experience of Borrowers -- Attempts to Sell -- Expense of the Experiment -- A Stranger Taken In CHAPTER XXV .
The Mormons in Nevada -- How to Persuade a Loan from Them -- Early History of the Territory -- Silver Mines Discovered -- The New Territorial Government -- A Foreign One and a Poor One -- Its Funny Struggles for Existence -- No Credit , no Cash -- Old Abe Currey Sustains it and its Officers -- Instructions and Vouchers -- An Indian 's Endorsement -- Toll-Gates CHAPTER XXVI .
The Silver Fever -- State of the Market -- Silver Bricks -- Tales Told -- Off for the Humboldt Mines
A New Travelling Companion -- All Full and No Accommodations -- How Captain Nye found Room -- and Caused Our Leaving to be Lamented -- The Uses of Tunnelling -- A Notable Example -- We Go into the `` Claim '' Business and Fail -- At the Bottom
Mono Lake -- Shampooing Made Easy -- Thoughtless Act of Our Dog and the Results -- Lye Water -- Curiosities of the Lake -- Free Hotel -- Some Funny Incidents a Little Overdrawn
A Rheumatic Patient -- Day Dreams -- An Unfortunate Stumble -- I Leave Suddenly -- Another Patient -- Higbie in the Cabin -- Our Balloon Bursted -- Worth Nothing -- Regrets and Explanations -- Our Third Partner
Buck Fanshaw 's Death -- The Cause Thereof -- Preparations for His Burial -- Scotty Briggs the Committee Man -- He Visits the Minister -- Scotty Can't Play His Hand -- The Minister Gets Mixed -- Both Begin to See -- '' All Down Again But Nine '' -- Buck Fanshaw as a Citizen -- How To `` Shook Your Mother '' -- The Funeral -- Scotty Briggs as a Sunday School Teacher
Dick Baker and his Cat -- Tom Quartz 's Peculiarities -- On an Excursion -- Appearance On His Return -- A Prejudiced Cat -- Empty Pockets and a Roving Life
A Saturday Afternoon -- Sandwich Island Girls on a Frolic -- The Poi Merchant -- Grand Gala Day -- A Native Dance -- Church Membership -- Cats and Officials -- An Overwhelming Discovery
Kealakekua Bay -- Death of Captain Cook -- His Monument -- Its Construction -- On Board the Schooner
Native Canoes -- Surf Bathing -- A Sanctuary -- How Built -- The Queen 's Rock -- Curiosities -- Petrified Lava
We were six days going from St. Louis to `` St .
-- a trip that was so dull , and sleepy , and eventless that it has left no more impression on my memory than if its duration had been six minutes instead of that many days .
No record is left in my mind , now , concerning it , but a confused jumble of savage-looking snags , which we deliberately walked over with one wheel or the other ; and of reefs which we butted and butted , and then retired from and climbed over in some softer place ; and of sand-bars which we roosted on occasionally , and rested , and then got out our crutches and sparred over .
In fact , the boat might almost as well have gone to St. Jo .
by land , for she was walking most of the time , anyhow -- climbing over reefs and clambering over snags patiently and laboriously all day long .
The captain said she was a `` bully '' boat , and all she wanted was more `` shear '' and a bigger wheel .
I thought she wanted a pair of stilts , but I had the deep sagacity not to say so .
After supper a woman got in , who lived about fifty miles further on , and we three had to take turns at sitting outside with the driver and conductor .
Apparently she was not a talkative woman .
She would sit there in the gathering twilight and fasten her steadfast eyes on a mosquito rooting into her arm , and slowly she would raise her other hand till she had got his range , and then she would launch a slap at him that would have jolted a cow ; and after that she would sit and contemplate the corpse with tranquil satisfaction -- for she never missed her mosquito ; she was a dead shot at short range .
She never removed a carcase , but left them there for bait .
I sat by this grim Sphynx and watched her kill thirty or forty mosquitoes -- watched her , and waited for her to say something , but she never did .
So I finally opened the conversation myself .
`` What did I understand you to say , madam ? ''
`` By George , the thoroughbrace is broke ! ''
Our party made this specimen `` hump himself , '' as the conductor said .
The secretary started him with a shot from the Colt ; I commenced spitting at him with my weapon ; and all in the same instant the old `` Allen 's '' whole broadside let go with a rattling crash , and it is not putting it too strong to say that the rabbit was frantic !
He dropped his ears , set up his tail , and left for San Francisco at a speed which can only be described as a flash and a vanish !
Long after he was out of sight we could hear him whiz .
This is easily done , for if the reader can imagine a gnarled and venerable live oak-tree reduced to a little shrub two feet-high , with its rough bark , its foliage , its twisted boughs , all complete , he can picture the `` sage-brush '' exactly .
Often , on lazy afternoons in the mountains , I have lain on the ground with my face under a sage-bush , and entertained myself with fancying that the gnats among its foliage were liliputian birds , and that the ants marching and countermarching about its base were liliputian flocks and herds , and myself some vast loafer from Brobdignag waiting to catch a little citizen and eat him .
The hostlers and station-keepers treated the really powerful conductor of the coach merely with the best of what was their idea of civility , but the driver was the only being they bowed down to and worshipped .
How admiringly they would gaze up at him in his high seat as he gloved himself with lingering deliberation , while some happy hostler held the bunch of reins aloft , and waited patiently for him to take it !
And how they would bombard him with glorifying ejaculations as he cracked his long whip and went careering away .
`` But I do n't like mackerel . ''
`` Pass the bread , you son of a skunk ! ''
No , I forget -- skunk was not the word ; it seems to me it was still stronger than that ; I know it was , in fact , but it is gone from my memory , apparently .
However , it is no matter -- probably it was too strong for print , anyway .
It is the landmark in my memory which tells me where I first encountered the vigorous new vernacular of the occidental plains and mountains .
So we flew along all day .
At 2 P.M. the belt of timber that fringes the North Platte and marks its windings through the vast level floor of the Plains came in sight .
At 4 P.M. we crossed a branch of the river , and at 5 P.M. we crossed the Platte itself , and landed at Fort Kearney , fifty-six hours out from St. Joe -- THREE HUNDRED MILES !
Another night of alternate tranquillity and turmoil .
But morning came , by and by .
It was another glad awakening to fresh breezes , vast expanses of level greensward , bright sunlight , an impressive solitude utterly without visible human beings or human habitations , and an atmosphere of such amazing magnifying properties that trees that seemed close at hand were more than three mile away .
We resumed undress uniform , climbed a-top of the flying coach , dangled our legs over the side , shouted occasionally at our frantic mules , merely to see them lay their ears back and scamper faster , tied our hats on to keep our hair from blowing away , and leveled an outlook over the world-wide carpet about us for things new and strange to gaze at .
Even at this day it thrills me through and through to think of the life , the gladness and the wild sense of freedom that used to make the blood dance in my veins on those fine overland mornings !
Next in rank and importance to the division-agent came the `` conductor . ''
His beat was the same length as the agent 's -- two hundred and fifty miles .
He sat with the driver , and ( when necessary ) rode that fearful distance , night and day , without other rest or sleep than what he could get perched thus on top of the flying vehicle .
He had absolute charge of the mails , express matter , passengers and stage , coach , until he delivered them to the next conductor , and got his receipt for them .
Consequently he had to be a man of intelligence , decision and considerable executive ability .
He was usually a quiet , pleasant man , who attended closely to his duties , and was a good deal of a gentleman .
It was not absolutely necessary that the division-agent should be a gentleman , and occasionally he was n't .
But he was always a general in administrative ability , and a bull-dog in courage and determination -- otherwise the chieftainship over the lawless underlings of the overland service would never in any instance have been to him anything but an equivalent for a month of insolence and distress and a bullet and a coffin at the end of it .
There were about sixteen or eighteen conductors on the overland , for there was a daily stage each way , and a conductor on every stage .
Now and then a division-agent was really obliged to shoot a hostler through the head to teach him some simple matter that he could have taught him with a club if his circumstances and surroundings had been different .
But they were snappy , able men , those division-agents , and when they tried to teach a subordinate anything , that subordinate generally `` got it through his head . ''
A great portion of this vast machinery -- these hundreds of men and coaches , and thousands of mules and horses -- was in the hands of Mr. Ben Holliday .
All the western half of the business was in his hands .
This reminds me of an incident of Palestine travel which is pertinent here , so I will transfer it just in the language in which I find it set down in my Holy Land note-book :
`` Oh , by the way !
I came near forgetting .
I have got a thing here to astonish you .
Such a thing as neither you nor any other man ever heard of -- I 've got a cat that will eat cocoanut !
Common green cocoanut -- and not only eat the meat , but drink the milk .
It is so -- I 'll swear to it . ''
`` HERE HE COMES ! ''
We rattled through Scott 's Bluffs Pass , by and by .
It was along here somewhere that we first came across genuine and unmistakable alkali water in the road , and we cordially hailed it as a first-class curiosity , and a thing to be mentioned with eclat in letters to the ignorant at home .
This water gave the road a soapy appearance , and in many places the ground looked as if it had been whitewashed .
I think the strange alkali water excited us as much as any wonder we had come upon yet , and I know we felt very complacent and conceited , and better satisfied with life after we had added it to our list of things which we had seen and some other people had not .
In a small way we were the same sort of simpletons as those who climb unnecessarily the perilous peaks of Mont Blanc and the Matterhorn , and derive no pleasure from it except the reflection that it is n't a common experience .
But once in a while one of those parties trips and comes darting down the long mountain-crags in a sitting posture , making the crusted snow smoke behind him , flitting from bench to bench , and from terrace to terrace , jarring the earth where he strikes , and still glancing and flitting on again , sticking an iceberg into himself every now and then , and tearing his clothes , snatching at things to save himself , taking hold of trees and fetching them along with him , roots and all , starting little rocks now and then , then big boulders , then acres of ice and snow and patches of forest , gathering and still gathering as he goes , adding and still adding to his massed and sweeping grandeur as he nears a three thousand-foot precipice , till at last he waves his hat magnificently and rides into eternity on the back of a raging and tossing avalanche !
This person 's statement were not generally believed .
We fed on that mystery the rest of the night -- what was left of it , for it was waning fast .
It had to remain a present mystery , for all we could get from the conductor in answer to our hails was something that sounded , through the clatter of the wheels , like `` Tell you in the morning ! ''
On one occasion a man who kept a little whisky-shelf at the station did something which angered Slade -- and went and made his will .
A day or two afterward Slade came in and called for some brandy .
The man reached under the counter ( ostensibly to get a bottle -- possibly to get something else ) , but Slade smiled upon him that peculiarly bland and satisfied smile of his which the neighbors had long ago learned to recognize as a death-warrant in disguise , and told him to `` none of that !
-- pass out the high-priced article . ''
So the poor bar-keeper had to turn his back and get the high-priced brandy from the shelf ; and when he faced around again he was looking into the muzzle of Slade 's pistol .
`` And the next instant , '' added my informant , impressively , `` he was one of the deadest men that ever lived . ''
Here was romance , and I sitting face to face with it !
-- looking upon it -- touching it -- hobnobbing with it , as it were !
Here , right by my side , was the actual ogre who , in fights and brawls and various ways , had taken the lives of twenty-six human beings , or all men lied about him !
I suppose I was the proudest stripling that ever traveled to see strange lands and wonderful people .
He was so friendly and so gentle-spoken that I warmed to him in spite of his awful history .
It was hardly possible to realize that this pleasant person was the pitiless scourge of the outlaws , the raw-head-and-bloody-bones the nursing mothers of the mountains terrified their children with .
And to this day I can remember nothing remarkable about Slade except that his face was rather broad across the cheek bones , and that the cheek bones were low and the lips peculiarly thin and straight .
But that was enough to leave something of an effect upon me , for since then I seldom see a face possessing those characteristics without fancying that the owner of it is a dangerous man .
He politely offered to fill it , but although I wanted it , I politely declined .
I was afraid he had not killed anybody that morning , and might be needing diversion .
But still with firm politeness he insisted on filling my cup , and said I had traveled all night and better deserved it than he -- and while he talked he placidly poured the fluid , to the last drop .
I thanked him and drank it , but it gave me no comfort , for I could not feel sure that he would not be sorry , presently , that he had given it away , and proceed to kill me to distract his thoughts from the loss .
But nothing of the kind occurred .
We left him with only twenty-six dead people to account for , and I felt a tranquil satisfaction in the thought that in so judiciously taking care of No .
1 at that breakfast-table I had pleasantly escaped being No .
Slade came out to the coach and saw us off , first ordering certain rearrangements of the mail-bags for our comfort , and then we took leave of him , satisfied that we should hear of him again , some day , and wondering in what connection .
From time to time Slade received warnings from men that he well knew would not deceive him , of the certain end of his conduct .
There was not a moment , for weeks previous to his arrest , in which the public did not expect to hear of some bloody outrage .
The dread of his very name , and the presence of the armed band of hangers-on who followed him alone prevented a resistance which must certainly have ended in the instant murder or mutilation of the opposing party .
Slade had been drunk and `` cutting up '' all night .
He and his companions had made the town a perfect hell .
In the morning , J. M. Fox , the sheriff , met him , arrested him , took him into court and commenced reading a warrant that he had for his arrest , by way of arraignment .
He became uncontrollably furious , and seizing the writ , he tore it up , threw it on the ground and stamped upon it .
A leading member of the committee met Slade , and informed him in the quiet , earnest manner of one who feels the importance of what he is saying : `` Slade , get your horse at once , and go home , or there will be -- -- to pay . ''
Slade started and took a long look , with his dark and piercing eyes , at the gentleman .
`` What do you mean ? ''
`` You have no right to ask me what I mean , '' was the quiet reply , `` get your horse at once , and remember what I tell you . ''
After a short pause he promised to do so , and actually got into the saddle ; but , being still intoxicated , he began calling aloud to one after another of his friends , and at last seemed to have forgotten the warning he had received and became again uproarious , shouting the name of a well-known courtezan in company with those of two men whom he considered heads of the committee , as a sort of challenge ; perhaps , however , as a simple act of bravado .
It seems probable that the intimation of personal danger he had received had not been forgotten entirely ; though fatally for him , he took a foolish way of showing his remembrance of it .
He sought out Alexander Davis , the Judge of the Court , and drawing a cocked Derringer , he presented it at his head , and told him that he should hold him as a hostage for his own safety .
As the judge stood perfectly quiet , and offered no resistance to his captor , no further outrage followed on this score .
Previous to this , on account of the critical state of affairs , the committee had met , and at last resolved to arrest him .
His execution had not been agreed upon , and , at that time , would have been negatived , most assuredly .
A messenger rode down to Nevada to inform the leading men of what was on hand , as it was desirable to show that there was a feeling of unanimity on the subject , all along the gulch .
The body was cut down and carried to the Virginia Hotel , where , in a darkened room , it was scarcely laid out , when the unfortunate and bereaved companion of the deceased arrived , at headlong speed , to find that all was over , and that she was a widow .
Her grief and heart-piercing cries were terrible evidences of the depth of her attachment for her lost husband , and a considerable period elapsed before she could regain the command of her excited feelings .
Just beyond the breakfast-station we overtook a Mormon emigrant train of thirty-three wagons ; and tramping wearily along and driving their herd of loose cows , were dozens of coarse-clad and sad-looking men , women and children , who had walked as they were walking now , day after day for eight lingering weeks , and in that time had compassed the distance our stage had come in eight days and three hours -- seven hundred and ninety-eight miles !
They were dusty and uncombed , hatless , bonnetless and ragged , and they did look so tired !
After breakfast , we bathed in Horse Creek , a ( previously ) limpid , sparkling stream -- an appreciated luxury , for it was very seldom that our furious coach halted long enough for an indulgence of that kind .
We changed horses ten or twelve times in every twenty-four hours -- changed mules , rather -- six mules -- and did it nearly every time in four minutes .
It was lively work .
As our coach rattled up to each station six harnessed mules stepped gayly from the stable ; and in the twinkling of an eye , almost , the old team was out , and the new one in and we off and away again .
We bowled along cheerily , and presently , at the very summit ( though it had been all summit to us , and all equally level , for half an hour or more ) , we came to a spring which spent its water through two outlets and sent it in opposite directions .
The conductor said that one of those streams which we were looking at , was just starting on a journey westward to the Gulf of California and the Pacific Ocean , through hundreds and even thousands of miles of desert solitudes .
He said that the other was just leaving its home among the snow-peaks on a similar journey eastward -- and we knew that long after we should have forgotten the simple rivulet it would still be plodding its patient way down the mountain sides , and canyon-beds , and between the banks of the Yellowstone ; and by and by would join the broad Missouri and flow through unknown plains and deserts and unvisited wildernesses ; and add a long and troubled pilgrimage among snags and wrecks and sandbars ; and enter the Mississippi , touch the wharves of St. Louis and still drift on , traversing shoals and rocky channels , then endless chains of bottomless and ample bends , walled with unbroken forests , then mysterious byways and secret passages among woody islands , then the chained bends again , bordered with wide levels of shining sugar-cane in place of the sombre forests ; then by New Orleans and still other chains of bends -- and finally , after two long months of daily and nightly harassment , excitement , enjoyment , adventure , and awful peril of parched throats , pumps and evaporation , pass the Gulf and enter into its rest upon the bosom of the tropic sea , never to look upon its snow-peaks again or regret them .
I freighted a leaf with a mental message for the friends at home , and dropped it in the stream .
But I put no stamp on it and it was held for postage somewhere .
We recognized each other simultaneously , and hands were grasped as warmly as if no coldness had ever existed between us , and no allusion was made to any .
All animosities were buried and the simple fact of meeting a familiar face in that isolated spot so far from home , was sufficient to make us forget all things but pleasant ones , and we parted again with sincere `` good-bye '' and `` God bless you '' from both .
Echo Canyon is twenty miles long .
It was like a long , smooth , narrow street , with a gradual descending grade , and shut in by enormous perpendicular walls of coarse conglomerate , four hundred feet high in many places , and turreted like mediaeval castles .
This was the most faultless piece of road in the mountains , and the driver said he would `` let his team out . ''
He did , and if the Pacific express trains whiz through there now any faster than we did then in the stage-coach , I envy the passengers the exhilaration of it .
We fairly seemed to pick up our wheels and fly -- and the mail matter was lifted up free from everything and held in solution !
I am not given to exaggeration , and when I say a thing I mean it .
Half an hour or an hour later , we changed horses , and took supper with a Mormon `` Destroying Angel . ''
By and by the Acting Governor of the Territory introduced us to other `` Gentiles , '' and we spent a sociable hour with them .
`` Gentiles '' are people who are not Mormons .
Our fellow-passenger , Bemis , took care of himself , during this part of the evening , and did not make an overpowering success of it , either , for he came into our room in the hotel about eleven o'clock , full of cheerfulness , and talking loosely , disjointedly and indiscriminately , and every now and then tugging out a ragged word by the roots that had more hiccups than syllables in it .
This , together with his hanging his coat on the floor on one side of a chair , and his vest on the floor on the other side , and piling his pants on the floor just in front of the same chair , and then comtemplating the general result with superstitious awe , and finally pronouncing it `` too many for him '' and going to bed with his boots on , led us to fear that something he had eaten had not agreed with him .
Valley tan ( or , at least , one form of valley tan ) is a kind of whisky , or first cousin to it ; is of Mormon invention and manufactured only in Utah .
Tradition says it is made of ( imported ) fire and brimstone .
If I remember rightly no public drinking saloons were allowed in the kingdom by Brigham Young , and no private drinking permitted among the faithful , except they confined themselves to `` valley tan . ''
The armorial crest of my own State consisted of two dissolute bears holding up the head of a dead and gone cask between them and making the pertinent remark , `` UNITED , WE STAND -- ( hic ! )
-- DIVIDED , WE FALL . ''
It was always too figurative for the author of this book .
But the Mormon crest was easy .
And it was simple , unostentatious , and fitted like a glove .
It was a representation of a GOLDEN BEEHIVE , with the bees all at work !
The city lies in the edge of a level plain as broad as the State of Connecticut , and crouches close down to the ground under a curving wall of mighty mountains whose heads are hidden in the clouds , and whose shoulders bear relics of the snows of winter all the summer long .
And the next most interesting thing is to sit and listen to these Gentiles talk about polygamy ; and how some portly old frog of an elder , or a bishop , marries a girl -- likes her , marries her sister -- likes her , marries another sister -- likes her , takes another -- likes her , marries her mother -- likes her , marries her father , grandfather , great grandfather , and then comes back hungry and asks for more .
And how the pert young thing of eleven will chance to be the favorite wife and her own venerable grandmother have to rank away down toward D 4 in their mutual husband's esteem , and have to sleep in the kitchen , as like as not .
And how this dreadful sort of thing , this hiving together in one foul nest of mother and daughters , and the making a young daughter superior to her own mother in rank and authority , are things which Mormon women submit to because their religion teaches them that the more wives a man has on earth , and the more children he rears , the higher the place they will all have in the world to come -- and the warmer , maybe , though they do not seem to say anything about that .
According to these Gentile friends of ours , Brigham Young 's harem contains twenty or thirty wives .
They said that some of them had grown old and gone out of active service , but were comfortably housed and cared for in the henery -- or the Lion House , as it is strangely named .
Along with each wife were her children -- fifty altogether .
The house was perfectly quiet and orderly , when the children were still .
They all took their meals in one room , and a happy and home-like sight it was pronounced to be .
None of our party got an opportunity to take dinner with Mr. Young , but a Gentile by the name of Johnson professed to have enjoyed a sociable breakfast in the Lion House .
He gave a preposterous account of the `` calling of the roll , '' and other preliminaries , and the carnage that ensued when the buckwheat cakes came in .
But he embellished rather too much .
He said that Mr. Young told him several smart sayings of certain of his `` two-year-olds , '' observing with some pride that for many years he had been the heaviest contributor in that line to one of the Eastern magazines ; and then he wanted to show Mr. Johnson one of the pets that had said the last good thing , but he could not find the child .
He searched the faces of the children in detail , but could not decide which one it was .
Finally he gave it up with a sigh and said :
All men have heard of the Mormon Bible , but few except the `` elect '' have seen it , or , at least , taken the trouble to read it .
I brought away a copy from Salt Lake .
The book is a curiosity to me , it is such a pretentious affair , and yet so `` slow , '' so sleepy ; such an insipid mess of inspiration .
It is chloroform in print .
If Joseph Smith composed this book , the act was a miracle -- keeping awake while he did it was , at any rate .
If he , according to tradition , merely translated it from certain ancient and mysteriously-engraved plates of copper , which he declares he found under a stone , in an out-of-the-way locality , the work of translating was equally a miracle , for the same reason .
And when I am far on the road to conviction , and eight men , be they grammatical or otherwise , come forward and tell me that they have seen the plates too ; and not only seen those plates but `` hefted '' them , I am convinced .
I could not feel more satisfied and at rest if the entire Whitmer family had testified .
Nephi tried to stop these scandalous proceedings ; but they tied him neck and heels , and went on with their lark .
But observe how Nephi the prophet circumvented them by the aid of the invisible powers :
And it came to pass that Jesus spake unto them , and bade them arise .
And they arose from the earth , and He said unto them , Blessed are ye because of your faith .
And now behold , My joy is full .
And when He had said these words , He wept , and the multitude bear record of it , and He took their little children , one by one , and blessed them , and prayed unto the Father for them .
And when He had done this He wept again , and He spake unto the multitude , and saith unto them , Behold your little ones .
And as they looked to behold , they cast their eyes toward heaven , and they saw the heavens open , and they saw angels descending out of heaven as it were , in the midst of fire ; and they came down and encircled those little ones about , and they were encircled about with fire ; and the angels did minister unto them , and the multitude did see and hear and bear record ; and they know that their record is true , for they all of them did see and hear , every man for himself ; and they were in number about two thousand and five hundred souls ; and they did consist of men , women , and children .
And it came to pass that Coriantumr wrote again an epistle unto Shiz , desiring that he would not come again to battle , but that he would take the kingdom , and spare the lives of the people .
But behold , the Spirit of the Lord had ceased striving with them , and Satan had full power over the hearts of the people , for they were given up unto the hardness of their hearts , and the blindness of their minds that they might be destroyed ; wherefore they went again to battle .
And it came to pass that they fought all that day , and when the night came they slept upon their swords ; and on the morrow they fought even until the night came ; and when the night came they were drunken with anger , even as a man who is drunken with wine ; and they slept again upon their swords ; and on the morrow they fought again ; and when the night came they had all fallen by the sword save it were fifty and two of the people of Coriantumr , and sixty and nine of the people of Shiz .
And it came to pass that they slept upon their swords that night , and on the morrow they fought again , and they contended in their mights with their swords , and with their shields , all that day ; and when the night came there were thirty and two of the people of Shiz , and twenty and seven of the people of Coriantumr .
I left Great Salt Lake a good deal confused as to what state of things existed there -- and sometimes even questioning in my own mind whether a state of things existed there at all or not .
But presently I remembered with a lightening sense of relief that we had learned two or three trivial things there which we could be certain of ; and so the two days were not wholly lost .
For instance , we had learned that we were at last in a pioneer land , in absolute and tangible reality .
But people easily get reconciled to big money and big prices , and fond and vain of both -- it is a descent to little coins and cheap prices that is hardest to bear and slowest to take hold upon one 's toleration .
After a month 's acquaintance with the twenty-five cent minimum , the average human being is ready to blush every time he thinks of his despicable five-cent days .
How sunburnt with blushes I used to get in gaudy Nevada , every time I thought of my first financial experience in Salt Lake .
It was on this wise ( which is a favorite expression of great authors , and a very neat one , too , but I never hear anybody say on this wise when they are talking ) .
A young half-breed with a complexion like a yellow-jacket asked me if I would have my boots blacked .
It was at the Salt Lake House the morning after we arrived .
I said yes , and he blacked them .
Then I handed him a silver five-cent piece , with the benevolent air of a person who is conferring wealth and blessedness upon poverty and suffering .
The yellow-jacket took it with what I judged to be suppressed emotion , and laid it reverently down in the middle of his broad hand .
Then he began to contemplate it , much as a philosopher contemplates a gnat 's ear in the ample field of his microscope .
Several mountaineers , teamsters , stage-drivers , etc.
, drew near and dropped into the tableau and fell to surveying the money with that attractive indifference to formality which is noticeable in the hardy pioneer .
Presently the yellow-jacket handed the half dime back to me and told me I ought to keep my money in my pocket-book instead of in my soul , and then I would n't get it cramped and shriveled up so !
Poor thing , they are making fun of his hat ; and the cut of his New York coat ; and his conscientiousness about his grammar ; and his feeble profanity ; and his consumingly ludicrous ignorance of ores , shafts , tunnels , and other things which he never saw before , and never felt enough interest in to read about .
And all the time that he is thinking what a sad fate it is to be exiled to that far country , that lonely land , the citizens around him are looking down on him with a blighting compassion because he is an `` emigrant '' instead of that proudest and blessedest creature that exists on all the earth , a `` FORTY-NINER . ''
And it was comfort in those succeeding days to sit up and contemplate the majestic panorama of mountains and valleys spread out below us and eat ham and hard boiled eggs while our spiritual natures revelled alternately in rainbows , thunderstorms , and peerless sunsets .
Nothing helps scenery like ham and eggs .
Ham and eggs , and after these a pipe -- an old , rank , delicious pipe -- ham and eggs and scenery , a `` down grade , '' a flying coach , a fragrant pipe and a contented heart -- these make happiness .
It is what all the ages have struggled for .
This enthusiasm , this stern thirst for adventure , wilted under the sultry August sun and did not last above one hour .
One poor little hour -- and then we were ashamed that we had `` gushed '' so .
The poetry was all in the anticipation -- there is none in the reality .
Imagine a vast , waveless ocean stricken dead and turned to ashes ; imagine this solemn waste tufted with ash-dusted sage-bushes ; imagine the lifeless silence and solitude that belong to such a place ; imagine a coach , creeping like a bug through the midst of this shoreless level , and sending up tumbled volumes of dust as if it were a bug that went by steam ; imagine this aching monotony of toiling and plowing kept up hour after hour , and the shore still as far away as ever , apparently ; imagine team , driver , coach and passengers so deeply coated with ashes that they are all one colorless color ; imagine ash-drifts roosting above moustaches and eyebrows like snow accumulations on boughs and bushes .
This is the reality of it .
Two miles and a quarter an hour for ten hours -- that was what we accomplished .
It was hard to bring the comprehension away down to such a snail-pace as that , when we had been used to making eight and ten miles an hour .
When we reached the station on the farther verge of the desert , we were glad , for the first time , that the dictionary was along , because we never could have found language to tell how glad we were , in any sort of dictionary but an unabridged one with pictures in it .
But there could not have been found in a whole library of dictionaries language sufficient to tell how tired those mules were after their twenty-three mile pull .
To try to give the reader an idea of how thirsty they were , would be to `` gild refined gold or paint the lily . ''
On the morning of the sixteenth day out from St. Joseph we arrived at the entrance of Rocky Canyon , two hundred and fifty miles from Salt Lake .
It was along in this wild country somewhere , and far from any habitation of white men , except the stage stations , that we came across the wretchedest type of mankind I have ever seen , up to this writing .
I refer to the Goshoot Indians .
From what we could see and all we could learn , they are very considerably inferior to even the despised Digger Indians of California ; inferior to all races of savages on our continent ; inferior to even the Terra del Fuegans ; inferior to the Hottentots , and actually inferior in some respects to the Kytches of Africa .
Indeed , I have been obliged to look the bulky volumes of Wood 's `` Uncivilized Races of Men '' clear through in order to find a savage tribe degraded enough to take rank with the Goshoots .
I find but one people fairly open to that shameful verdict .
It is the Bosjesmans ( Bushmen ) of South Africa .
Such of the Goshoots as we saw , along the road and hanging about the stations , were small , lean , `` scrawny '' creatures ; in complexion a dull black like the ordinary American negro ; their faces and hands bearing dirt which they had been hoarding and accumulating for months , years , and even generations , according to the age of the proprietor ; a silent , sneaking , treacherous looking race ; taking note of everything , covertly , like all the other `` Noble Red Men '' that we ( do not ) read about , and betraying no sign in their countenances ; indolent , everlastingly patient and tireless , like all other Indians ; prideless beggars -- for if the beggar instinct were left out of an Indian he would not `` go , '' any more than a clock without a pendulum ; hungry , always hungry , and yet never refusing anything that a hog would eat , though often eating what a hog would decline ; hunters , but having no higher ambition than to kill and eat jack-ass rabbits , crickets and grasshoppers , and embezzle carrion from the buzzards and cayotes ; savages who , when asked if they have the common Indian belief in a Great Spirit show a something which almost amounts to emotion , thinking whiskey is referred to ; a thin , scattering race of almost naked black children , these Goshoots are , who produce nothing at all , and have no villages , and no gatherings together into strictly defined tribal communities -- a people whose only shelter is a rag cast on a bush to keep off a portion of the snow , and yet who inhabit one of the most rocky , wintry , repulsive wastes that our country or any other can exhibit .
At the border of the Desert lies Carson Lake , or The `` Sink '' of the Carson , a shallow , melancholy sheet of water some eighty or a hundred miles in circumference .
Carson River empties into it and is lost -- sinks mysteriously into the earth and never appears in the light of the sun again -- for the lake has no outlet whatever .
Stage-coaching on the Overland is no more , and stage drivers are a race defunct .
I wonder if they bequeathed that bald-headed anecdote to their successors , the railroad brakemen and conductors , and if these latter still persecute the helpless passenger with it until he concludes , as did many a tourist of other days , that the real grandeurs of the Pacific coast are not Yo Semite and the Big Trees , but Hank Monk and his adventure with Horace Greeley .
[ And what makes that worn anecdote the more aggravating , is , that the adventure it celebrates never occurred .
If it were a good anecdote , that seeming demerit would be its chiefest virtue , for creative power belongs to greatness ; but what ought to be done to a man who would wantonly contrive so flat a one as this ?
If I were to suggest what ought to be done to him , I should be called extravagant -- but what does the sixteenth chapter of Daniel say ?
This was all we saw that day , for it was two o'clock , now , and according to custom the daily `` Washoe Zephyr '' set in ; a soaring dust-drift about the size of the United States set up edgewise came with it , and the capital of Nevada Territory disappeared from view .
It was something to see that much .
I could have seen more , if I could have kept the dust out of my eyes .
The `` Washoe Zephyr '' ( Washoe is a pet nickname for Nevada ) is a peculiar Scriptural wind , in that no man knoweth `` whence it cometh . ''
That is to say , where it originates .
It comes right over the mountains from the West , but when one crosses the ridge he does not find any of it on the other side !
It probably is manufactured on the mountain-top for the occasion , and starts from there .
It is a pretty regular wind , in the summer time .
Its office hours are from two in the afternoon till two the next morning ; and anybody venturing abroad during those twelve hours needs to allow for the wind or he will bring up a mile or two to leeward of the point he is aiming at .
And yet the first complaint a Washoe visitor to San Francisco makes , is that the sea winds blow so , there !
There is a good deal of human nature in that .
We found the state palace of the Governor of Nevada Territory to consist of a white frame one-story house with two small rooms in it and a stanchion supported shed in front -- for grandeur -- it compelled the respect of the citizen and inspired the Indians with awe .
The newly arrived Chief and Associate Justices of the Territory , and other machinery of the government , were domiciled with less splendor .
They were boarding around privately , and had their offices in their bedrooms .
It was a jolly company , the fourteen .
They were principally voluntary camp-followers of the Governor , who had joined his retinue by their own election at New York and San Francisco and came along , feeling that in the scuffle for little territorial crumbs and offices they could not make their condition more precarious than it was , and might reasonably expect to make it better .
They were popularly known as the `` Irish Brigade , '' though there were only four or five Irishmen among all the Governor's retainers .
`` To the Atlantic Ocean , blast you !
-- and then bridge it and go on ! ''
`` I 've got him !
I 've got him ! ''
[ Pause , and probable change of circumstances . ]
`` No , he 's got me !
Oh , ai n't they never going to fetch a lantern ! ''
We found the small skiff belonging to the Brigade boys , and without loss of time set out across a deep bend of the lake toward the landmarks that signified the locality of the camp .
I got Johnny to row -- not because I mind exertion myself , but because it makes me sick to ride backwards when I am at work .
A three-mile pull brought us to the camp just as the night fell , and we stepped ashore very tired and wolfishly hungry .
In a `` cache '' among the rocks we found the provisions and the cooking utensils , and then , all fatigued as I was , I sat down on a boulder and superintended while Johnny gathered wood and cooked supper .
Many a man who had gone through what I had , would have wanted to rest .
We slept in the sand close to the water 's edge , between two protecting boulders , which took care of the stormy night-winds for us .
We never took any paregoric to make us sleep .
At the first break of dawn we were always up and running foot-races to tone down excess of physical vigor and exuberance of spirits .
That is , Johnny was -- but I held his hat .
While smoking the pipe of peace after breakfast we watched the sentinel peaks put on the glory of the sun , and followed the conquering light as it swept down among the shadows , and set the captive crags and forests free .
We watched the tinted pictures grow and brighten upon the water till every little detail of forest , precipice and pinnacle was wrought in and finished , and the miracle of the enchanter complete .
Then to `` business . ''
Within half an hour all before us was a tossing , blinding tempest of flame !
It went surging up adjacent ridges -- surmounted them and disappeared in the canons beyond -- burst into view upon higher and farther ridges , presently -- shed a grander illumination abroad , and dove again -- flamed out again , directly , higher and still higher up the mountain-side -- threw out skirmishing parties of fire here and there , and sent them trailing their crimson spirals away among remote ramparts and ribs and gorges , till as far as the eye could reach the lofty mountain-fronts were webbed as it were with a tangled network of red lava streams .
Away across the water the crags and domes were lit with a ruddy glare , and the firmament above was a reflected hell !
Every feature of the spectacle was repeated in the glowing mirror of the lake !
Both pictures were sublime , both were beautiful ; but that in the lake had a bewildering richness about it that enchanted the eye and held it with the stronger fascination .
Hunger asserted itself now , but there was nothing to eat .
The provisions were all cooked , no doubt , but we did not go to see .
We were homeless wanderers again , without any property .
Our fence was gone , our house burned down ; no insurance .
Our pine forest was well scorched , the dead trees all burned up , and our broad acres of manzanita swept away .
Our blankets were on our usual sand-bed , however , and so we lay down and went to sleep .
The next morning we started back to the old camp , but while out a long way from shore , so great a storm came up that we dared not try to land .
So I baled out the seas we shipped , and Johnny pulled heavily through the billows till we had reached a point three or four miles beyond the camp .
The storm was increasing , and it became evident that it was better to take the hazard of beaching the boat than go down in a hundred fathoms of water ; so we ran in , with tall white-caps following , and I sat down in the stern-sheets and pointed her head-on to the shore .
The instant the bow struck , a wave came over the stern that washed crew and cargo ashore , and saved a deal of trouble .
We shivered in the lee of a boulder all the rest of the day , and froze all the night through .
In the morning the tempest had gone down , and we paddled down to the camp without any unnecessary delay .
We were so starved that we ate up the rest of the Brigade 's provisions , and then set out to Carson to tell them about it and ask their forgiveness .
It was accorded , upon payment of damages .
`` Going , going , going -- at twent -- ty -- four dollars and a half , gen -- ''
Such panting and blowing !
Such spreading and contracting of the red equine nostrils , and glaring of the wild equine eye !
But was the imperial beast subjugated ?
Indeed he was not .
Now whoever has had the luck to ride a real Mexican plug will recognize the animal depicted in this chapter , and hardly consider him exaggerated -- but the uninitiated will feel justified in regarding his portrait as a fancy sketch , perhaps .
Originally , Nevada was a part of Utah and was called Carson county ; and a pretty large county it was , too .
Certain of its valleys produced no end of hay , and this attracted small colonies of Mormon stock-raisers and farmers to them .
A few orthodox Americans straggled in from California , but no love was lost between the two classes of colonists .
There was little or no friendly intercourse ; each party staid to itself .
The Mormons were largely in the majority , and had the additional advantage of being peculiarly under the protection of the Mormon government of the Territory .
Therefore they could afford to be distant , and even peremptory toward their neighbors .
One of the traditions of Carson Valley illustrates the condition of things that prevailed at the time I speak of .
The hired girl of one of the American families was Irish , and a Catholic ; yet it was noted with surprise that she was the only person outside of the Mormon ring who could get favors from the Mormons .
She asked kindnesses of them often , and always got them .
It was a mystery to everybody .
But one day as she was passing out at the door , a large bowie knife dropped from under her apron , and when her mistress asked for an explanation she observed that she was going out to `` borry a wash-tub from the Mormons ! ''
In 1858 silver lodes were discovered in `` Carson County , '' and then the aspect of things changed .
Californians began to flock in , and the American element was soon in the majority .
Allegiance to Brigham Young and Utah was renounced , and a temporary territorial government for `` Washoe '' was instituted by the citizens .
Governor Roop was the first and only chief magistrate of it .
In due course of time Congress passed a bill to organize `` Nevada Territory , '' and President Lincoln sent out Governor Nye to supplant Roop .
Let me state one or two things which will help the reader to better comprehend certain items in the above .
At this time , our near neighbor , Gold Hill , was the most successful silver mining locality in Nevada .
It was from there that more than half the daily shipments of silver bricks came .
`` Very rich '' ( and scarce ) Gold Hill ore yielded from $ 100 to $ 400 to the ton ; but the usual yield was only $ 20 to $ 40 per ton -- that is to say , each hundred pounds of ore yielded from one dollar to two dollars .
But the reader will perceive by the above extract , that in Humboldt from one fourth to nearly half the mass was silver !
That is to say , every one hundred pounds of the ore had from two hundred dollars up to about three hundred and fifty in it .
Some days later this same correspondent wrote :
We made seven miles , and camped in the desert .
Young Clagett ( now member of Congress from Montana ) unharnessed and fed and watered the horses ; Oliphant and I cut sagebrush , built the fire and brought water to cook with ; and old Mr. Ballou the blacksmith did the cooking .
This division of labor , and this appointment , was adhered to throughout the journey .
We had no tent , and so we slept under our blankets in the open plain .
We were so tired that we slept soundly .
We camped two days in the neighborhood of the `` Sink of the Humboldt . ''
We tried to use the strong alkaline water of the Sink , but it would not answer .
It was like drinking lye , and not weak lye , either .
It left a taste in the mouth , bitter and every way execrable , and a burning in the stomach that was very uncomfortable .
We put molasses in it , but that helped it very little ; we added a pickle , yet the alkali was the prominent taste and so it was unfit for drinking .
The boys were as hungry as usual , but I could eat nothing .
Neither could I talk .
I was full of dreams and far away .
Their conversation interrupted the flow of my fancy somewhat , and annoyed me a little , too .
I despised the sordid and commonplace things they talked about .
But as they proceeded , it began to amuse me .
It grew to be rare fun to hear them planning their poor little economies and sighing over possible privations and distresses when a gold mine , all our own , lay within sight of the cabin and I could point it out at any moment .
Smothered hilarity began to oppress me , presently .
It was hard to resist the impulse to burst out with exultation and reveal everything ; but I did resist .
I said within myself that I would filter the great news through my lips calmly and be serene as a summer morning while I watched its effect in their faces .
`` So you think the prospect is pretty poor ? ''
`` I should say he was as crazy as a loon ! ''
said old Ballou , but wild with excitement , nevertheless .
There was an eager scramble for it , and a closing of heads together over it under the candle-light .
Then old Ballou said :
So vanished my dream .
So melted my wealth away .
So toppled my airy castle to the earth and left me stricken and forlorn .
Moralizing , I observed , then , that `` all that glitters is not gold . ''
That was the weariest work !
One of us held the iron drill in its place and another would strike with an eight-pound sledge -- it was like driving nails on a large scale .
In the course of an hour or two the drill would reach a depth of two or three feet , making a hole a couple of inches in diameter .
We would put in a charge of powder , insert half a yard of fuse , pour in sand and gravel and ram it down , then light the fuse and run .
When the explosion came and the rocks and smoke shot into the air , we would go back and find about a bushel of that hard , rebellious quartz jolted out .
One week of this satisfied me .
Clagget and Oliphant followed .
Our shaft was only twelve feet deep .
We decided that a tunnel was the thing we wanted .
So we went down the mountain side and worked a week ; at the end of which time we had blasted a tunnel about deep enough to hide a hogshead in , and judged that about nine hundred feet more of it would reach the ledge .
I resigned again , and the other boys only held out one day longer .
We decided that a tunnel was not what we wanted .
We wanted a ledge that was already `` developed . ''
There were none in the camp .
Meantime the camp was filling up with people , and there was a constantly growing excitement about our Humboldt mines .
We fell victims to the epidemic and strained every nerve to acquire more `` feet . ''
We prospected and took up new claims , put `` notices '' on them and gave them grandiloquent names .
We traded some of our `` feet '' for `` feet '' in other people 's claims .
In a little while we owned largely in the `` Gray Eagle , '' the `` Columbiana , '' the `` Branch Mint , '' the `` Maria Jane , '' the `` Universe , '' the `` Root-Hog-or-Die , '' the `` Samson and Delilah , '' the `` Treasure Trove , '' the `` Golconda , '' the `` Sultana , '' the `` Boomerang , '' the `` Great Republic , '' the `` Grand Mogul , '' and fifty other `` mines '' that had never been molested by a shovel or scratched with a pick .
We had not less than thirty thousand `` feet '' apiece in the `` richest mines on earth '' as the frenzied cant phrased it -- and were in debt to the butcher .
We were stark mad with excitement -- drunk with happiness -- smothered under mountains of prospective wealth -- arrogantly compassionate toward the plodding millions who knew not our marvellous canyon -- but our credit was not good at the grocer 's .
I met men at every turn who owned from one thousand to thirty thousand `` feet '' in undeveloped silver mines , every single foot of which they believed would shortly be worth from fifty to a thousand dollars -- and as often as any other way they were men who had not twenty-five dollars in the world .
Every man you met had his new mine to boast of , and his `` specimens '' ready ; and if the opportunity offered , he would infallibly back you into a corner and offer as a favor to you , not to him , to part with just a few feet in the `` Golden Age , '' or the `` Sarah Jane , '' or some other unknown stack of croppings , for money enough to get a `` square meal '' with , as the phrase went .
And you were never to reveal that he had made you the offer at such a ruinous price , for it was only out of friendship for you that he was willing to make the sacrifice .
Then he would fish a piece of rock out of his pocket , and after looking mysteriously around as if he feared he might be waylaid and robbed if caught with such wealth in his possession , he would dab the rock against his tongue , clap an eyeglass to it , and exclaim :
And does the reader remember , a few pages back , the calculations , of a quoted correspondent , whereby the ore is to be mined and shipped all the way to England , the metals extracted , and the gold and silver contents received back by the miners as clear profit , the copper , antimony and other things in the ore being sufficient to pay all the expenses incurred ?
Everybody 's head was full of such `` calculations '' as those -- such raving insanity , rather .
Few people took work into their calculations -- or outlay of money either ; except the work and expenditures of other people .
We walked out , after supper , and visited a small Indian camp in the vicinity .
The Indians were in a great hurry about something , and were packing up and getting away as fast as they could .
In their broken English they said , `` By'm-by , heap water ! ''
and by the help of signs made us understand that in their opinion a flood was coming .
The weather was perfectly clear , and this was not the rainy season .
There was about a foot of water in the insignificant river -- or maybe two feet ; the stream was not wider than a back alley in a village , and its banks were scarcely higher than a man 's head .
At eleven o'clock only the roof of the little log stable was out of water , and our inn was on an island in mid-ocean .
As far as the eye could reach , in the moonlight , there was no desert visible , but only a level waste of shining water .
The Indians were true prophets , but how did they get their information ?
I am not able to answer the question .
We remained cooped up eight days and nights with that curious crew .
Swearing , drinking and card playing were the order of the day , and occasionally a fight was thrown in for variety .
Dirt and vermin -- but let us forget those features ; their profusion is simply inconceivable -- it is better that they remain so .
`` I reckon the Pennsylvania 'lection -- ''
`` I was only goin ' to say -- ''
`` You was only goin ' to say .
You was only goin ' to say -- what was you goin ' to say ?
That 's what I want to know .
I want to know wha -- what you ( 'ic ) what you know about Pennsylvania , since you're makin ' yourself so d -- -d free .
Answer me that ! ''
`` Why , I never said nothing , Mr. Arkansas .
You do n't give a man no chance .
I was only goin ' to say that Pennsylvania was goin ' to have an election next week -- that was all -- that was everything I was goin ' to say -- I wish I may never stir if it was n't . ''
They embraced , with drunken affection on the landlord 's part and unresponsive toleration on the part of Arkansas , who , bribed by a drink , was disappointed of his prey once more .
But the foolish landlord was so happy to have escaped butchery , that he went on talking when he ought to have marched himself out of danger .
The consequence was that Arkansas shortly began to glower upon him dangerously , and presently said :
`` No -- nothing . ''
With that , Arkansas began to shoot , and the landlord to clamber over benches , men and every sort of obstacle in a frantic desire to escape .
In the midst of the wild hubbub the landlord crashed through a glass door , and as Arkansas charged after him the landlord 's wife suddenly appeared in the doorway and confronted the desperado with a pair of scissors !
Her fury was magnificent .
With head erect and flashing eye she stood a moment and then advanced , with her weapon raised .
The astonished ruffian hesitated , and then fell back a step .
She backed him step by step into the middle of the bar-room , and then , while the wondering crowd closed up and gazed , she gave him such another tongue-lashing as never a cowed and shamefaced braggart got before , perhaps !
As she finished and retired victorious , a roar of applause shook the house , and every man ordered `` drinks for the crowd '' in one and the same breath .
This was distressing , but it paled before a greater horror -- the horses were gone !
I had been appointed to hold the bridles , but in my absorbing anxiety over the pistol experiment I had unconsciously dropped them and the released animals had walked off in the storm .
It was useless to try to follow them , for their footfalls could make no sound , and one could pass within two yards of the creatures and never see them .
We gave them up without an effort at recovering them , and cursed the lying books that said horses would stay by their masters for protection and companionship in a distressful time like ours .
We were miserable enough , before ; we felt still more forlorn , now .
Patiently , but with blighted hope , we broke more sticks and piled them , and once more the Prussian shot them into annihilation .
Plainly , to light a fire with a pistol was an art requiring practice and experience , and the middle of a desert at midnight in a snow-storm was not a good place or time for the acquiring of the accomplishment .
We gave it up and tried the other .
Each man took a couple of sticks and fell to chafing them together .
At the end of half an hour we were thoroughly chilled , and so were the sticks .
We bitterly execrated the Indians , the hunters and the books that had betrayed us with the silly device , and wondered dismally what was next to be done .
At this critical moment Mr. Ballou fished out four matches from the rubbish of an overlooked pocket .
To have found four gold bars would have seemed poor and cheap good luck compared to this .
For two hours we sat apart in the station and ruminated in disgust .
The mystery was gone , now , and it was plain enough why the horses had deserted us .
Without a doubt they were under that shed a quarter of a minute after they had left us , and they must have overheard and enjoyed all our confessions and lamentations .
General Buncombe was shipped out to Nevada in the invoice of Territorial officers , to be United States Attorney .
He considered himself a lawyer of parts , and he very much wanted an opportunity to manifest it -- partly for the pure gratification of it and partly because his salary was Territorially meagre ( which is a strong expression ) .
Now the older citizens of a new territory look down upon the rest of the world with a calm , benevolent compassion , as long as it keeps out of the way -- when it gets in the way they snub it .
Sometimes this latter takes the shape of a practical joke .
`` And when I reminded him , '' said Hyde , weeping , `` that it was on top of my ranch and that he was trespassing , he had the infernal meanness to ask me why did n't I stay on my ranch and hold possession when I see him a-coming !
Why did n't I stay on it , the blathering lunatic -- by George , when I heard that racket and looked up that hill it was just like the whole world was a-ripping and a-tearing down that mountain side -- splinters , and cord-wood , thunder and lightning , hail and snow , odds and ends of hay stacks , and awful clouds of dust !
-- trees going end over end in the air , rocks as big as a house jumping 'bout a thousand feet high and busting into ten million pieces , cattle turned inside out and a-coming head on with their tails hanging out between their teeth !
-- and in the midst of all that wrack and destruction sot that cussed Morgan on his gate-post , a-wondering why I did n't stay and hold possession !
Laws bless me , I just took one glimpse , General , and lit out'n the county in three jumps exactly .
`` But what grinds me is that that Morgan hangs on there and wo n't move off'n that ranch -- says it 's his'n and he 's going to keep it -- likes it better'n he did when it was higher up the hill .
Well , I 've been so mad for two days I could n't find my way to town -- been wandering around in the brush in a starving condition -- got anything here to drink , General ?
But I 'm here now , and I 'm a-going to law .
You hear me ! ''
`` Order in the Court ! ''
`` I warn you that this thing which has happened is a thing with which the sacrilegious hands and brains and tongues of men must not meddle .
Gentlemen , it is the verdict of this court that the plaintiff , Richard Hyde , has been deprived of his ranch by the visitation of God !
And from this decision there is no appeal . ''
We took up various claims , and commenced shafts and tunnels on them , but never finished any of them .
We had to do a certain amount of work on each to `` hold '' it , else other parties could seize our property after the expiration of ten days .
We were always hunting up new claims and doing a little work on them and then waiting for a buyer -- who never came .
We never found any ore that would yield more than fifty dollars a ton ; and as the mills charged fifty dollars a ton for working ore and extracting the silver , our pocket-money melted steadily away and none returned to take its place .
We lived in a little cabin and cooked for ourselves ; and altogether it was a hard life , though a hopeful one -- for we never ceased to expect fortune and a customer to burst upon us some day .
All these tiresome things we had to attend to constantly .
Streams of dirty water flowed always from the pans and were carried off in broad wooden troughs to the ravine .
One would not suppose that atoms of gold and silver would float on top of six inches of water , but they did ; and in order to catch them , coarse blankets were laid in the troughs , and little obstructing `` riffles '' charged with quicksilver were placed here and there across the troughs also .
These riffles had to be cleaned and the blankets washed out every evening , to get their precious accumulations -- and after all this eternity of trouble one third of the silver and gold in a ton of rock would find its way to the end of the troughs in the ravine at last and have to be worked over again some day .
There is nothing so aggravating as silver milling .
There never was any idle time in that mill .
There was always something to do .
It is a pity that Adam could not have gone straight out of Eden into a quartz mill , in order to understand the full force of his doom to `` earn his bread by the sweat of his brow . ''
Every now and then , during the day , we had to scoop some pulp out of the pans , and tediously `` wash '' it in a horn spoon -- wash it little by little over the edge till at last nothing was left but some little dull globules of quicksilver in the bottom .
If they were soft and yielding , the pan needed some salt or some sulphate of copper or some other chemical rubbish to assist digestion ; if they were crisp to the touch and would retain a dint , they were freighted with all the silver and gold they could seize and hold , and consequently the pan needed a fresh charge of quicksilver .
When there was nothing else to do , one could always `` screen tailings . ''
That is to say , he could shovel up the dried sand that had washed down to the ravine through the troughs and dash it against an upright wire screen to free it from pebbles and prepare it for working over .
From our bricks a little corner was chipped off for the `` fire-assay '' -- a method used to determine the proportions of gold , silver and base metals in the mass .
This is an interesting process .
The chip is hammered out as thin as paper and weighed on scales so fine and sensitive that if you weigh a two-inch scrap of paper on them and then write your name on the paper with a course , soft pencil and weigh it again , the scales will take marked notice of the addition .
I was ordered off the premises !
And yet , when I look back to those days and call to mind the exceeding hardness of the labor I performed in that mill , I only regret that I did not ask him seven hundred thousand .
Shortly after this I began to grow crazy , along with the rest of the population , about the mysterious and wonderful `` cement mine , '' and to make preparations to take advantage of any opportunity that might offer to go and help hunt for it .
I was thirty steps from him , and knew he could not see me , it was so very dark in the shadow of the mountain .
So I lay still .
Another head appeared in the light of the cabin door , and presently the two men walked toward me .
They stopped within ten steps of me , and one said :
They left and I was glad .
I did not care whither they went , so they went .
I was willing they should visit Welch , and the sooner the better .
The lake is two hundred feet deep , and its sluggish waters are so strong with alkali that if you only dip the most hopelessly soiled garment into them once or twice , and wring it out , it will be found as clean as if it had been through the ablest of washerwomen 's hands .
While we camped there our laundry work was easy .
We tied the week 's washing astern of our boat , and sailed a quarter of a mile , and the job was complete , all to the wringing out .
If we threw the water on our heads and gave them a rub or so , the white lather would pile up three inches high .
This water is not good for bruised places and abrasions of the skin .
We had a valuable dog .
He had raw places on him .
He had more raw places on him than sound ones .
He was the rawest dog I almost ever saw .
He jumped overboard one day to get away from the flies .
But it was bad judgment .
In his condition , it would have been just as comfortable to jump into the fire .
Half a dozen little mountain brooks flow into Mono Lake , but not a stream of any kind flows out of it .
It neither rises nor falls , apparently , and what it does with its surplus water is a dark and bloody mystery .
The agony that alkali water inflicts on bruises , chafes and blistered hands , is unspeakable , and nothing but greasing all over will modify it -- but we ate , drank and slept well , that night , notwithstanding .
Dam stove heap gone ! ''
-- and resumed his scrubbing as placidly as if it were an entirely customary thing for a stove to do .
I will explain , that `` heap '' is `` Injun-English '' for `` very much . ''
The reader will perceive the exhaustive expressiveness of it in the present instance .
He disappeared in the gloom of a `` side drift '' just as a head appeared in the mouth of the shaft and somebody shouted `` Hello ! ''
-- which he did not answer .
He was not disturbed any more .
An hour later he entered the cabin , hot , red , and ready to burst with smothered excitement , and exclaimed in a stage whisper :
`` Say it again ! ''
But perhaps I ought to explain .
A `` blind lead '' is a lead or ledge that does not `` crop out '' above the surface .
A miner does not know where to look for such leads , but they are often stumbled upon by accident in the course of driving a tunnel or sinking a shaft .
Higbie knew the Wide West rock perfectly well , and the more he had examined the new developments the more he was satisfied that the ore could not have come from the Wide West vein .
And so had it occurred to him alone , of all the camp , that there was a blind lead down in the shaft , and that even the Wide West people themselves did not suspect it .
When he went down the shaft , he found that the blind lead held its independent way through the Wide West vein , cutting it diagonally , and that it was enclosed in its own well-defined casing-rocks and clay .
Hence it was public property .
Both leads being perfectly well defined , it was easy for any miner to see which one belonged to the Wide West and which did not .
`` But what kind ? ''
`` Well -- I had n't thought of that .
When are you ? ''
`` I 'm agreed . ''
`` Wo n't it be a swell trip ! ''
It reads like a wild fancy sketch , but the evidence of many witnesses , and likewise that of the official records of Esmeralda District , is easily obtainable in proof that it is a true history .
I can always have it to say that I was absolutely and unquestionably worth a million dollars , once , for ten days .
My two columns were filled .
When I read them over in the morning I felt that I had found my legitimate occupation at last .
I reasoned within myself that news , and stirring news , too , was what a paper needed , and I felt that I was peculiarly endowed with the ability to furnish it .
Mr. Goodman said that I was as good a reporter as Dan .
I desired no higher commendation .
With encouragement like that , I felt that I could take my pen and murder all the immigrants on the plains if need be and the interests of the paper demanded it .
`` Are you all set ? ''
I staid down there an hour , and surprised the workmen when they hauled up and found a man on the rope instead of a bucket of rock .
I walked home , too -- five miles -- up hill .
We had no school report next morning ; but the Union had .
Six months after my entry into journalism the grand `` flush times '' of Silverland began , and they continued with unabated splendor for three years .
All difficulty about filling up the `` local department '' ceased , and the only trouble now was how to make the lengthened columns hold the world of incidents and happenings that came to our literary net every day .
Virginia had grown to be the `` livest '' town , for its age and population , that America had ever produced .
The sidewalks swarmed with people -- to such an extent , indeed , that it was generally no easy matter to stem the human tide .
The streets themselves were just as crowded with quartz wagons , freight teams and other vehicles .
The procession was endless .
So great was the pack , that buggies frequently had to wait half an hour for an opportunity to cross the principal street .
Joy sat on every countenance , and there was a glad , almost fierce , intensity in every eye , that told of the money-getting schemes that were seething in every brain and the high hope that held sway in every heart .
Money was as plenty as dust ; every individual considered himself wealthy , and a melancholy countenance was nowhere to be seen .
There were military companies , fire companies , brass bands , banks , hotels , theatres , `` hurdy-gurdy houses , '' wide-open gambling palaces , political pow-wows , civic processions , street fights , murders , inquests , riots , a whiskey mill every fifteen steps , a Board of Aldermen , a Mayor , a City Surveyor , a City Engineer , a Chief of the Fire Department , with First , Second and Third Assistants , a Chief of Police , City Marshal and a large police force , two Boards of Mining Brokers , a dozen breweries and half a dozen jails and station-houses in full operation , and some talk of building a church .
The `` flush times '' were in magnificent flower !
Large fire-proof brick buildings were going up in the principal streets , and the wooden suburbs were spreading out in all directions .
Town lots soared up to prices that were amazing .
The prices rose and fell constantly ; but still a fall disturbed us little , because a thousand dollars a foot was our figure , and so we were content to let it fluctuate as much as it pleased till it reached it .
My pile of stock was not all given to me by people who wished their claims `` noticed . ''
At least half of it was given me by persons who had no thought of such a thing , and looked for nothing more than a simple verbal `` thank you ; '' and you were not even obliged by law to furnish that .
If you are coming up the street with a couple of baskets of apples in your hands , and you meet a friend , you naturally invite him to take a few .
That describes the condition of things in Virginia in the `` flush times . ''
Every man had his pockets full of stock , and it was the actual custom of the country to part with small quantities of it to friends without the asking .
After that , the Commission got itself into systematic working order , and for weeks the contributions flowed into its treasury in a generous stream .
Individuals and all sorts of organizations levied upon themselves a regular weekly tax for the sanitary fund , graduated according to their means , and there was not another grand universal outburst till the famous `` Sanitary Flour Sack '' came our way .
Its history is peculiar and interesting .
A former schoolmate of mine , by the name of Reuel Gridley , was living at the little city of Austin , in the Reese river country , at this time , and was the Democratic candidate for mayor .
He and the Republican candidate made an agreement that the defeated man should be publicly presented with a fifty-pound sack of flour by the successful one , and should carry it home on his shoulder .
The new mayor gave him the sack of flour , and he shouldered it and carried it a mile or two , from Lower Austin to his home in Upper Austin , attended by a band of music and the whole population .
Arrived there , he said he did not need the flour , and asked what the people thought he had better do with it .
Thirty-six hours afterward Gridley arrived , and an afternoon mass meeting was held in the Opera House , and the auction began .
But the sack had come sooner than it was expected ; the people were not thoroughly aroused , and the sale dragged .
At nightfall only five thousand dollars had been secured , and there was a crestfallen feeling in the community .
However , there was no disposition to let the matter rest here and acknowledge vanquishment at the hands of the village of Austin .
Till late in the night the principal citizens were at work arranging the morrow's campaign , and when they went to bed they had no fears for the result .
At eleven the next morning a procession of open carriages , attended by clamorous bands of music and adorned with a moving display of flags , filed along C street and was soon in danger of blockade by a huzzaing multitude of citizens .
In the first carriage sat Gridley , with the flour sack in prominent view , the latter splendid with bright paint and gilt lettering ; also in the same carriage sat the mayor and the recorder .
The other carriages contained the Common Council , the editors and reporters , and other people of imposing consequence .
The crowd pressed to the corner of C and Taylor streets , expecting the sale to begin there , but they were disappointed , and also unspeakably surprised ; for the cavalcade moved on as if Virginia had ceased to be of importance , and took its way over the `` divide , '' toward the small town of Gold Hill .
Telegrams had gone ahead to Gold Hill , Silver City and Dayton , and those communities were at fever heat and rife for the conflict .
It was a very hot day , and wonderfully dusty .
At the end of a short half hour we descended into Gold Hill with drums beating and colors flying , and enveloped in imposing clouds of dust .
The whole population -- men , women and children , Chinamen and Indians , were massed in the main street , all the flags in town were at the mast head , and the blare of the bands was drowned in cheers .
Gridley stood up and asked who would make the first bid for the National Sanitary Flour Sack .
`` Here , that wo n't do !
He guessed two miles wider of the mark than I did . ''
`` Well , sir , '' said Smith , `` that 's just where I 've got you , for I guessed two hundred and nine .
If you 'll look at my figgers again you 'll find a 2 and two 0 's , which stands for 200 , do n't it ?
-- and after 'em you 'll find a 9 ( 2009 ) , which stands for two hundred and nine .
I reckon I 'll take that money , if you please . ''
A youth of nineteen , who was a telegraph operator in Virginia on a salary of a hundred dollars a month , and who , when he could not make out German names in the list of San Francisco steamer arrivals , used to ingeniously select and supply substitutes for them out of an old Berlin city directory , made himself rich by watching the mining telegrams that passed through his hands and buying and selling stocks accordingly , through a friend in San Francisco .
Once when a private dispatch was sent from Virginia announcing a rich strike in a prominent mine and advising that the matter be kept secret till a large amount of the stock could be secured , he bought forty `` feet '' of the stock at twenty dollars a foot , and afterward sold half of it at eight hundred dollars a foot and the rest at double that figure .
Within three months he was worth $ 150,000 , and had resigned his telegraphic position .
But why go on ?
The traditions of Silverland are filled with instances like these , and I would never get through enumerating them were I to attempt do it .
I only desired to give , the reader an idea of a peculiarity of the `` flush times '' which I could not present so strikingly in any other way , and which some mention of was necessary to a realizing comprehension of the time and the country .
I was personally acquainted with the majority of the nabobs I have referred to , and so , for old acquaintance sake , I have shifted their occupations and experiences around in such a way as to keep the Pacific public from recognizing these once notorious men .
No longer notorious , for the majority of them have drifted back into poverty and obscurity again .
In Nevada there used to be current the story of an adventure of two of her nabobs , which may or may not have occurred .
I give it for what it is worth :
Then he put his head out of the window , and shouted to the driver :
The driver passed his hand through the strap-hole , and tapped for his fare -- it was before the gongs came into common use .
Col. Jack took the hand , and shook it cordially .
He resisted every effort to pass fares to the driver , and made everybody cordially welcome .
The situation dawned on the people , and they pocketed their money , and delivered themselves up to covert enjoyment of the episode .
Half a dozen more passengers entered .
A Chinaman crowded his way in .
He choked , and even shed tears ; but with an effort he mastered his voice and said in lugubrious tones :
`` Are you the duck that runs the gospel-mill next door ? ''
`` I am the shepherd in charge of the flock whose fold is next door . ''
What did I understand you to say ? ''
`` You 've raised me out , pard . ''
`` I still fail to catch your meaning . ''
`` Now you talk !
You see my blind and straddle it like a man .
Put it there ! ''
-- extending a brawny paw , which closed over the minister 's small hand and gave it a shake indicative of fraternal sympathy and fervent gratification .
`` Now we 're all right , pard .
Let 's start fresh .
Do n't you mind my snuffling a little -- becuz we 're in a power of trouble .
You see , one of the boys has gone up the flume -- ''
`` Yes , I understand . ''
Do you reckon a man has got as many lives as a cat ?
But you bet you he 's awful dead now , poor old boy , and I wish I 'd never seen this day .
I do n't want no better friend than Buck Fanshaw .
I knowed him by the back ; and when I know a man and like him , I freeze to him -- you hear me .
Take him all round , pard , there never was a bullier man in the mines .
No man ever knowed Buck Fanshaw to go back on a friend .
But it 's all up , you know , it 's all up .
It ai n't no use .
They 've scooped him . ''
`` That 's it . ''
`` That 's it -- any of the boys will tell you so . ''
`` Well , but why should he shake her ? ''
`` You 've treated me like a gentleman , pard , and I ai n't the man to hurt your feelings intentional .
I think you 're white .
I think you 're a square man , pard .
I like you , and I 'll lick any man that do n't .
I'll lick him till he ca n't tell himself from a last year 's corpse !
Put it there ! ''
[ Another fraternal hand-shake -- and exit . ]
The obsequies were all that `` the boys '' could desire .
Such a marvel of funeral pomp had never been seen in Virginia .
The plumed hearse , the dirge-breathing brass bands , the closed marts of business , the flags drooping at half mast , the long , plodding procession of uniformed secret societies , military battalions and fire companies , draped engines , carriages of officials , and citizens in vehicles and on foot , attracted multitudes of spectators to the sidewalks , roofs and windows ; and for years afterward , the degree of grandeur attained by any civic display in Virginia was determined by comparison with Buck Fanshaw 's funeral .
If an unknown individual arrived , they did not inquire if he was capable , honest , industrious , but -- had he killed his man ?
If he had not , he gravitated to his natural and proper position , that of a man of small consequence ; if he had , the cordiality of his reception was graduated according to the number of his dead .
It was tedious work struggling up to a position of influence with bloodless hands ; but when a man came with the blood of half a dozen men on his soul , his worth was recognized at once and his acquaintance sought .
`` Have you read the newspaper accounts of it ? ''
They got a look in return that froze their marrow , and by that time a curled and breast-pinned bar keeper was beaming over the counter , proud of the established acquaintanceship that permitted such a familiar form of speech as :
An inquest was immediately held , and the following testimony adduced :
Oh , there was no excitement about it -- he merely `` remarked '' the small circumstance !
Four months later the following item appeared in the same paper ( the Enterprise ) .
In this item the name of one of the city officers above referred to ( Deputy Marshal Jack Williams ) occurs again :
-- On Tuesday night , a German named Charles Hurtzal , engineer in a mill at Silver City , came to this place , and visited the hurdy-gurdy house on B street .
The music , dancing and Teutonic maidens awakened memories of Faderland until our German friend was carried away with rapture .
He evidently had money , and was spending if freely .
Late in the evening Jack Williams and Andy Blessington invited him down stairs to take a cup of coffee .
Williams proposed a game of cards and went up stairs to procure a deck , but not finding any returned .
On the stairway he met the German , and drawing his pistol knocked him down and rifled his pockets of some seventy dollars .
Hurtzal dared give no alarm , as he was told , with a pistol at his head , if he made any noise or exposed them , they would blow his brains out .
So effectually was he frightened that he made no complaint , until his friends forced him .
Yesterday a warrant was issued , but the culprits had disappeared .
Trial by jury is the palladium of our liberties .
I do not know what a palladium is , having never seen a palladium , but it is a good thing no doubt at any rate .
Not less than a hundred men have been murdered in Nevada -- perhaps I would be within bounds if I said three hundred -- and as far as I can learn , only two persons have suffered the death penalty there .
However , four or five who had no money and no political influence have been punished by imprisonment -- one languished in prison as much as eight months , I think .
However , I do not desire to be extravagant -- it may have been less .
`` I 've heard of Capt .
Ned Blakely , and one of us is a better man than 'tother -- I 'll know which , before I go ashore . ''
`` You 've come to the right shop -- I 'm your man .
I 'll learn you to come aboard this ship without an invite . ''
He seized Noakes , backed him against the mainmast , pounded his face to a pulp , and then threw him overboard .
`` Do you see that ship there at the dock ? ''
`` Ay-ay , sir . ''
What do I want to try him for , if he killed the nigger ? ''
`` Oh , Capt .
Ned , this will never do .
Think how it will sound . ''
`` Then I 'm going to hang him , that 's all .
Everybody I 've talked to talks just the same way you do .
Everybody says he killed the nigger , everybody knows he killed the nigger , and yet every lubber of you wants him tried for it .
I do n't understand such bloody foolishness as that .
Mind you , I do n't object to trying him , if it 's got to be done to give satisfaction ; and I 'll be there , and chip in and help , too ; but put it off till afternoon -- put it off till afternoon , for I 'll have my hands middling full till after the burying -- ''
`` Probably only a little while . ''
But at last they satisfied him that they were projecting nothing underhanded .
`` No , sir , I prefer to fetch him myself -- he do n't get out of my hands .
Besides , I 've got to go to the ship to get a rope , anyway . ''
There 's few that would have took the pains with you that I have . ''
But , by and by , two hundred miles off New Bedford , the ship took fire ; she burned to the water 's edge ; of all her crew and passengers , only thirty were saved .
They floated about the sea half an afternoon and all night long .
Among them were our friends .
The lawyer , by superhuman exertions , had saved the blonde and her parents , swimming back and forth two hundred yards and bringing one each time -- ( the girl first ) .
The Duke had saved himself .
In the morning two whale ships arrived on the scene and sent their boats .
The weather was stormy and the embarkation was attended with much confusion and excitement .
The lawyer did his duty like a man ; helped his exhausted and insensible blonde , her parents and some others into a boat ( the Duke helped himself in ) ; then a child fell overboard at the other end of the raft and the lawyer rushed thither and helped half a dozen people fish it out , under the stimulus of its mother 's screams .
Then he ran back -- a few seconds too late -- the blonde's boat was under way .
So he had to take the other boat , and go to the other ship .
The storm increased and drove the vessels out of sight of each other -- drove them whither it would .
A man came rushing from a house , Saying , `` Snub up your boat I pray , [ The customary canal technicality for 'tie up . '
] Snub up your boat , snub up , alas , Snub up while yet you may . ''
`` So let us strive , while life remains , To save all souls on board , And then if die at last we must , Let .
I can not speak the word ! ''
`` Sever the tow-line !
Cripple the mules ! ''
There comes a shock !
Another length , and the fated craft Would have swum in the saving lock !
Then gathered together the shipwrecked crew And took one last embrace , While sorrowful tears from despairing eyes Ran down each hopeless face ; And some did think of their little ones Whom they never more might see , And others of waiting wives at home , And mothers that grieved would be .
But of all the children of misery there On that poor sinking frame , But one spake words of hope and faith , And I worshipped as they came : Said Dollinger the pilot man , -- ( O brave heart , strong and true ! )
-- '' Fear not , but trust in Dollinger , For he will fetch you through . ''
Then every sufferer stood amazed That pilot man before ; A moment stood .
Then wondering turned , And speechless walked ashore .
Speculation ran riot , and yet there was a world of substantial business going on , too .
All freights were brought over the mountains from California ( 150 miles ) by pack-train partly , and partly in huge wagons drawn by such long mule teams that each team amounted to a procession , and it did seem , sometimes , that the grand combined procession of animals stretched unbroken from Virginia to California .
Its long route was traceable clear across the deserts of the Territory by the writhing serpent of dust it lifted up .
By these wagons , freights over that hundred and fifty miles were $ 200 a ton for small lots ( same price for all express matter brought by stage ) , and $ 100 a ton for full loads .
One Virginia firm received one hundred tons of freight a month , and paid $ 10,000 a month freightage .
In the winter the freights were much higher .
All the bullion was shipped in bars by stage to San Francisco ( a bar was usually about twice the size of a pig of lead and contained from $ 1,500 to $ 3,000 according to the amount of gold mixed with the silver ) , and the freight on it ( when the shipment was large ) was one and a quarter per cent .
of its intrinsic value .
Chinamen hold their dead in great reverence -- they worship their departed ancestors , in fact .
Hence , in China , a man 's front yard , back yard , or any other part of his premises , is made his family burying ground , in order that he may visit the graves at any and all times .
Therefore that huge empire is one mighty cemetery ; it is ridged and wringled from its centre to its circumference with graves -- and inasmuch as every foot of ground must be made to do its utmost , in China , lest the swarming population suffer for food , the very graves are cultivated and yield a harvest , custom holding this to be no dishonor to the dead .
Since the departed are held in such worshipful reverence , a Chinaman can not bear that any indignity be offered the places where they sleep .
Mr. Burlingame said that herein lay China 's bitter opposition to railroads ; a road could not be built anywhere in the empire without disturbing the graves of their ancestors or friends .
His ducks , however , and his eggs , we could understand ; the former were split open and flattened out like codfish , and came from China in that shape , and the latter were plastered over with some kind of paste which kept them fresh and palatable through the long voyage .
Mr. See Yup keeps a fancy store on Live Fox street .
He sold us fans of white feathers , gorgeously ornamented ; perfumery that smelled like Limburger cheese , Chinese pens , and watch-charms made of a stone unscratchable with steel instruments , yet polished and tinted like the inner coat of a sea-shell .
As tokens of his esteem , See Yup presented the party with gaudy plumes made of gold tinsel and trimmed with peacocks ' feathers .
We ate chow-chow with chop-sticks in the celestial restaurants ; our comrade chided the moon-eyed damsels in front of the houses for their want of feminine reserve ; we received protecting Josh-lights from our hosts and `` dickered '' for a pagan God or two .
Finally , we were impressed with the genius of a Chinese book-keeper ; he figured up his accounts on a machine like a gridiron with buttons strung on its bars ; the different rows represented units , tens , hundreds and thousands .
He fingered them with incredible rapidity -- in fact , he pushed them from place to place as fast as a musical professor 's fingers travel over the keys of a piano .
I began to get tired of staying in one place so long .
There was no longer satisfying variety in going down to Carson to report the proceedings of the legislature once a year , and horse-races and pumpkin-shows once in three months ; ( they had got to raising pumpkins and potatoes in Washoe Valley , and of course one of the first achievements of the legislature was to institute a ten-thousand-dollar Agricultural Fair to show off forty dollars ' worth of those pumpkins in -- however , the territorial legislature was usually spoken of as the `` asylum '' ) .
I wanted to see San Francisco .
I wanted to go somewhere .
I wanted -- I did not know what I wanted .
I had the `` spring fever '' and wanted a change , principally , no doubt .
Besides , a convention had framed a State Constitution ; nine men out of every ten wanted an office ; I believed that these gentlemen would `` treat '' the moneyless and the irresponsible among the population into adopting the constitution and thus well-nigh killing the country ( it could not well carry such a load as a State government , since it had nothing to tax that could stand a tax , for undeveloped mines could not , and there were not fifty developed ones in the land , there was but little realty to tax , and it did seem as if nobody was ever going to think of the simple salvation of inflicting a money penalty on murder ) .
I believed that a State government would destroy the `` flush times , '' and I wanted to get away .
I believed that the mining stocks I had on hand would soon be worth $ 100,000 , and thought if they reached that before the Constitution was adopted , I would sell out and make myself secure from the crash the change of government was going to bring .
I considered $ 100,000 sufficient to go home with decently , though it was but a small amount compared to what I had been expecting to return with .
I felt rather down-hearted about it , but I tried to comfort myself with the reflection that with such a sum I could not fall into want .
About this time a schoolmate of mine whom I had not seen since boyhood , came tramping in on foot from Reese River , a very allegory of Poverty .
The son of wealthy parents , here he was , in a strange land , hungry , bootless , mantled in an ancient horse-blanket , roofed with a brimless hat , and so generally and so extravagantly dilapidated that he could have `` taken the shine out of the Prodigal Son himself , '' as he pleasantly remarked .
I wanted a change .
I wanted variety of some kind .
Mr. Goodman went away for a week and left me the post of chief editor .
The first day , I wrote my `` leader '' in the forenoon .
The second day , I had no subject and put it off till the afternoon .
The third day I put it off till evening , and then copied an elaborate editorial out of the `` American Cyclopedia , '' that steadfast friend of the editor , all over this land .
The fourth day I `` fooled around '' till midnight , and then fell back on the Cyclopedia again .
The fifth day I cudgeled my brain till midnight , and then kept the press waiting while I penned some bitter personalities on six different people .
The sixth day I labored in anguish till far into the night and brought forth -- nothing .
The paper went to press without an editorial .
The seventh day I resigned .
On the eighth , Mr. Goodman returned and found six duels on his hands -- my personalities had borne fruit .
Nobody , except he has tried it , knows what it is to be an editor .
It is easy to scribble local rubbish , with the facts all before you ; it is easy to clip selections from other papers ; it is easy to string out a correspondence from any locality ; but it is unspeakable hardship to write editorials .
Subjects are the trouble -- the dreary lack of them , I mean .
Every day , it is drag , drag , drag -- think , and worry and suffer -- all the world is a dull blank , and yet the editorial columns must be filled .
Only give the editor a subject , and his work is done -- it is no trouble to write it up ; but fancy how you would feel if you had to pump your brains dry every day in the week , fifty-two weeks in the year .
It makes one low spirited simply to think of it .
The matter that each editor of a daily paper in America writes in the course of a year would fill from four to eight bulky volumes like this book !
Fancy what a library an editor's work would make , after twenty or thirty years ' service .
Yet people often marvel that Dickens , Scott , Bulwer , Dumas , etc.
, have been able to produce so many books .
If these authors had wrought as voluminously as newspaper editors do , the result would be something to marvel at , indeed .
How editors can continue this tremendous labor , this exhausting consumption of brain fibre ( for their work is creative , and not a mere mechanical laying-up of facts , like reporting ) , day after day and year after year , is incomprehensible .
Preachers take two months ' holiday in midsummer , for they find that to produce two sermons a week is wearing , in the long run .
In truth it must be so , and is so ; and therefore , how an editor can take from ten to twenty texts and build upon them from ten to twenty painstaking editorials a week and keep it up all the year round , is farther beyond comprehension than ever .
Ever since I survived my week as editor , I have found at least one pleasure in any newspaper that comes to my hand ; it is in admiring the long columns of editorial , and wondering to myself how in the mischief he did it !
It was not without regret that I took a last look at the tiny flag ( it was thirty-five feet long and ten feet wide ) fluttering like a lady's handkerchief from the topmost peak of Mount Davidson , two thousand feet above Virginia 's roofs , and felt that doubtless I was bidding a permanent farewell to a city which had afforded me the most vigorous enjoyment of life I had ever experienced .
And this reminds me of an incident which the dullest memory Virginia could boast at the time it happened must vividly recall , at times , till its possessor dies .
Late one summer afternoon we had a rain shower .
But for the journalistic monopoly that forbade the slightest revealment of eastern news till a day after its publication in the California papers , the glorified flag on Mount Davidson would have been saluted and re-saluted , that memorable evening , as long as there was a charge of powder to thunder with ; the city would have been illuminated , and every man that had any respect for himself would have got drunk , -- as was the custom of the country on all occasions of public moment .
Even at this distant day I can not think of this needlessly marred supreme opportunity without regret .
What a time we might have had !
The climate of San Francisco is mild and singularly equable .
The thermometer stands at about seventy degrees the year round .
It hardly changes at all .
You sleep under one or two light blankets Summer and Winter , and never use a mosquito bar .
Nobody ever wears Summer clothing .
You wear black broadcloth -- if you have it -- in August and January , just the same .
It is no colder , and no warmer , in the one month than the other .
You do not use overcoats and you do not use fans .
It is as pleasant a climate as could well be contrived , take it all around , and is doubtless the most unvarying in the whole world .
The wind blows there a good deal in the summer months , but then you can go over to Oakland , if you choose -- three or four miles away -- it does not blow there .
It has only snowed twice in San Francisco in nineteen years , and then it only remained on the ground long enough to astonish the children , and set them to wondering what the feathery stuff was .
`` But , gentlemen , the poor thing , she -- ''
`` There 's a hundred and fifty dollars in dust , there , and I 'll give it to you to let me kiss the child ! ''
The bubble scarcely left a microscopic moisture behind it .
I was an early beggar and a thorough one .
My hoarded stocks were not worth the paper they were printed on .
I threw them all away .
I , the cheerful idiot that had been squandering money like water , and thought myself beyond the reach of misfortune , had not now as much as fifty dollars when I gathered together my various debts and paid them .
I removed from the hotel to a very private boarding house .
I took a reporter 's berth and went to work .
I was not entirely broken in spirit , for I was building confidently on the sale of the silver mine in the east .
But I could not hear from Dan .
My letters miscarried or were not answered .
`` However , we will omit the benediction ! ''
-- and the next instant there was a vacancy in the atmosphere where he had stood .
`` But outside is good enough ! ''
He then skipped out at the back door .
Such another destruction of mantel ornaments and toilet bottles as the earthquake created , San Francisco never saw before .
There was hardly a girl or a matron in the city but suffered losses of this kind .
Suspended pictures were thrown down , but oftener still , by a curious freak of the earthquake 's humor , they were whirled completely around with their faces to the wall !
There was great difference of opinion , at first , as to the course or direction the earthquake traveled , but water that splashed out of various tanks and buckets settled that .
Thousands of people were made so sea-sick by the rolling and pitching of floors and streets that they were weak and bed-ridden for hours , and some few for even days afterward.
-- Hardly an individual escaped nausea entirely .
NEVADA MINES IN NEW YORK.
M. Marshall , Sheba Hurs and Amos H. Rose , who left San Francisco last July for New York City , with ores from mines in Pine Wood District , Humboldt County , and on the Reese River range , have disposed of a mine containing six thousand feet and called the Pine Mountains Consolidated , for the sum of $ 3,000,000 .
The stamps on the deed , which is now on its way to Humboldt County , from New York , for record , amounted to $ 3,000 , which is said to be the largest amount of stamps ever placed on one document .
A working capital of $ 1,000,000 has been paid into the treasury , and machinery has already been purchased for a large quartz mill , which will be put up as soon as possible .
The stock in this company is all full paid and entirely unassessable .
The ores of the mines in this district somewhat resemble those of the Sheba mine in Humboldt .
Sheba Hurst , the discoverer of the mines , with his friends corralled all the best leads and all the land and timber they desired before making public their whereabouts .
Ores from there , assayed in this city , showed them to be exceedingly rich in silver and gold -- silver predominating .
There is an abundance of wood and water in the District .
We are glad to know that New York capital has been enlisted in the development of the mines of this region .
Having seen the ores and assays , we are satisfied that the mines of the District are very valuable -- anything but wild-cat .
For a time I wrote literary screeds for the Golden Era .
C. H. Webb had established a very excellent literary weekly called the Californian , but high merit was no guaranty of success ; it languished , and he sold out to three printers , and Bret Harte became editor at $ 20 a week , and I was employed to contribute an article a week at $ 12 .
But the journal still languished , and the printers sold out to Captain Ogden , a rich man and a pleasant gentleman who chose to amuse himself with such an expensive luxury without much caring about the cost of it .
When he grew tired of the novelty , he re-sold to the printers , the paper presently died a peaceful death , and I was out of work again .
I would not mention these things but for the fact that they so aptly illustrate the ups and downs that characterize life on the Pacific coast .
A man could hardly stumble into such a variety of queer vicissitudes in any other country .
For two months my sole occupation was avoiding acquaintances ; for during that time I did not earn a penny , or buy an article of any kind , or pay my board .
I became a very adept at `` slinking . ''
I slunk from back street to back street , I slunk away from approaching faces that looked familiar , I slunk to my meals , ate them humbly and with a mute apology for every mouthful I robbed my generous landlady of , and at midnight , after wanderings that were but slinkings away from cheerfulness and light , I slunk to my bed .
I felt meaner , and lowlier and more despicable than the worms .
During all this time I had but one piece of money -- a silver ten cent piece -- and I held to it and would not spend it on any account , lest the consciousness coming strong upon me that I was entirely penniless , might suggest suicide .
I had pawned every thing but the clothes I had on ; so I clung to my dime desperately , till it was smooth with handling .
However , I am forgetting .
I did have one other occupation beside that of `` slinking . ''
It was the entertaining of a collector ( and being entertained by him , ) who had in his hands the Virginia banker 's bill for forty-six dollars which I had loaned my schoolmate , the `` Prodigal . ''
This man used to call regularly once a week and dun me , and sometimes oftener .
He did it from sheer force of habit , for he knew he could get nothing .
He would get out his bill , calculate the interest for me , at five per cent a month , and show me clearly that there was no attempt at fraud in it and no mistakes ; and then plead , and argue and dun with all his might for any sum -- any little trifle -- even a dollar -- even half a dollar , on account .
Then his duty was accomplished and his conscience free .
He immediately dropped the subject there always ; got out a couple of cigars and divided , put his feet in the window , and then we would have a long , luxurious talk about everything and everybody , and he would furnish me a world of curious dunning adventures out of the ample store in his memory .
By and by he would clap his hat on his head , shake hands and say briskly :
He passed before the lights of Martin 's restaurant , the most aristocratic in the city , and stopped .
It was a place where he had often dined , in better days , and Martin knew him well .
Standing aside , just out of the range of the light , he worshiped the quails and steaks in the show window , and imagined that may be the fairy times were not gone yet and some prince in disguise would come along presently and tell him to go in there and take whatever he wanted .
He chewed his stick with a hungry interest as he warmed to his subject .
Just at this juncture he was conscious of some one at his side , sure enough ; and then a finger touched his arm .
He looked up , over his shoulder , and saw an apparition -- a very allegory of Hunger !
It was a man six feet high , gaunt , unshaven , hung with rags ; with a haggard face and sunken cheeks , and eyes that pleaded piteously .
He locked his arm in Blucher 's and walked up the street to where the passengers were few and the light not strong , and then facing about , put out his hands in a beseeching way , and said :
Pocket hunting is an ingenious process .
You take a spadeful of earth from the hill-side and put it in a large tin pan and dissolve and wash it gradually away till nothing is left but a teaspoonful of fine sediment .
Whatever gold was in that earth has remained , because , being the heaviest , it has sought the bottom .
Among the sediment you will find half a dozen yellow particles no larger than pin-heads .
You move off to one side and wash another pan .
If you find gold again , you move to one side further , and wash a third pan .
If you find no gold this time , you are delighted again , because you know you are on the right scent .
The hogs are good pocket hunters .
All the summer they root around the bushes , and turn up a thousand little piles of dirt , and then the miners long for the rains ; for the rains beat upon these little piles and wash them down and expose the gold , possibly right over a pocket .
Two pockets were found in this way by the same man in one day .
One had $ 5,000 in it and the other $ 8,000 .
That man could appreciate it , for he had n't had a cent for about a year .
I said , `` Well , Mr. Baker , his prejudice against quartz-mining was remarkable , considering how he came by it .
Could n't you ever cure him of it ? ''
Yet he had never fired a gun or fought a battle in his life .
When I knew him on board the Ajax , he was seventy-two years old and had plowed the salt water sixty-one of them .
For sixteen years he had gone in and out of the harbor of Honolulu in command of a whaleship , and for sixteen more had been captain of a San Francisco and Sandwich Island passenger packet and had never had an accident or lost a vessel .
The simple natives knew him for a friend who never failed them , and regarded him as children regard a father .
It was a dangerous thing to oppress them when the roaring Admiral was around .
`` Certain of it ?
Am I certain of it ?
Do you think I 've been lying about it ?
What do you take me for ?
Anybody that do n't know that circumstance , do n't know anything ; a child ought to know it .
Read up your history !
Read it up -- -- - , and do n't come asking a man if he 's certain about a bit of ABC stuff that the very southern niggers know all about . ''
It was such ecstacy to dream , and dream -- till you got a bite .
I can not describe what a load of anxiety was lifted from my mind when I found that he was only asleep .
I woke him up and started him into a faster walk , and then the villainy of his nature came out again .
He tried to climb over a stone wall , five or six feet high .
I saw that I must apply force to this horse , and that I might as well begin first as last .
I plucked a stout switch from a tamarind tree , and the moment he saw it , he surrendered .
He broke into a convulsive sort of a canter , which had three short steps in it and one long one , and reminded me alternately of the clattering shake of the great earthquake , and the sweeping plunging of the Ajax in a storm .
This ancient temple was built of rough blocks of lava , and was simply a roofless inclosure a hundred and thirty feet long and seventy wide -- nothing but naked walls , very thick , but not much higher than a man's head .
They will last for ages no doubt , if left unmolested .
Its three altars and other sacred appurtenances have crumbled and passed away years ago .
It is said that in the old times thousands of human beings were slaughtered here , in the presence of naked and howling savages .
If these mute stones could speak , what tales they could tell , what pictures they could describe , of fettered victims writhing under the knife ; of massed forms straining forward out of the gloom , with ferocious faces lit up by the sacrificial fires ; of the background of ghostly trees ; of the dark pyramid of Diamond Head standing sentinel over the uncanny scene , and the peaceful moon looking down upon it through rifts in the cloud-rack !
Those were savage times when this old slaughter-house was in its prime .
The King and the chiefs ruled the common herd with a rod of iron ; made them gather all the provisions the masters needed ; build all the houses and temples ; stand all the expenses , of whatever kind ; take kicks and cuffs for thanks ; drag out lives well flavored with misery , and then suffer death for trifling offences or yield up their lives on the sacrificial altars to purchase favors from the gods for their hard rulers .
The missionaries have clothed them , educated them , broken up the tyrannous authority of their chiefs , and given them freedom and the right to enjoy whatever their hands and brains produce with equal laws for all , and punishment for all alike who transgress them .
The contrast is so strong -- the benefit conferred upon this people by the missionaries is so prominent , so palpable and so unquestionable , that the frankest compliment I can pay them , and the best , is simply to point to the condition of the Sandwich Islanders of Captain Cook 's time , and their condition to-day .
You give your horse a little grain once a day ; it comes from San Francisco , and is worth about two cents a pound ; and you give him as much hay as he wants ; it is cut and brought to the market by natives , and is not very good it is baled into long , round bundles , about the size of a large man ; one of them is stuck by the middle on each end of a six foot pole , and the Kanaka shoulders the pole and walks about the streets between the upright bales in search of customers .
These hay bales , thus carried , have a general resemblance to a colossal capital 'H . '
The taro root looks like a thick , or , if you please , a corpulent sweet potato , in shape , but is of a light purple color when boiled .
When boiled it answers as a passable substitute for bread .
The buck Kanakas bake it under ground , then mash it up well with a heavy lava pestle , mix water with it until it becomes a paste , set it aside and let if ferment , and then it is poi -- and an unseductive mixture it is , almost tasteless before it ferments and too sour for a luxury afterward .
But nothing is more nutritious .
When solely used , however , it produces acrid humors , a fact which sufficiently accounts for the humorous character of the Kanakas .
I think there must be as much of a knack in handling poi as there is in eating with chopsticks .
The forefinger is thrust into the mess and stirred quickly round several times and drawn as quickly out , thickly coated , just as it it were poulticed ; the head is thrown back , the finger inserted in the mouth and the delicacy stripped off and swallowed -- the eye closing gently , meanwhile , in a languid sort of ecstasy .
Many a different finger goes into the same bowl and many a different kind of dirt and shade and quality of flavor is added to the virtues of its contents .
Around a small shanty was collected a crowd of natives buying the awa root .
It is said that but for the use of this root the destruction of the people in former times by certain imported diseases would have been far greater than it was , and by others it is said that this is merely a fancy .
All agree that poi will rejuvenate a man who is used up and his vitality almost annihilated by hard drinking , and that in some kinds of diseases it will restore health after all medicines have failed ; but all are not willing to allow to the awa the virtues claimed for it .
The natives manufacture an intoxicating drink from it which is fearful in its effects when persistently indulged in .
It covers the body with dry , white scales , inflames the eyes , and causes premature decripitude .
Although the man before whose establishment we stopped has to pay a Government license of eight hundred dollars a year for the exclusive right to sell awa root , it is said that he makes a small fortune every twelve-month ; while saloon keepers , who pay a thousand dollars a year for the privilege of retailing whiskey , etc.
, only make a bare living .
At night they feasted and the girls danced the lascivious hula hula -- a dance that is said to exhibit the very perfection of educated notion of limb and arm , hand , head and body , and the exactest uniformity of movement and accuracy of `` time . ''
It was performed by a circle of girls with no raiment on them to speak of , who went through an infinite variety of motions and figures without prompting , and yet so true was their `` time , '' and in such perfect concert did they move that when they were placed in a straight line , hands , arms , bodies , limbs and heads waved , swayed , gesticulated , bowed , stooped , whirled , squirmed , twisted and undulated as if they were part and parcel of a single individual ; and it was difficult to believe they were not moved in a body by some exquisite piece of mechanism .
`` Really , I beg your pardon , Captain .
I trust you had a good season .
How much oil '' --
What do you take me for ?
I 'm not a whaler . ''
`` Major General in the household troops , no doubt ?
Minister of the Interior , likely ?
First Gentleman of the Bed-chamber ?
Commissioner of the Royal '' --
I still quote from my journal :
In former times , among the Islanders , not only a plurality of wives was customary , but a plurality of husbands likewise .
Some native women of noble rank had as many as six husbands .
A woman thus supplied did not reside with all her husbands at once , but lived several months with each in turn .
An understood sign hung at her door during these months .
When the sign was taken down , it meant `` NEXT . ''
A luxury which they enjoy more than anything else , is a large funeral .
If a person wants to get rid of a troublesome native , it is only necessary to promise him a fine funeral and name the hour and he will be on hand to the minute -- at least his remains will .
The poor creatures were beaming with complacency and wholly unconscious of any absurdity in their appearance .
They gazed at each other with happy admiration , and it was plain to see that the young girls were taking note of what each other had on , as naturally as if they had always lived in a land of Bibles and knew what churches were made for ; here was the evidence of a dawning civilization .
The spectacle which the congregation presented was so extraordinary and withal so moving , that the missionaries found it difficult to keep to the text and go on with the services ; and by and by when the simple children of the sun began a general swapping of garments in open meeting and produced some irresistibly grotesque effects in the course of re-dressing , there was nothing for it but to cut the thing short with the benediction and dismiss the fantastic assemblage .
Next we have his Excellency the Commander-in-chief of the Household Troops , whose forces consist of about the number of soldiers usually placed under a corporal in other lands .
Next comes the royal Steward and the Grand Equerry in Waiting -- high dignitaries with modest salaries and little to do .
Then we have his Excellency the Imperial Minister of Finance , who handles a million dollars of public money a year , sends in his annual `` budget '' with great ceremony , talks prodigiously of `` finance , '' suggests imposing schemes for paying off the `` national debt '' ( of $ 150,000 , ) and does it all for $ 4,000 a year and unimaginable glory .
Next , their Excellencies the Governors of Oahu , Hawaii , etc.
, and after them a string of High Sheriffs and other small fry too numerous for computation .
Then there are their Excellencies the Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of his Imperial Majesty the Emperor of the French ; her British Majesty 's Minister ; the Minister Resident , of the United States ; and some six or eight representatives of other foreign nations , all with sounding titles , imposing dignity and prodigious but economical state .
And let it be borne in mind that there is a strictly defined `` court costume '' of so `` stunning '' a nature that it would make the clown in a circus look tame and commonplace by comparison ; and each Hawaiian official dignitary has a gorgeous vari-colored , gold-laced uniform peculiar to his office -- no two of them are alike , and it is hard to tell which one is the `` loudest . ''
The King had a `` drawing-room '' at stated intervals , like other monarchs , and when these varied uniforms congregate there -- weak-eyed people have to contemplate the spectacle through smoked glass .
Is there not a gratifying contrast between this latter-day exhibition and the one the ancestors of some of these magnates afforded the missionaries the Sunday after the old-time distribution of clothing ?
Behold what religion and civilization have wrought !
While I was in Honolulu I witnessed the ceremonious funeral of the King's sister , her Royal Highness the Princess Victoria .
According to the royal custom , the remains had lain in state at the palace thirty days , watched day and night by a guard of honor .
And during all that time a great multitude of natives from the several islands had kept the palace grounds well crowded and had made the place a pandemonium every night with their howlings and wailings , beating of tom-toms and dancing of the ( at other times ) forbidden `` hula-hula '' by half-clad maidens to the music of songs of questionable decency chanted in honor of the deceased .
The printed programme of the funeral procession interested me at the time ; and after what I have just said of Hawaiian grandiloquence in the matter of `` playing empire , '' I am persuaded that a perusal of it may interest the reader :
It is interesting to contrast the funeral ceremonies of the Princess Victoria with those of her noted ancestor Kamehameha the Conqueror , who died fifty years ago -- in 1819 , the year before the first missionaries came .
Dogs were , and still are , reared and fattened for food , by the natives -- hence the reference to their value in one of the above paragraphs .
Forty years ago it was the custom in the Islands to suspend all law for a certain number of days after the death of a royal personage ; and then a saturnalia ensued which one may picture to himself after a fashion , but not in the full horror of the reality .
The people shaved their heads , knocked out a tooth or two , plucked out an eye sometimes , cut , bruised , mutilated or burned their flesh , got drunk , burned each other 's huts , maimed or murdered one another according to the caprice of the moment , and both sexes gave themselves up to brutal and unbridled licentiousness .
The natives still keep up an old custom of theirs which can not be comforting to an invalid .
When they think a sick friend is going to die , a couple of dozen neighbors surround his hut and keep up a deafening wailing night and day till he either dies or gets well .
No doubt this arrangement has helped many a subject to a shroud before his appointed time .
Sleeping was out of the question when he was on watch .
He was a source of genuine aggravation and annoyance .
It was worse than useless to shout at him or apply offensive epithets to him -- he only took these things for applause , and strained himself to make more noise .
Occasionally , during the day , I threw potatoes at him through an aperture in the bulkhead , but he only dodged and went on crowing .
We passed several sugar plantations -- new ones and not very extensive .
The crops were , in most cases , third rattoons .
-- The first crop is called `` plant cane ; '' subsequent crops which spring from the original roots , without replanting , are called `` rattoons . ''
] Almost everywhere on the island of Hawaii sugar-cane matures in twelve months , both rattoons and plant , and although it ought to be taken off as soon as it tassels , no doubt , it is not absolutely necessary to do it until about four months afterward .
In Kona , the average yield of an acre of ground is two tons of sugar , they say .
This is only a moderate yield for these islands , but would be astounding for Louisiana and most other sugar growing countries .
The plantations in Kona being on pretty high ground -- up among the light and frequent rains -- no irrigation whatever is required .
`` Potations do sometimes wake wines ; turnips restrain passion ; causes necessary to state .
Infest the poor widow ; her lord 's effects will be void .
But dirt , bathing , etc.
, followed unfairly , will worm him from his folly -- so swear not .
Yrxwly , HEVACE EVEELOJ . '
`` DEAR SIR : I fear I do not entirely comprehend your kind note .
It can not be possible , Sir , that 'turnips restrain passion ' -- at least the study or contemplation of turnips can not -- for it is this very employment that has scorched our poor friend 's mind and sapped his bodily strength.
-- But if they do restrain it , will you bear with us a little further and explain how they should be prepared ?
I observe that you say 'causes necessary to state , ' but you have omitted to state them .
`` Under a misapprehension , you seem to attribute to me interested motives in this matter -- to call it by no harsher term .
But I assure you , dear sir , that if I seem to be 'infesting the widow , ' it is all seeming , and void of reality .
It is from no seeking of mine that I am in this position .
She asked me , herself , to write you .
I never have infested her -- indeed I scarcely know her .
I do not infest anybody .
I try to go along , in my humble way , doing as near right as I can , never harming anybody , and never throwing out insinuations .
As for 'her lord and his effects , ' they are of no interest to me .
I trust I have effects enough of my own -- shall endeavor to get along with them , at any rate , and not go mousing around to get hold of somebody 's that are 'void . '
But do you not see ?
-- this woman is a widow -- she has no 'lord . '
He is dead -- or pretended to be , when they buried him .
Therefore , no amount of 'dirt , bathing , ' etc.
, howsoever 'unfairly followed ' will be likely to 'worm him from his folly ' -- if being dead and a ghost is 'folly . '
Your closing remark is as unkind as it was uncalled for ; and if report says true you might have applied it to yourself , sir , with more point and less impropriety .
Very Truly Yours , SIMON ERICKSON .
There were doubtless plenty of Kanaka sentinels on guard hereabouts at that time , but they did not leave casts of their figures in the lava as the Roman sentinels at Herculaneum and Pompeii did .
It is a pity it is so , because such things are so interesting ; but so it is .
They probably went away .
They went away early , perhaps .
However , they had their merits ; the Romans exhibited the higher pluck , but the Kanakas showed the sounder judgment .
His flesh was stripped from the bones and burned ( except nine pounds of it which were sent on board the ships ) .
The heart was hung up in a native hut , where it was found and eaten by three children , who mistook it for the heart of a dog .
One of these children grew to be a very old man , and died in Honolulu a few years ago .
Some of Cook 's bones were recovered and consigned to the deep by the officers of the ships .
Near the shore we found `` Cook 's Monument '' -- only a cocoanut stump , four feet high and about a foot in diameter at the butt .
It had lava boulders piled around its base to hold it up and keep it in its place , and it was entirely sheathed over , from top to bottom , with rough , discolored sheets of copper , such as ships ' bottoms are coppered with .
Each sheet had a rude inscription scratched upon it -- with a nail , apparently -- and in every case the execution was wretched .
Most of these merely recorded the visits of British naval commanders to the spot , but one of them bore this legend :
The idol the natives worshipped for him was a slender , unornamented staff twelve feet long .
Tradition says he was a favorite god on the Island of Hawaii -- a great king who had been deified for meritorious services -- just our own fashion of rewarding heroes , with the difference that we would have made him a Postmaster instead of a god , no doubt .
In an angry moment he slew his wife , a goddess named Kaikilani Aiii .
Remorse of conscience drove him mad , and tradition presents us the singular spectacle of a god traveling `` on the shoulder ; '' for in his gnawing grief he wandered about from place to place boxing and wrestling with all whom he met .
Of course this pastime soon lost its novelty , inasmuch as it must necessarily have been the case that when so powerful a deity sent a frail human opponent `` to grass '' he never came back any more .
Therefore , he instituted games called makahiki , and ordered that they should be held in his honor , and then sailed for foreign lands on a three-cornered raft , stating that he would return some day -- and that was the last of Lono .
He was never seen any more ; his raft got swamped , perhaps .
But the people always expected his return , and thus they were easily led to accept Captain Cook as the restored god .
In those days , if a man killed another anywhere on the island the relatives were privileged to take the murderer 's life ; and then a chase for life and liberty began -- the outlawed criminal flying through pathless forests and over mountain and plain , with his hopes fixed upon the protecting walls of the City of Refuge , and the avenger of blood following hotly after him !
This old sanctuary was sacred to all -- even to rebels in arms and invading armies .
Once within its walls , and confession made to the priest and absolution obtained , the wretch with a price upon his head could go forth without fear and without danger -- he was tabu , and to harm him was death .
The routed rebels in the lost battle for idolatry fled to this place to claim sanctuary , and many were thus saved .
Close to the corner of the great inclosure is a round structure of stone , some six or eight feet high , with a level top about ten or twelve in diameter .
This was the place of execution .
A high palisade of cocoanut piles shut out the cruel scenes from the vulgar multitude .
Here criminals were killed , the flesh stripped from the bones and burned , and the bones secreted in holes in the body of the structure .
If the man had been guilty of a high crime , the entire corpse was burned .
We got back to the schooner in good time , and then sailed down to Kau , where we disembarked and took final leave of the vessel .
Next day we bought horses and bent our way over the summer-clad mountain-terraces , toward the great volcano of Kilauea ( Ke-low-way-ah ) .
We made nearly a two days ' journey of it , but that was on account of laziness .
Toward sunset on the second day , we reached an elevation of some four thousand feet above sea level , and as we picked our careful way through billowy wastes of lava long generations ago stricken dead and cold in the climax of its tossing fury , we began to come upon signs of the near presence of the volcano -- signs in the nature of ragged fissures that discharged jets of sulphurous vapor into the air , hot from the molten ocean down in the bowels of the mountain .
Shortly the crater came into view .
I have seen Vesuvius since , but it was a mere toy , a child 's volcano , a soup-kettle , compared to this .
Mount Vesuvius is a shapely cone thirty-six hundred feet high ; its crater an inverted cone only three hundred feet deep , and not more than a thousand feet in diameter , if as much as that ; its fires meagre , modest , and docile.
-- But here was a vast , perpendicular , walled cellar , nine hundred feet deep in some places , thirteen hundred in others , level-floored , and ten miles in circumference !
Here was a yawning pit upon whose floor the armies of Russia could camp , and have room to spare .
A colossal column of cloud towered to a great height in the air immediately above the crater , and the outer swell of every one of its vast folds was dyed with a rich crimson luster , which was subdued to a pale rose tint in the depressions between .
It glowed like a muffled torch and stretched upward to a dizzy height toward the zenith .
I thought it just possible that its like had not been seen since the children of Israel wandered on their long march through the desert so many centuries ago over a path illuminated by the mysterious `` pillar of fire . ''
And I was sure that I now had a vivid conception of what the majestic `` pillar of fire '' was like , which almost amounted to a revelation .
I forgot to say that the noise made by the bubbling lava is not great , heard as we heard it from our lofty perch .
It makes three distinct sounds -- a rushing , a hissing , and a coughing or puffing sound ; and if you stand on the brink and close your eyes it is no trick at all to imagine that you are sweeping down a river on a large low-pressure steamer , and that you hear the hissing of the steam about her boilers , the puffing from her escape-pipes and the churning rush of the water abaft her wheels .
The smell of sulphur is strong , but not unpleasant to a sinner .
We rode horseback all around the island of Hawaii ( the crooked road making the distance two hundred miles ) , and enjoyed the journey very much .
We were more than a week making the trip , because our Kanaka horses would not go by a house or a hut without stopping -- whip and spur could not alter their minds about it , and so we finally found that it economized time to let them have their way .
Upon inquiry the mystery was explained : the natives are such thorough-going gossips that they never pass a house without stopping to swap news , and consequently their horses learn to regard that sort of thing as an essential part of the whole duty of man , and his salvation not to be compassed without it .
However , at a former crisis of my life I had once taken an aristocratic young lady out driving , behind a horse that had just retired from a long and honorable career as the moving impulse of a milk wagon , and so this present experience awoke a reminiscent sadness in me in place of the exasperation more natural to the occasion .
I remembered how helpless I was that day , and how humiliated ; how ashamed I was of having intimated to the girl that I had always owned the horse and was accustomed to grandeur ; how hard I tried to appear easy , and even vivacious , under suffering that was consuming my vitals ; how placidly and maliciously the girl smiled , and kept on smiling , while my hot blushes baked themselves into a permanent blood-pudding in my face ; how the horse ambled from one side of the street to the other and waited complacently before every third house two minutes and a quarter while I belabored his back and reviled him in my heart ; how I tried to keep him from turning corners and failed ; how I moved heaven and earth to get him out of town , and did not succeed ; how he traversed the entire settlement and delivered imaginary milk at a hundred and sixty-two different domiciles , and how he finally brought up at a dairy depot and refused to budge further , thus rounding and completing the revealment of what the plebeian service of his life had been ; how , in eloquent silence , I walked the girl home , and how , when I took leave of her , her parting remark scorched my soul and appeared to blister me all over : she said that my horse was a fine , capable animal , and I must have taken great comfort in him in my time -- but that if I would take along some milk-tickets next time , and appear to deliver them at the various halting places , it might expedite his movements a little .
There was a coolness between us after that .
I think it was about ten days afterward that , as I finished a statement I was making for the instruction of a group of friends and acquaintances , and which made no pretence of being extraordinary , a familiar voice chimed instantly in on the heels of my last word , and said :
I said I had the headache , and so excused myself and went home .
And on my diary I entered `` another night spoiled '' by this offensive loafer .
And a fervent curse was set down with it to keep the item company .
And the very next day I packed up , out of all patience , and left the Island .
That line has done good service since .
Showmen have borrowed it frequently .
I have even seen it appended to a newspaper advertisement reminding school pupils in vacation what time next term would begin .
As those three days of suspense dragged by , I grew more and more unhappy .
I had sold two hundred tickets among my personal friends , but I feared they might not come .
My lecture , which had seemed `` humorous '' to me , at first , grew steadily more and more dreary , till not a vestige of fun seemed left , and I grieved that I could not bring a coffin on the stage and turn the thing into a funeral .
I was so panic-stricken , at last , that I went to three old friends , giants in stature , cordial by nature , and stormy-voiced , and said :
Just then a dim figure approached me from the direction of Virginia -- a man , evidently .
He came straight at me , and I stepped aside to let him pass ; he stepped in the way and confronted me again .
Then I saw that he had a mask on and was holding something in my face -- I heard a click-click and recognized a revolver in dim outline .
I pushed the barrel aside with my hand and said :
`` You can have them with pleasure -- but take the pistol away from my face , please .
It makes me shiver . ''
`` Well , friend , I 'm trying my best to please you .
You tell me to give up my money , and when I reach for it you tell me to put up my hands .
If you would only -- .
Oh , now -- do n't !
All six of you at me !
That other man will get away while.
-- Now please take some of those revolvers out of my face -- do , if you please !
Every time one of them clicks , my liver comes up into my throat !
If you have a mother -- any of you -- or if any of you have ever had a mother -- or a -- grandmother -- or a -- ''
Will you give up your money , or have we got to -- .
There -- there -- none of that !
Put up your hands ! ''
`` The time 's up , now , aint it ? ''
The joke of these highwayman friends of ours was mainly a joke upon themselves ; for they had waited for me on the cold hill-top two full hours before I came , and there was very little fun in that ; they were so chilled that it took them a couple of weeks to get warm again .
Moreover , I never had a thought that they would kill me to get money which it was so perfectly easy to get without any such folly , and so they did not really frighten me bad enough to make their enjoyment worth the trouble they had taken .
I was only afraid that their weapons would go off accidentally .
Their very numbers inspired me with confidence that no blood would be intentionally spilled .
They were not smart ; they ought to have sent only one highwayman , with a double-barrelled shot gun , if they desired to see the author of this volume climb a tree .
Thus , after seven years of vicissitudes , ended a `` pleasure trip '' to the silver mines of Nevada which had originally been intended to occupy only three months .
However , I usually miss my calculations further than that .
Great Salt Lake City throve finely , and so did Utah .
One of the last things which Brigham Young had done before leaving Iowa , was to appear in the pulpit dressed to personate the worshipped and lamented prophet Smith , and confer the prophetic succession , with all its dignities , emoluments and authorities , upon `` President Brigham Young ! ''
The people accepted the pious fraud with the maddest enthusiasm , and Brigham 's power was sealed and secured for all time .
Within five years afterward he openly added polygamy to the tenets of the church by authority of a `` revelation '' which he pretended had been received nine years before by Joseph Smith , albeit Joseph is amply on record as denouncing polygamy to the day of his death .
Let it be borne in mind that the majority of the Mormons have always been ignorant , simple , of an inferior order of intellect , unacquainted with the world and its ways ; and let it be borne in mind that the wives of these Mormons are necessarily after the same pattern and their children likely to be fit representatives of such a conjunction ; and then let it be remembered that for forty years these creatures have been driven , driven , driven , relentlessly !
and mobbed , beaten , and shot down ; cursed , despised , expatriated ; banished to a remote desert , whither they journeyed gaunt with famine and disease , disturbing the ancient solitudes with their lamentations and marking the long way with graves of their dead -- and all because they were simply trying to live and worship God in the way which they believed with all their hearts and souls to be the true one .
Let all these things be borne in mind , and then it will not be hard to account for the deathless hatred which the Mormons bear our people and our government .
THE MOUNTAIN MEADOWS MASSACRE .
The command of the `` revelation '' was faithfully obeyed .
A large party of Mormons , painted and tricked out as Indians , overtook the train of emigrant wagons some three hundred miles south of Salt Lake City , and made an attack .
But the emigrants threw up earthworks , made fortresses of their wagons and defended themselves gallantly and successfully for five days !
Your Missouri or Arkansas gentleman is not much afraid of the sort of scurvy apologies for `` Indians '' which the southern part of Utah affords .
He would stand up and fight five hundred of them .
An editorial in the Territorial Enterprise of that day says of him and of the occasion :
Had Harney been Governor , Cradlebaugh would have been supported in his work , and the absolute proofs adduced by him of Mormon guilt in this massacre and in a number of previous murders , would have conferred gratuitous coffins upon certain citizens , together with occasion to use them .
But Cumming was the Federal Governor , and he , under a curious pretense of impartiality , sought to screen the Mormons from the demands of justice .
On one occasion he even went so far as to publish his protest against the use of the U.S. troops in aid of Cradlebaugh's proceedings .
The children and the property of the emigrants found in possession of the Mormons , and that possession traced back to the very day after the massacre .
I replied , `` Indeed !
Why he sent me word that he would call on me here this afternoon at four o'clock ! ''
On reaching the editorial part of the News office , which viewed from the street is dark , I did not see Mr. Winters , and again my misgivings arose .
Had I paused long enough to consider the case , I should have invited Sheriff Cummings in , but as Lynch went down stairs , he said : `` This way , Wiegand -- it 's best to be private , '' or some such remark .
Mr. Lynch was present during the most of the time ( say a little short of an hour ) , but three times he left the room .
His testimony , therefore , would be available only as to the bulk of what transpired .
On entering this carpeted den I was invited to a seat near one corner of the room .
Mr. Lynch took a seat near the window .
B. Winters sat ( at first ) near the door , and began his remarks essentially as follows :
`` I have come here to exact of you a retraction , in black and white , of those damnably false charges which you have preferred against me in that -- -infamous lying sheet of yours , and you must declare yourself their author , that you published them knowing them to be false , and that your motives were malicious . ''
`` Hold , Mr. Winters .
Your language is insulting and your demand an enormity .
I trust I was not invited here either to be insulted or coerced .
I supposed myself here by invitation of Mr. Lynch , at your request . ''
To gain time for general reflection and resolution , I took up the paper and looked it over for awhile , he remaining silent , and as I hoped , cooling .
I then resumed saying , `` As I supposed .
I do not admit having written that article , nor have you any right to assume so important a point , and then base important action upon your assumption .
You might deeply regret it afterwards .
In my published Address to the People , I notified the world that no information as to the authorship of any article would be given without the consent of the writer .
I therefore can not honorably tell you who wrote that article , nor can you exact it . ''
`` Passing that point , the most important misapprehension which I notice is , that you regard them as 'charges ' at all , when their context , both at their beginning and end , show they are not .
These words introduce them : 'Such an investigation [ just before indicated ] , we think MIGHT result in showing some of the following points . '
Then follow eleven specifications , and the succeeding paragraph shows that the suggested investigation 'might EXONERATE those who are generally believed guilty . '
You see , therefore , the context proves they are not preferred as charges , and this you seem to have overlooked . ''
-- I resolved to make no motion with my arms or hands which could possibly be construed into aggression .
-- I resolved completely to govern my outward manner and suppress indignation .
To do this , I must govern my spirit .
To do that , by force of imagination I was obliged like actors on the boards to resolve myself into an unnatural mental state and see all things through the eyes of an assumed character .
`` Nor do I , '' said Winters ; `` in fact , I regard it as adding insult to injury .
Mr. Wiegand you 've got to do better than that .
You are not the man who can pull wool over my eyes . ''
`` Well , sir , what 's to be done must be done quickly , for I 've been here long enough already .
I 'll put the thing in another shape ( and then pointing to the paper ) ; do n't you know those charges to be false ? ''
`` Do you know them to be true ? ''
`` Do n't you know that I know they are false ? ''
`` And did you deem it a fit thing to publish ? ''
`` Most assuredly , sir , or I would never have consented to its appearance .
Of its authorship I can say nothing whatever , but for its publication I assume full , sole and personal responsibility . ''
`` And do you then retract it or not ? ''
First -- To terrify me by making me conscious of my own helplessness after making actual though not legal threats against my life .
Though he may not deem it prudent to take my life just now , the publication of this article I feel sure must compel Gen. Winters ( with his peculiar views about his right to exemption from criticism by me ) to resolve on my violent death , though it may take years to compass it .
Notwithstanding I bear him no ill will ; and if W. C. Ralston and William Sharon , and other members of the San Francisco mining and milling Ring feel that he above all other men in this State and California is the most fitting man to supervise and control Yellow Jacket matters , until I am able to vote more than half their stock I presume he will be retained to grace his present post .
That first time that she forsook me !
ah , I shall never forget that -- never , never .
My heart was lead in my body !
I said , `` She was all I had , and now she is gone ! ''
In my despair I said , `` Break , my heart ; I can not bear my life any more ! ''
and hid my face in my hands , and there was no solace for me .
And when I took them away , after a little , there she was again , white and shining and beautiful , and I sprang into her arms !
I wrought again ; and when I had made a good deal of fire-dust I emptied it into a handful of dry brown grass , intending to carry it home and keep it always and play with it ; but the wind struck it and it sprayed up and spat out at me fiercely , and I dropped it and ran .
When I looked back the blue spirit was towering up and stretching and rolling away like a cloud , and instantly I thought of the name of it -- SMOKE !
-- though , upon my word , I had never heard of smoke before .
Soon brilliant yellow and red flares shot up through the smoke , and I named them in an instant -- FLAMES -- and I was right , too , though these were the very first flames that had ever been in the world .
They climbed the trees , then flashed splendidly in and out of the vast and increasing volume of tumbling smoke , and I had to clap my hands and laugh and dance in my rapture , it was so new and strange and so wonderful and so beautiful !
But I was interested .
There were ashes , gray and soft and delicate and pretty -- I knew what they were at once .
And the embers ; I knew the embers , too .
I found my apples , and raked them out , and was glad ; for I am very young and my appetite is active .
But I was disappointed ; they were all burst open and spoiled .
Spoiled apparently ; but it was not so ; they were better than raw ones .
Fire is beautiful ; some day it will be useful , I think .
Perhaps I ought to remember that she is very young , a mere girl and make allowances .
She is all interest , eagerness , vivacity , the world is to her a charm , a wonder , a mystery , a joy ; she ca n't speak for delight when she finds a new flower , she must pet it and caress it and smell it and talk to it , and pour out endearing names upon it .
And she is color-mad : brown rocks , yellow sand , gray moss , green foliage , blue sky ; the pearl of the dawn , the purple shadows on the mountains , the golden islands floating in crimson seas at sunset , the pallid moon sailing through the shredded cloud-rack , the star-jewels glittering in the wastes of space -- none of them is of any practical value , so far as I can see , but because they have color and majesty , that is enough for her , and she loses her mind over them .
If she could quiet down and keep still a couple minutes at a time , it would be a reposeful spectacle .
In that case I think I could enjoy looking at her ; indeed I am sure I could , for I am coming to realize that she is a quite remarkably comely creature -- lithe , slender , trim , rounded , shapely , nimble , graceful ; and once when she was standing marble-white and sun-drenched on a boulder , with her young head tilted back and her hand shading her eyes , watching the flight of a bird in the sky , I recognized that she was beautiful .
I have learned a number of things , and am educated , now , but I was n't at first .
I was ignorant at first .
At first it used to vex me because , with all my watching , I was never smart enough to be around when the water was running uphill ; but now I do not mind it .
I have experimented and experimented until now I know it never does run uphill , except in the dark .
I know it does in the dark , because the pool never goes dry , which it would , of course , if the water did n't come back in the night .
It is best to prove things by actual experiment ; then you KNOW ; whereas if you depend on guessing and supposing and conjecturing , you never get educated .
At first I could n't make out what I was made for , but now I think it was to search out the secrets of this wonderful world and be happy and thank the Giver of it all for devising it .
I think there are many things to learn yet -- I hope so ; and by economizing and not hurrying too fast I think they will last weeks and weeks .
When you cast up a feather it sails away on the air and goes out of sight ; then you throw up a clod and it does n't .
It comes down , every time .
I have tried it and tried it , and it is always so .
I wonder why it is ?
Of course it DOES N'T come down , but why should it SEEM to ?
I suppose it is an optical illusion .
I mean , one of them is .
I do n't know which one .
It may be the feather , it may be the clod ; I ca n't prove which it is , I can only demonstrate that one or the other is a fake , and let a person take his choice .
`` We observe that our contemporary of the Mud Springs _Morning Howl_ has fallen into the error of supposing that the election of Van Werter is not an established fact , but he will have discovered his mistake before this reminder reaches him , no doubt .
He was doubtless misled by incomplete election returns .
`` Thunder and lightning !
Do you suppose I am going to speak of those cattle that way ?
Do you suppose my subscribers are going to stand such gruel as that ?
Give me the pen ! ''
I took the manuscript .
It was scarred with erasures and interlineations till its mother would n't have known it if it had had one .
It now read as follows :
Be seated , sir .
Be careful of the chair , one of its legs is gone .
I believe I have the honor of addressing the putrid liar , Colonel Blatherskite Tecumseh ? ''
Both pistols rang out their fierce clamor at the same instant .
The chief lost a lock of his hair , and the Colonel 's bullet ended its career in the fleshy part of my thigh .
The Colonel 's left shoulder was clipped a little .
Both missed their men this time , but I got my share , a shot in the arm .
At the third fire both gentlemen were wounded slightly , and I had a knuckle chipped .
I then said I believed I would go out and take a walk , as this was a private matter , and I had a delicacy about participating in it further .
But both gentlemen begged me to keep my seat , and assured me that I was not in the way .
He continued : `` Jones will be here at three -- cowhide him .
Gillespie will call earlier , perhaps -- throw him out of the window .
Ferguson will be along about four -- kill him .
That is all for to-day , I believe .
If you have any odd time , you may write a blistering article on the police -- give the chief inspector rats .
The cowhides are under the table ; weapons in the drawer -- ammunition there in the corner -- lint and bandages up there in the pigeon-holes .
In case of accident , go to Lancet , the surgeon , down-stairs .
He advertises -- we take it out in trade . ''
I said : `` I 'll have to get you to excuse me ; I think maybe I might write to suit you after a while ; as soon as I had had some practice and learned the language I am confident I could .
But , to speak the plain truth , that sort of energy of expression has its inconveniences , and a man is liable to interruption .
You see that yourself .
Vigorous writing is calculated to elevate the public , no doubt , but then I do not like to attract so much attention as it calls forth .
I ca n't write with comfort when I am interrupted so much as I have been to-day .
I like this berth well enough , but I do n't like to be left here to wait on the customers .
The experiences are novel , I grant you , and entertaining , too , after a fashion , but they are not judiciously distributed .
A gentleman shoots at you through the window and cripples _me_ ; a bomb-shell comes down the stove-pipe for your gratification and sends the stove-door down _my_ throat ; a friend drops in to swap compliments with you , and freckles _me_ with bullet-holes till my skin won't hold my principles ; you go to dinner , and Jones comes with his cowhide , Gillespie throws me out of the window , Thompson tears all my clothes off , and an entire stranger takes my scalp with the easy freedom of an old acquaintance ; and in less than five minutes all the blackguards in the country arrive in their war-paint , and proceed to scare the rest of me to death with their tomahawks .
Take it altogether , I never had such a spirited time in all my life as I have had to-day .
No ; I like you , and I like your calm , unruffled way of explaining things to the customers , but you see I am not used to it .
The Southern heart is too impulsive ; Southern hospitality is too lavish with the stranger .
The paragraphs which I have written to-day , and into whose cold sentences your masterly hand has infused the fervent spirit of Tennessean journalism , will wake up another nest of hornets .
All that mob of editors will come -- and they will come hungry , too , and want somebody for breakfast .
I shall have to bid you adieu .
I decline to be present at these festivities .
I came South for my health ; I will go back on the same errand , and suddenly .
Tennessean journalism is too stirring for me . ''
`` Pap 's so po ' he cai n't run me no mo ' , so I want to git a show somers if I kin , 'tai n't no diffunce what -- I 'm strong and hearty , and I do n't turn my back on no kind of work , hard nur soft . ''
`` Yes -- middlin ' . ''
`` Well , I 've seed people could lay over me thar . ''
`` But suppose he did spell it with a little g -- what then ? ''
The village smarties recognized a treasure in Nicodemus right away -- a butt to play jokes on .
It was easy to see that he was inconceivably green and confiding .
George Jones had the glory of perpetrating the first joke on him ; he gave him a cigar with a fire-cracker in it and winked to the crowd to come ; the thing exploded presently and swept away the bulk of Nicodemus 's eyebrows and eyelashes .
-- Last evening , about six o'clock , as Mr. William Schuyler , an old and respectable citizen of South Park , was leaving his residence to go down-town , as has been his usual custom for many years with the exception only of a short interval in the spring of 1850 , during which he was confined to his bed by injuries received in attempting to stop a runaway horse by thoughtlessly placing himself directly in its wake and throwing up his hands and shouting , which , if he had done so even a single moment sooner , must inevitably have frightened the animal still more instead of checking its speed , although disastrous enough to himself as it was , and rendered more melancholy and distressing by reason of the presence of his wife 's mother , who was there and saw the sad occurrence , notwithstanding it is at least likely , though not necessarily so , that she should be reconnoitring in another direction when incidents occur , not being vivacious and on the lookout , as a general thing , but even the reverse , as her own mother is said to have stated , who is no more , but died in the full hope of a glorious resurrection , upward of three years ago , aged eighty-six , being a Christian woman and without guile , as it were , or property , in consequence of the fire of 1849 , which destroyed every single thing she had in the world .
But such is life .
Let us all take warning by this solemn occurrence , and let us endeavor so to conduct ourselves that when we come to die we can do it .
Let us place our hands upon our heart , and say with earnestness and sincerity that from this day forth we will beware of the intoxicating bowl.
-- _First edition of the Californian._
I have read it again , and it does really seem a good deal more mixed than ever .
The editor was looking sad and perplexed and dejected .
I am an American .
I was born and reared in Hartford , in the State of Connecticut -- anyway , just over the river , in the country .
So I am a Yankee of the Yankees -- and practical ; yes , and nearly barren of sentiment , I suppose -- or poetry , in other words .
My father was a blacksmith , my uncle was a horse doctor , and I was both , along at first .
Then I went over to the great arms factory and learned my real trade ; learned all there was to it ; learned to make everything : guns , revolvers , cannon , boilers , engines , all sorts of labor-saving machinery .
Why , I could make anything a body wanted -- anything in the world , it did n't make any difference what ; and if there was n't any quick new-fangled way to make a thing , I could invent one -- and do it as easy as rolling off a log .
I became head superintendent ; had a couple of thousand men under me .
My stranger had been showing signs of sleepiness .
He caught himself nodding , now , and smiled one of those pathetic , obsolete smiles of his , and said :
In his chamber , he said : `` First , I kept a journal ; then by and by , after years , I took the journal and turned it into a book .
How long ago that was ! ''
`` Begin here -- I 've already told you what goes before . ''
He was steeped in drowsiness by this time .
As I went out at his door I heard him murmur sleepily : `` Give you good den , fair sir . ''
I sat down by my fire and examined my treasure .
The first part of it -- the great bulk of it -- was parchment , and yellow with age .
I scanned a leaf particularly and saw that it was a palimpsest .
Under the old dim writing of the Yankee historian appeared traces of a penmanship which was older and dimmer still -- Latin words and sentences : fragments from old monkish legends , evidently .
I turned to the place indicated by my stranger and began to read -- as follows :
In the town were some substantial windowless houses of stone scattered among a wilderness of thatched cabins ; the streets were mere crooked alleys , and unpaved ; troops of dogs and nude children played in the sun and made life and noise ; hogs roamed and rooted contentedly about , and one of them lay in a reeking wallow in the middle of the main thoroughfare and suckled her family .
Presently there was a distant blare of military music ; it came nearer , still nearer , and soon a noble cavalcade wound into view , glorious with plumed helmets and flashing mail and flaunting banners and rich doublets and horse-cloths and gilded spearheads ; and through the muck and swine , and naked brats , and joyous dogs , and shabby huts , it took its gallant way , and in its wake we followed .
Followed through one winding alley and then another , -- and climbing , always climbing -- till at last we gained the breezy height where the huge castle stood .
There was an exchange of bugle blasts ; then a parley from the walls , where men-at-arms , in hauberk and morion , marched back and forth with halberd at shoulder under flapping banners with the rude figure of a dragon displayed upon them ; and then the great gates were flung open , the drawbridge was lowered , and the head of the cavalcade swept forward under the frowning arches ; and we , following , soon found ourselves in a great paved court , with towers and turrets stretching up into the blue air on all the four sides ; and all about us the dismount was going on , and much greeting and ceremony , and running to and fro , and a gay display of moving and intermingling colors , and an altogether pleasant stir and noise and confusion .
It was pretty severe , but I was nettled .
However , it never phazed him ; he did n't appear to know he was hurt .
He began to talk and laugh , in happy , thoughtless , boyish fashion , as we walked along , and made himself old friends with me at once ; asked me all sorts of questions about myself and about my clothes , but never waited for an answer -- always chattered straight ahead , as if he didn't know he had asked a question and was n't expecting any reply , until at last he happened to mention that he was born in the beginning of the year 513 .
You do n't look it !
Come , my boy , I am a stranger and friendless ; be honest and honorable with me .
Are you in your right mind ? ''
`` Well , then , '' I said , `` either I am a lunatic , or something just as awful has happened .
Now tell me , honest and true , where am I ? ''
`` And according to your notions , what year is it now ? ''
He made a long story of it ; but the part that had immediate interest for me was this : He said I was Sir Kay 's prisoner , and that in the due course of custom I would be flung into a dungeon and left there on scant commons until my friends ransomed me -- unless I chanced to rot , first .
I saw that the last chance had the best show , but I did n't waste any bother about that ; time was too precious .
The page said , further , that dinner was about ended in the great hall by this time , and that as soon as the sociability and the heavy drinking should begin , Sir Kay would have me in and exhibit me before King Arthur and his illustrious knights seated at the Table Round , and would brag about his exploit in capturing me , and would probably exaggerate the facts a little , but it would n't be good form for me to correct him , and not over safe , either ; and when I was done being exhibited , then ho for the dungeon ; but he , Clarence , would find a way to come and see me every now and then , and cheer me up , and help me get word to my friends .
Get word to my friends !
I thanked him ; I could n't do less ; and about this time a lackey came to say I was wanted ; so Clarence led me in and took me off to one side and sat down by me .
Everybody praised the valor and magnanimity of Sir Launcelot ; and as for me , I was perfectly amazed , that one man , all by himself , should have been able to beat down and capture such battalions of practiced fighters .
I said as much to Clarence ; but this mocking featherhead only said :
`` An Sir Kay had had time to get another skin of sour wine into him , ye had seen the accompt doubled . ''
`` Merlin , the mighty liar and magician , perdition singe him for the weariness he worketh with his one tale !
But that men fear him for that he hath the storms and the lightnings and all the devils that be in hell at his beck and call , they would have dug his entrails out these many years ago to get at that tale and squelch it .
He telleth it always in the third person , making believe he is too modest to glorify himself -- maledictions light upon him , misfortune be his dole !
Good friend , prithee call me for evensong . ''
The boy nestled himself upon my shoulder and pretended to go to sleep .
The old man began his tale ; and presently the lad was asleep in reality ; so also were the dogs , and the court , the lackeys , and the files of men-at-arms .
The droning voice droned on ; a soft snoring arose on all sides and supported it like a deep and subdued accompaniment of wind instruments .
Some heads were bowed upon folded arms , some lay back with open mouths that issued unconscious music ; the flies buzzed and bit , unmolested , the rats swarmed softly out from a hundred holes , and pattered about , and made themselves at home everywhere ; and one of them sat up like a squirrel on the king 's head and held a bit of cheese in its hands and nibbled it , and dribbled the crumbs in the king 's face with naive and impudent irreverence .
It was a tranquil scene , and restful to the weary eye and the jaded spirit .
Sir Dinadan the Humorist was the first to awake , and he soon roused the rest with a practical joke of a sufficiently poor quality .
He tied some metal mugs to a dog 's tail and turned him loose , and he tore around and around the place in a frenzy of fright , with all the other dogs bellowing after him and battering and crashing against everything that came in their way and making altogether a chaos of confusion and a most deafening din and turmoil ; at which every man and woman of the multitude laughed till the tears flowed , and some fell out of their chairs and wallowed on the floor in ecstasy .
It was just like so many children .
Sir Dinadan was so proud of his exploit that he could not keep from telling over and over again , to weariness , how the immortal idea happened to occur to him ; and as is the way with humorists of his breed , he was still laughing at it after everybody else had got through .
He was so set up that he concluded to make a speech -- of course a humorous speech .
I think I never heard so many old played-out jokes strung together in my life .
He was worse than the minstrels , worse than the clown in the circus .
It seemed peculiarly sad to sit here , thirteen hundred years before I was born , and listen again to poor , flat , worm-eaten jokes that had given me the dry gripes when I was a boy thirteen hundred years afterwards .
It about convinced me that there is n't any such thing as a new joke possible .
Everybody laughed at these antiquities -- but then they always do ; I had noticed that , centuries later .
However , of course the scoffer did n't laugh -- I mean the boy .
No , he scoffed ; there was n't anything he would n't scoff at .
He said the most of Sir Dinadan 's jokes were rotten and the rest were petrified .
I said `` petrified '' was good ; as I believed , myself , that the only right way to classify the majestic ages of some of those jokes was by geologic periods .
But that neat idea hit the boy in a blank place , for geology had n't been invented yet .
However , I made a note of the remark , and calculated to educate the commonwealth up to it if I pulled through .
It is no use to throw a good thing away merely because the market is n't ripe yet .
They were so troubled about my enchanted clothes that they were mightily relieved , at last , when old Merlin swept the difficulty away for them with a common-sense hint .
He asked them why they were so dull -- why did n't it occur to them to strip me .
In half a minute I was as naked as a pair of tongs !
And dear , dear , to think of it : I was the only embarrassed person there .
Everybody discussed me ; and did it as unconcernedly as if I had been a cabbage .
Queen Guenever was as naively interested as the rest , and said she had never seen anybody with legs just like mine before .
It was the only compliment I got -- if it was a compliment .
Finally I was carried off in one direction , and my perilous clothes in another .
I was shoved into a dark and narrow cell in a dungeon , with some scant remnants for dinner , some moldy straw for a bed , and no end of rats for company .
Why , the dream that I am in Arthur 's court -- a person who never existed ; and that I am talking to you , who are nothing but a work of the imagination . ''
`` Oh , la , indeed !
and is it a dream that you 're to be burned to-morrow ?
Ho-ho -- answer me that ! ''
`` Full a score .
One may not hope to escape . ''
After a pause -- hesitatingly : `` and there be other reasons -- and weightier . ''
What are they ? ''
He hesitated , pulled one way by desire , the other way by fear ; then he stole to the door and peeped out , listening ; and finally crept close to me and put his mouth to my ear and told me his fearful news in a whisper , and with all the cowering apprehension of one who was venturing upon awful ground and speaking of things whose very mention might be freighted with death .
`` Merlin , in his malice , has woven a spell about this dungeon , and there bides not the man in these kingdoms that would be desperate enough to essay to cross its lines with you !
Now God pity me , I have told it !
Ah , be kind to me , be merciful to a poor boy who means thee well ; for an thou betray me I am lost ! ''
I laughed the only really refreshing laugh I had had for some time ; and shouted :
`` Merlin has wrought a spell !
That cheap old humbug , that maundering old ass ?
Bosh , pure bosh , the silliest bosh in the world !
Why , it does seem to me that of all the childish , idiotic , chuckle-headed , chicken-livered superstitions that ev -- oh , damn Merlin ! ''
`` No -- but for our blessed Lady 's sake , do it no more . ''
`` I hasted the message to our liege the king , and straightway he had me to his presence .
He was frighted even to the marrow , and was minded to give order for your instant enlargement , and that you be clothed in fine raiment and lodged as befitted one so great ; but then came Merlin and spoiled all ; for he persuaded the king that you are mad , and know not whereof you speak ; and said your threat is but foolishness and idle vaporing .
They disputed long , but in the end , Merlin , scoffing , said , 'Wherefore hath he not _named_ his brave calamity ?
Verily it is because he can not . '
This thrust did in a most sudden sort close the king's mouth , and he could offer naught to turn the argument ; and so , reluctant , and full loth to do you the discourtesy , he yet prayeth you to consider his perplexed case , as noting how the matter stands , and name the calamity -- if so be you have determined the nature of it and the time of its coming .
Oh , prithee delay not ; to delay at such a time were to double and treble the perils that already compass thee about .
Oh , be thou wise -- name the calamity ! ''
Then I have slept well , sure enough .
Nine in the morning now !
And yet it is the very complexion of midnight , to a shade .
This is the 20th , then ? ''
`` At high noon . ''
`` But this is a mistake -- the execution is to-morrow . ''
I choked out some words through my grief and misery ; as much as to say I would spare the sun ; for which the lad 's eyes paid me back with such deep and loving gratitude that I had not the heart to tell him his good-hearted foolishness had ruined me and sent me to my death .
`` Stay where you are .
If any man moves -- even the king -- before I give him leave , I will blast him with thunder , I will consume him with lightnings ! ''
That made an immense effect ; up went appealing hands everywhere , and the king was assailed with a storm of supplications that I might be bought off at any price , and the calamity stayed .
The king was eager to comply .
`` I have reflected , Sir King .
For a lesson , I will let this darkness proceed , and spread night in the world ; but whether I blot out the sun for good , or restore it , shall rest with you .
These are the terms , to wit : You shall remain king over all your dominions , and receive all the glories and honors that belong to the kingship ; but you shall appoint me your perpetual minister and executive , and give me for my services one per cent of such actual increase of revenue over and above its present amount as I may succeed in creating for the state .
If I ca n't live on that , I sha'n't ask anybody to give me a lift .
Is it satisfactory ? ''
Inasmuch as I was now the second personage in the Kingdom , as far as political power and authority were concerned , much was made of me .
My raiment was of silks and velvets and cloth of gold , and by consequence was very showy , also uncomfortable .
But habit would soon reconcile me to my clothes ; I was aware of that .
I was given the choicest suite of apartments in the castle , after the king 's .
They were aglow with loud-colored silken hangings , but the stone floors had nothing but rushes on them for a carpet , and they were misfit rushes at that , being not all of one breed .
As for conveniences , properly speaking , there were n't any .
I mean _little_ conveniences ; it is the little conveniences that make the real comfort of life .
The big oaken chairs , graced with rude carvings , were well enough , but that was the stopping place .
There was no soap , no matches , no looking-glass -- except a metal one , about as powerful as a pail of water .
And not a chromo .
I had been used to chromos for years , and I saw now that without my suspecting it a passion for art had got worked into the fabric of my being , and was become a part of me .
It made me homesick to look around over this proud and gaudy but heartless barrenness and remember that in our house in East Hartford , all unpretending as it was , you could n't go into a room but you would find an insurance-chromo , or at least a three-color God-Bless-Our-Home over the door ; and in the parlor we had nine .
But here , even in my grand room of state , there was n't anything in the nature of a picture except a thing the size of a bedquilt , which was either woven or knitted ( it had darned places in it ) , and nothing in it was the right color or the right shape ; and as for proportions , even Raphael himself could n't have botched them more formidably , after all his practice on those nightmares they call his `` celebrated Hampton Court cartoons . ''
Raphael was a bird .
We had several of his chromos ; one was his `` Miraculous Draught of Fishes , '' where he puts in a miracle of his own -- puts three men into a canoe which would n't have held a dog without upsetting .
I always admired to study R. 's art , it was so fresh and unconventional .
One thing troubled me along at first -- the immense interest which people took in me .
Apparently the whole nation wanted a look at me .
It soon transpired that the eclipse had scared the British world almost to death ; that while it lasted the whole country , from one end to the other , was in a pitiable state of panic , and the churches , hermitages , and monkeries overflowed with praying and weeping poor creatures who thought the end of the world was come .
Then had followed the news that the producer of this awful event was a stranger , a mighty magician at Arthur 's court ; that he could have blown out the sun like a candle , and was just going to do it when his mercy was purchased , and he then dissolved his enchantments , and was now recognized and honored as the man who had by his unaided might saved the globe from destruction and its peoples from extinction .
Now if you consider that everybody believed that , and not only believed it , but never even dreamed of doubting it , you will easily understand that there was not a person in all Britain that would not have walked fifty miles to get a sight of me .
Of course I was all the talk -- all other subjects were dropped ; even the king became suddenly a person of minor interest and notoriety .
Within twenty-four hours the delegations began to arrive , and from that time onward for a fortnight they kept coming .
The village was crowded , and all the countryside .
I had to go out a dozen times a day and show myself to these reverent and awe-stricken multitudes .
It came to be a great burden , as to time and trouble , but of course it was at the same time compensatingly agreeable to be so celebrated and such a center of homage .
It turned Brer Merlin green with envy and spite , which was a great satisfaction to me .
But there was one thing I couldn't understand -- nobody had asked for an autograph .
I spoke to Clarence about it .
I had to explain to him what it was .
Then he said nobody in the country could read or write but a few dozen priests .
There was another thing that troubled me a little .
Those multitudes presently began to agitate for another miracle .
To be able to carry back to their far homes the boast that they had seen the man who could command the sun , riding in the heavens , and be obeyed , would make them great in the eyes of their neighbors , and envied by them all ; but to be able to also say they had seen him work a miracle themselves -- why , people would come a distance to see _them_ .
The pressure got to be pretty strong .
There was going to be an eclipse of the moon , and I knew the date and hour , but it was too far away .
I would have given a good deal for license to hurry it up and use it now when there was a big market for it .
It seemed a great pity to have it wasted so , and come lagging along at a time when a body would n't have any use for it , as like as not .
If it had been booked for only a month away , I could have sold it short ; but , as matters stood , I couldn't seem to cipher out any way to make it do me any good , so I gave up trying .
Next , Clarence found that old Merlin was making himself busy on the sly among those people .
He was spreading a report that I was a humbug , and that the reason I did n't accommodate the people with a miracle was because I could n't .
I saw that I must do something .
I presently thought out a plan .
Thunder-showers had been tolerably frequent of late , and I was not much afraid of a failure ; still , I should n't have cared for a delay of a day or two ; I should have explained that I was busy with affairs of state yet , and the people must wait .
Merlin arrived in a gloomy mood .
`` You wanted to burn me alive when I had not done you any harm , and latterly you have been trying to injure my professional reputation .
Therefore I am going to call down fire and blow up your tower , but it is only fair to give you a chance ; now if you think you can break my enchantments and ward off the fires , step to the bat , it 's your innings . ''
`` You have had time enough .
I have given you every advantage , and not interfered .
It is plain your magic is weak .
It is only fair that I begin now . ''
Well , it was a curious country , and full of interest .
They were the quaintest and simplest and trustingest race ; why , they were nothing but rabbits .
It was pitiful for a person born in a wholesome free atmosphere to listen to their humble and hearty outpourings of loyalty toward their king and Church and nobility ; as if they had any more occasion to love and honor king and Church and noble than a slave has to love and honor the lash , or a dog has to love and honor the stranger that kicks him !
Why , dear me , _any_ kind of royalty , howsoever modified , _any_ kind of aristocracy , howsoever pruned , is rightly an insult ; but if you are born and brought up under that sort of arrangement you probably never find it out for yourself , and do n't believe it when somebody else tells you .
It is enough to make a body ashamed of his race to think of the sort of froth that has always occupied its thrones without shadow of right or reason , and the seventh-rate people that have always figured as its aristocracies -- a company of monarchs and nobles who , as a rule , would have achieved only poverty and obscurity if left , like their betters , to their own exertions .
The most of King Arthur 's British nation were slaves , pure and simple , and bore that name , and wore the iron collar on their necks ; and the rest were slaves in fact , but without the name ; they imagined themselves men and freemen , and called themselves so .
The truth was , the nation as a body was in the world for one object , and one only : to grovel before king and Church and noble ; to slave for them , sweat blood for them , starve that they might be fed , work that they might play , drink misery to the dregs that they might be happy , go naked that they might wear silks and jewels , pay taxes that they might be spared from paying them , be familiar all their lives with the degrading language and postures of adulation that they might walk in pride and think themselves the gods of this world .
And for all this , the thanks they got were cuffs and contempt ; and so poor-spirited were they that they took even this sort of attention as an honor .
Well , whenever one of those people got a thing into his head , there was no getting it out again .
I knew that , so I saved my breath , and offered no explanations .
As soon as Sir Sagramor got well , he notified me that there was a little account to settle between us , and he named a day three or four years in the future ; place of settlement , the lists where the offense had been given .
I said I would be ready when he got back .
You see , he was going for the Holy Grail .
The boys all took a flier at the Holy Grail now and then .
It was a several years ' cruise .
They always put in the long absence snooping around , in the most conscientious way , though none of them had any idea where the Holy Grail really was , and I do n't think any of them actually expected to find it , or would have known what to do with it if he _had_ run across it .
You see , it was just the Northwest Passage of that day , as you may say ; that was all .
Every year expeditions went out holy grailing , and next year relief expeditions went out to hunt for _them_ .
There was worlds of reputation in it , but no money .
Why , they actually wanted _me_ to put in !
Well , I should smile .
My works showed what a despot could do with the resources of a kingdom at his command .
Unsuspected by this dark land , I had the civilization of the nineteenth century booming under its very nose !
It was fenced away from the public view , but there it was , a gigantic and unassailable fact -- and to be heard from , yet , if I lived and had luck .
There it was , as sure a fact and as substantial a fact as any serene volcano , standing innocent with its smokeless summit in the blue sky and giving no sign of the rising hell in its bowels .
My schools and churches were children four years before ; they were grown-up now ; my shops of that day were vast factories now ; where I had a dozen trained men then , I had a thousand now ; where I had one brilliant expert then , I had fifty now .
I stood with my hand on the cock , so to speak , ready to turn it on and flood the midnight world with light at any moment .
But I was not going to do the thing in that sudden way .
It was not my policy .
The people could not have stood it ; and , moreover , I should have had the Established Roman Catholic Church on my back in a minute .
We had another large departure on hand , too .
This was a telegraph and a telephone ; our first venture in this line .
These wires were for private service only , as yet , and must be kept private until a riper day should come .
We had a gang of men on the road , working mainly by night .
They were stringing ground wires ; we were afraid to put up poles , for they would attract too much inquiry .
Ground wires were good enough , in both instances , for my wires were protected by an insulation of my own invention which was perfect .
My men had orders to strike across country , avoiding roads , and establishing connection with any considerable towns whose lights betrayed their presence , and leaving experts in charge .
Nobody could tell you how to find any place in the kingdom , for nobody ever went intentionally to any place , but only struck it by accident in his wanderings , and then generally left it without thinking to inquire what its name was .
At one time and another we had sent out topographical expeditions to survey and map the kingdom , but the priests had always interfered and raised trouble .
So we had given the thing up , for the present ; it would be poor wisdom to antagonize the Church .
By an effort , I contained my joy when Clarence brought me the news .
But he -- he could not contain his .
His mouth gushed delight and gratitude in a steady discharge -- delight in my good fortune , gratitude to the king for this splendid mark of his favor for me .
He could keep neither his legs nor his body still , but pirouetted about the place in an airy ecstasy of happiness .
`` Land of Moder .
I do n't remember hearing of it before .
`` What , a map ?
What are you talking about ?
Do n't you know what a map is ?
There , there , never mind , do n't explain , I hate explanations ; they fog a thing up so that you ca n't tell anything about it .
Run along , dear ; good-day ; show her the way , Clarence . ''
I was to have an early breakfast , and start at dawn , for that was the usual way ; but I had the demon 's own time with my armor , and this delayed me a little .
It is troublesome to get into , and there is so much detail .
First you wrap a layer or two of blanket around your body , for a sort of cushion and to keep off the cold iron ; then you put on your sleeves and shirt of chain mail -- these are made of small steel links woven together , and they form a fabric so flexible that if you toss your shirt onto the floor , it slumps into a pile like a peck of wet fish-net ; it is very heavy and is nearly the uncomfortablest material in the world for a night shirt , yet plenty used it for that -- tax collectors , and reformers , and one-horse kings with a defective title , and those sorts of people ; then you put on your shoes -- flat-boats roofed over with interleaving bands of steel -- and screw your clumsy spurs into the heels .
Next you buckle your greaves on your legs , and your cuisses on your thighs ; then come your backplate and your breastplate , and you begin to feel crowded ; then you hitch onto the breastplate the half-petticoat of broad overlapping bands of steel which hangs down in front but is scolloped out behind so you can sit down , and is n't any real improvement on an inverted coal scuttle , either for looks or for wear , or to wipe your hands on ; next you belt on your sword ; then you put your stove-pipe joints onto your arms , your iron gauntlets onto your hands , your iron rat-trap onto your head , with a rag of steel web hitched onto it to hang over the back of your neck -- and there you are , snug as a candle in a candle-mould .
This is no time to dance .
Well , a man that is packed away like that is a nut that is n't worth the cracking , there is so little of the meat , when you get down to it , by comparison with the shell .
The boys helped me , or I never could have got in .
Just as we finished , Sir Bedivere happened in , and I saw that as like as not I had n't chosen the most convenient outfit for a long trip .
How stately he looked ; and tall and broad and grand .
He had on his head a conical steel casque that only came down to his ears , and for visor had only a narrow steel bar that extended down to his upper lip and protected his nose ; and all the rest of him , from neck to heel , was flexible chain mail , trousers and all .
But pretty much all of him was hidden under his outside garment , which of course was of chain mail , as I said , and hung straight from his shoulders to his ankles ; and from his middle to the bottom , both before and behind , was divided , so that he could ride and let the skirts hang down on each side .
He was going grailing , and it was just the outfit for it , too .
I would have given a good deal for that ulster , but it was too late now to be fooling around .
The sun was just up , the king and the court were all on hand to see me off and wish me luck ; so it would n't be etiquette for me to tarry .
You do n't get on your horse yourself ; no , if you tried it you would get disappointed .
They carry you out , just as they carry a sun-struck man to the drug store , and put you on , and help get you to rights , and fix your feet in the stirrups ; and all the while you do feel so strange and stuffy and like somebody else -- like somebody that has been married on a sudden , or struck by lightning , or something like that , and has n't quite fetched around yet , and is sort of numb , and ca n't just get his bearings .
Then they stood up the mast they called a spear , in its socket by my left foot , and I gripped it with my hand ; lastly they hung my shield around my neck , and I was all complete and ready to up anchor and get to sea .
Everybody was as good to me as they could be , and a maid of honor gave me the stirrup-cup her own self .
There was nothing more to do now , but for that damsel to get up behind me on a pillion , which she did , and put an arm or so around me to hold on .
`` Oh , what a guy ! ''
And hove clods at us .
`` Take a rest , child ; the way you are using up all the domestic air , the kingdom will have to go to importing it by to-morrow , and it's a low enough treasury without that . ''
All those trying hours whilst I was frozen and yet was in a living fire , as you may say , on account of that swarm of crawlers , that same unanswerable question kept circling and circling through my tired head : How do people stand this miserable armor ?
How have they managed to stand it all these generations ?
How can they sleep at night for dreading the tortures of next day ?
You see my kind of loyalty was loyalty to one 's country , not to its institutions or its office-holders .
The country is the real thing , the substantial thing , the eternal thing ; it is the thing to watch over , and care for , and be loyal to ; institutions are extraneous , they are its mere clothing , and clothing can wear out , become ragged , cease to be comfortable , cease to protect the body from winter , disease , and death .
To be loyal to rags , to shout for rags , to worship rags , to die for rags -- that is a loyalty of unreason , it is pure animal ; it belongs to monarchy , was invented by monarchy ; let monarchy keep it .
I was from Connecticut , whose Constitution declares `` that all political power is inherent in the people , and all free governments are founded on their authority and instituted for their benefit ; and that they have _at all times_ an undeniable and indefeasible right to _alter their form of government_ in such a manner as they may think expedient . ''
Under that gospel , the citizen who thinks he sees that the commonwealth 's political clothes are worn out , and yet holds his peace and does not agitate for a new suit , is disloyal ; he is a traitor .
That he may be the only one who thinks he sees this decay , does not excuse him ; it is his duty to agitate anyway , and it is the duty of the others to vote him down if they do not see the matter as he does .
`` No you wo n't , you wo n't be anybody 's slave .
Take your family and go along .
Your lord the bishop will confiscate your small property , but no matter .
Clarence will fix you all right . ''
We tarried with a holy hermit , that night , and my opportunity came about the middle of the next afternoon .
We were crossing a vast meadow by way of short-cut , and I was musing absently , hearing nothing , seeing nothing , when Sandy suddenly interrupted a remark which she had begun that morning , with the cry :
`` Lack-a-day , sir , they be not of that breed !
Sir Launcelot will give battle to dragons , and will abide by them , and will assail them again , and yet again , and still again , until he do conquer and destroy them ; and so likewise will Sir Pellinore and Sir Aglovale and Sir Carados , and mayhap others , but there be none else that will venture it , let the idle say what the idle will .
And , la , as to yonder base rufflers , think ye they have not their fill , but yet desire more ? ''
You see , I recognized my mistake at once .
I had set her works a-going ; it was my own fault ; she would be thirty days getting down to those facts .
And she generally began without a preface and finished without a result .
If you interrupted her she would either go right along without noticing , or answer with a couple of words , and go back and say the sentence over again .
So , interruptions only did harm ; and yet I had to interrupt , and interrupt pretty frequently , too , in order to save my life ; a person would die if he let her monotony drip on him right along all day .
If you 've got a fault in the world , Sandy , it is that you are a shade too archaic .
But it is n't any matter . ''
`` -- for I saw him once proved at a justs where many knights were gathered , and that time there might no man withstand him .
Ah , said Sir Gawaine , damsels , methinketh ye are to blame , for it is to suppose he that hung that shield there will not be long therefrom , and then may those knights match him on horseback , and that is more your worship than thus ; for I will abide no longer to see a knight 's shield dishonored .
And therewith Sir Uwaine and Sir Gawaine departed a little from them , and then were they ware where Sir Marhaus came riding on a great horse straight toward them .
And when the twelve damsels saw Sir Marhaus they fled into the turret as they were wild , so that some of them fell by the way .
Then the one of the knights of the tower dressed his shield , and said on high , Sir Marhaus defend thee .
And so they ran together that the knight brake his spear on Marhaus , and Sir Marhaus smote him so hard that he brake his neck and the horse 's back -- ''
`` The truth is , Alisande , these archaics are a little _too_ simple ; the vocabulary is too limited , and so , by consequence , descriptions suffer in the matter of variety ; they run too much to level Saharas of fact , and not enough to picturesque detail ; this throws about them a certain air of the monotonous ; in fact the fights are all alike : a couple of people come together with great random -- random is a good word , and so is exegesis , for that matter , and so is holocaust , and defalcation , and usufruct and a hundred others , but land !
a body ought to discriminate -- they come together with great random , and a spear is brast , and one party brake his shield and the other one goes down , horse and man , over his horse-tail and brake his neck , and then the next candidate comes randoming in , and brast _his_ spear , and the other man brast his shield , and down _he_ goes , horse and man , over his horse-tail , and brake _his_ neck , and then there 's another elected , and another and another and still another , till the material is all used up ; and when you come to figure up results , you ca n't tell one fight from another , nor who whipped ; and as a _picture_ , of living , raging , roaring battle , sho !
why , it 's pale and noiseless -- just ghosts scuffling in a fog .
Dear me , what would this barren vocabulary get out of the mightiest spectacle ?
-- the burning of Rome in Nero 's time , for instance ?
Why , it would merely say , 'Town burned down ; no insurance ; boy brast a window , fireman brake his neck ! '
Why , _that_ ai n't a picture ! ''
But I lost the thread there , and dozed off to slumber , thinking about what a pity it was that men with such superb strength -- strength enabling them to stand up cased in cruelly burdensome iron and drenched with perspiration , and hack and batter and bang each other for six hours on a stretch -- should not have been born at a time when they could put it to some useful purpose .
Take a jackass , for instance : a jackass has that kind of strength , and puts it to a useful purpose , and is valuable to this world because he is a jackass ; but a nobleman is not valuable because he is a jackass .
It is a mixture that is always ineffectual , and should never have been attempted in the first place .
And yet , once you start a mistake , the trouble is done and you never know what is going to come of it .
When I came to myself again and began to listen , I perceived that I had lost another chapter , and that Alisande had wandered a long way off with her people .
`` Celluloid teeth , nine dollars a set , as like as not -- the loose-fit kind , that go up and down like a portcullis when you eat , and fall out when you laugh . ''
Break -- my heart !
oh , my lost darling !
Just her age who was so gentle , and lovely , and all the world to me , and whom I shall never see again !
How the thought of her carries me back over wide seas of memory to a vague dim time , a happy time , so many , many centuries hence , when I used to wake in the soft summer mornings , out of sweet dreams of her , and say `` Hello , Central ! ''
just to hear her dear voice come melting back to me with a `` Hello , Hank ! ''
that was music of the spheres to my enchanted ear .
She got three dollars a week , but she was worth it .
As we approached each other , I saw that he wore a plumed helmet , and seemed to be otherwise clothed in steel , but bore a curious addition also -- a stiff square garment like a herald 's tabard .
However , I had to smile at my own forgetfulness when I got nearer and read this sign on his tabard :
So the poor colporteur 's griefs vanished away .
He was a brave fellow , and had done mighty feats of arms in his time .
His chief celebrity rested upon the events of an excursion like this one of mine , which he had once made with a damsel named Maledisant , who was as handy with her tongue as was Sandy , though in a different way , for her tongue churned forth only railings and insult , whereas Sandy 's music was of a kindlier sort .
I knew his story well , and so I knew how to interpret the compassion that was in his face when he bade me farewell .
He supposed I was having a bitter hard time of it .
he slumped to the floor , twisted his silken limbs in one great straining contortion of pain , and was dead .
Out of the old king was wrung an involuntary `` O-h ! ''
The look he got , made him cut it suddenly short and not put any more hyphens in it .
Sir Uwaine , at a sign from his mother , went to the anteroom and called some servants , and meanwhile madame went rippling sweetly along with her talk .
`` Hale me these varlets to the dungeons . ''
`` La , but do list to thine handmaid !
as if one gifted with powers like to mine might say the thing which I have said unto one who has vanquished Merlin , and not be jesting .
By mine enchantments I foresaw your coming , and by them I knew you when you entered here .
I did but play this little jest with hope to surprise you into some display of your art , as not doubting you would blast the guards with occult fires , consuming them to ashes on the spot , a marvel much beyond mine own ability , yet one which I have long been childishly curious to see . ''
`` Lay hands on her !
To the stake with her ! ''
She was up and facing toward the queen in a moment .
She indicated me , and said :
`` What is it ? ''
`` Anonymous testimony is n't just the right thing , your Highness .
It were fairer to confront the accused with the accuser . ''
`` I had not thought of that , it being but of small consequence .
But an I would , I could not , for that the accuser came masked by night , and told the forester , and straightway got him hence again , and so the forester knoweth him not . ''
`` He will not confess , else ; and then were his soul lost .
For his crime his life is forfeited by the law -- and of a surety will I see that he payeth it !
-- but it were peril to my own soul to let him die unconfessed and unabsolved .
Nay , I were a fool to fling me into hell for _his_ accommodation . ''
As we entered the rack-cell I caught a picture that will not go from me ; I wish it would .
A native young giant of thirty or thereabouts lay stretched upon the frame on his back , with his wrists and ankles tied to ropes which led over windlasses at either end .
There was no color in him ; his features were contorted and set , and sweat-drops stood upon his forehead .
A priest bent over him on each side ; the executioner stood by ; guards were on duty ; smoking torches stood in sockets along the walls ; in a corner crouched a poor young creature , her face drawn with anguish , a half-wild and hunted look in her eyes , and in her lap lay a little child asleep .
Just as we stepped across the threshold the executioner gave his machine a slight turn , which wrung a cry from both the prisoner and the woman ; but I shouted , and the executioner released the strain without waiting to see who spoke .
I could not let this horror go on ; it would have killed me to see it .
I asked the queen to let me clear the place and speak to the prisoner privately ; and when she was going to object I spoke in a low voice and said I did not want to make a scene before her servants , but I must have my way ; for I was King Arthur's representative , and was speaking in his name .
She saw she had to yield .
I asked her to indorse me to these people , and then leave me .
It was not pleasant for her , but she took the pill ; and even went further than I was meaning to require .
I only wanted the backing of her own authority ; but she said :
Why , her eyes were as grateful as an animal 's , when you do it a kindness that it understands .
The baby was out of her way and she had her cheek against the man 's in a minute and her hands fondling his hair , and her happy tears running down .
The man revived and caressed his wife with his eyes , which was all he could do .
I judged I might clear the den , now , and I did ; cleared it of all but the family and myself .
And she fell to sobbing and grovelling about my feet , and still imploring .
The man 's death ?
I could not quite get the bearings of the thing .
But Hugo interrupted her and said :
Ye wit not what ye ask .
Shall I starve whom I love , to win a gentle death ?
I wend thou knewest me better . ''
It gets thicker and thicker .
What did you want him to do that for ? ''
Why , of a surety he _did_ . ''
I had had enough of this grisly place by this time , and wanted to leave , but I could n't , because I had something on my mind that my conscience kept prodding me about , and would n't let me forget .
If I had the remaking of man , he would n't have any conscience .
It is one of the most disagreeable things connected with a person ; and although it certainly does a great deal of good , it can not be said to pay , in the long run ; it would be much better to have less good and more comfort .
Still , this is only my opinion , and I am only one man ; others , with less experience , may think differently .
They have a right to their view .
I only stand to this : I have noticed my conscience for many years , and I know it is more trouble and bother to me than anything else I started with .
I suppose that in the beginning I prized it , because we prize anything that is ours ; and yet how foolish it was to think so .
If we look at it in another way , we see how absurd it is : if I had an anvil in me would I prize it ?
And yet when you come to think , there is no real difference between a conscience and an anvil -- I mean for comfort .
I have noticed it a thousand times .
And you could dissolve an anvil with acids , when you could n't stand it any longer ; but there is n't any way that you can work off a conscience -- at least so it will stay worked off ; not that I know of , anyway .
There was something I wanted to do before leaving , but it was a disagreeable matter , and I hated to go at it .
Well , it bothered me all the morning .
I could have mentioned it to the old king , but what would be the use ?
-- he was but an extinct volcano ; he had been active in his time , but his fire was out , this good while , he was only a stately ash-pile now ; gentle enough , and kindly enough for my purpose , without doubt , but not usable .
He was nothing , this so-called king : the queen was the only power there .
And she was a Vesuvius .
As a favor , she might consent to warm a flock of sparrows for you , but then she might take that very opportunity to turn herself loose and bury a city .
However , I reflected that as often as any other way , when you are expecting the worst , you get something that is not so bad , after all .
And with these words and others , he lightly took his spear and gat him thence .
In the middle of the afternoon we came upon one of those very patriarchs ourselves , in the edge of a poor village .
He was basking in the love of relatives and friends whom he had not seen for fifty years ; and about him and caressing him were also descendants of his own body whom he had never seen at all till now ; but to him these were all strangers , his memory was gone , his mind was stagnant .
It seemed incredible that a man could outlast half a century shut up in a dark hole like a rat , but here were his old wife and some old comrades to testify to it .
They could remember him as he was in the freshness and strength of his young manhood , when he kissed his child and delivered it to its mother 's hands and went away into that long oblivion .
The people at the castle could not tell within half a generation the length of time the man had been shut up there for his unrecorded and forgotten offense ; but this old wife knew ; and so did her old child , who stood there among her married sons and daughters trying to realize a father who had been to her a name , a thought , a formless image , a tradition , all her life , and now was suddenly concreted into actual flesh and blood and set before her face .
Two days later , toward noon , Sandy began to show signs of excitement and feverish expectancy .
She said we were approaching the ogre's castle .
I was surprised into an uncomfortable shock .
The object of our quest had gradually dropped out of my mind ; this sudden resurrection of it made it seem quite a real and startling thing for a moment , and roused up in me a smart interest .
Sandy's excitement increased every moment ; and so did mine , for that sort of thing is catching .
My heart got to thumping .
You ca n't reason with your heart ; it has its own laws , and thumps about things which the intellect scorns .
Presently , when Sandy slid from the horse , motioned me to stop , and went creeping stealthily , with her head bent nearly to her knees , toward a row of bushes that bordered a declivity , the thumpings grew stronger and quicker .
And they kept it up while she was gaining her ambush and getting her glimpse over the declivity ; and also while I was creeping to her side on my knees .
Her eyes were burning now , as she pointed with her finger , and said in a panting whisper :
It is nothing but a pigsty ; a pigsty with a wattled fence around it . ''
`` It was not enchanted aforetime , '' she said in a musing fashion , as if to herself .
`` And how strange is this marvel , and how awful -- that to the one perception it is enchanted and dight in a base and shameful aspect ; yet to the perception of the other it is not enchanted , hath suffered no change , but stands firm and stately still , girt with its moat and waving its banners in the blue air from its towers .
And God shield us , how it pricks the heart to see again these gracious captives , and the sorrow deepened in their sweet faces !
We have tarried along , and are to blame . ''
`` Thanks , oh , sweet my lord , thou talkest like an angel .
And I know that thou wilt deliver them , for that thou art minded to great deeds and art as strong a knight of your hands and as brave to will and to do , as any that is on live . ''
`` I will not leave a princess in the sty , Sandy .
Are those three yonder that to my disordered eyes are starveling swine-herds -- ''
We got the hogs home just at dark -- most of them .
The princess Nerovens de Morganore was missing , and two of her ladies in waiting : namely , Miss Angela Bohun , and the Demoiselle Elaine Courtemains , the former of these two being a young black sow with a white star in her forehead , and the latter a brown one with thin legs and a slight limp in the forward shank on the starboard side -- a couple of the tryingest blisters to drive that I ever saw .
Also among the missing were several mere baronesses -- and I wanted them to stay missing ; but no , all that sausage-meat had to be found ; so servants were sent out with torches to scour the woods and hills to that end .
`` Come -- you do n't even know these people ?
Then who invited us here ? ''
`` None invited us .
We but came ; that is all . ''
`` Why , woman , this is a most extraordinary performance .
The effrontery of it is beyond admiration .
We blandly march into a man 's house , and cram it full of the only really valuable nobility the sun has yet discovered in the earth , and then it turns out that we do n't even know the man 's name .
How did you ever venture to take this extravagant liberty ?
I supposed , of course , it was your home .
What will the man say ? ''
`` Well , no -- when you come to that .
No , it 's an even bet that this is the first time he has had a treat like this . ''
`` Well , you know we have n't got time for this sort of thing .
Don't you see , we could distribute these people around the earth in less time than it is going to take you to explain that we ca n't .
We must n't talk now , we must act .
You want to be careful ; you mustn't let your mill get the start of you that way , at a time like this .
To business now -- and sharp 's the word .
Who is to take the aristocracy home ? ''
`` Even their friends .
These will come for them from the far parts of the earth . ''
`` He that would essay it could have his halter free ; yes , and swiftly would he need it , too . ''
`` You spoke of some hermits , Sandy . ''
`` The miraculous fount hath ceased to flow ! ''
This shout burst from twenty pilgrim mouths at once .
`` Has somebody been washing again ? ''
`` None may describe it in words .
The fount is these nine days dry .
The prayers that did begin then , and the lamentations in sackcloth and ashes , and the holy processions , none of these have ceased nor night nor day ; and so the monks and the nuns and the foundlings be all exhausted , and do hang up prayers writ upon parchment , sith that no strength is left in man to lift up voice .
And at last they sent for thee , Sir Boss , to try magic and enchantment ; and if you could not come , then was the messenger to fetch Merlin , and he is there these three days now , and saith he will fetch that water though he burst the globe and wreck its kingdoms to accomplish it ; and right bravely doth he work his magic and call upon his hellions to hie them hither and help , but not a whiff of moisture hath he started yet , even so much as might qualify as mist upon a copper mirror an ye count not the barrel of sweat he sweateth betwixt sun and sun over the dire labors of his task ; and if ye -- ''
`` Delay not , son , but get to thy saving work .
An we bring not the water back again , and soon , we are ruined , and the good work of two hundred years must end .
And see thou do it with enchantments that be holy , for the Church will not endure that work in her cause be done by devil 's magic . ''
`` Ah , he said he would , my son , he said he would , and took oath to make his promise good . ''
`` It will not answer to mix methods , Father ; neither would it be professional courtesy .
Two of a trade must not underbid each other .
We might as well cut rates and be done with it ; it would arrive at that in the end .
Merlin has the contract ; no other magician can touch it till he throws it up . ''
`` No-no , Father , it skills not , as these people say .
If he were persuaded against his will , he would load that well with a malicious enchantment which would balk me until I found out its secret .
It might take a month .
I could set up a little enchantment of mine which I call the telephone , and he could not find out its secret in a hundred years .
Yes , you perceive , he might block me for a month .
Would you like to risk a month in a dry time like this ? ''
The mere thought of it maketh me to shudder .
Have it thy way , my son .
But my heart is heavy with this disappointment .
Leave me , and let me wear my spirit with weariness and waiting , even as I have done these ten long days , counterfeiting thus the thing that is called rest , the prone body making outward sign of repose where inwardly is none . ''
I was at the well next day betimes .
Merlin was there , enchanting away like a beaver , but not raising the moisture .
He was not in a pleasant humor ; and every time I hinted that perhaps this contract was a shade too hefty for a novice he unlimbered his tongue and cursed like a bishop -- French bishop of the Regency days , I mean .
It was true -- as to recent times at least -- for there was witness to it , and better witness than a monk ; only about twenty or thirty feet of the chain showed wear and use , the rest of it was unworn and rusty .
What had happened when the well gave out that other time ?
Without doubt some practical person had come along and mended the leak , and then had come up and told the abbot he had discovered by divination that if the sinful bath were destroyed the well would flow again .
The leak had befallen again now , and these children would have prayed , and processioned , and tolled their bells for heavenly succor till they all dried up and blew away , and no innocent of them all would ever have thought to drop a fish-line into the well or go down in it and find out what was really the matter .
Old habit of mind is one of the toughest things to get away from in the world .
It transmits itself like physical form and feature ; and for a man , in those days , to have had an idea that his ancestors had n't had , would have brought him under suspicion of being illegitimate .
I said to the monk :
It 's what you call hostel .
The man that can do this miracle can keep hostel .
I can do this miracle ; I shall do this miracle ; yet I do not try to conceal from you that it is a miracle to tax the occult powers to the last strain . ''
Do they keep open afternoons ? ''
His stand was a pillar sixty feet high , with a broad platform on the top of it .
He was now doing what he had been doing every day for twenty years up there -- bowing his body ceaselessly and rapidly almost to his feet .
It was his way of praying .
I timed him with a stop watch , and he made 1,244 revolutions in 24 minutes and 46 seconds .
It seemed a pity to have all this power going to waste .
It was one of the most useful motions in mechanics , the pedal movement ; so I made a note in my memorandum book , purposing some day to apply a system of elastic cords to him and run a sewing machine with it .
I afterward carried out that scheme , and got five years ' good service out of him ; in which time he turned out upward of eighteen thousand first-rate tow-linen shirts , which was ten a day .
I worked him Sundays and all ; he was going , Sundays , the same as week days , and it was no use to waste the power .
These shirts cost me nothing but just the mere trifle for the materials -- I furnished those myself , it would not have been right to make him do that -- and they sold like smoke to pilgrims at a dollar and a half apiece , which was the price of fifty cows or a blooded race horse in Arthurdom .
They were regarded as a perfect protection against sin , and advertised as such by my knights everywhere , with the paint-pot and stencil-plate ; insomuch that there was not a cliff or a bowlder or a dead wall in England but you could read on it at a mile distance :
He raised a smoke this time that darkened all the region , and must have made matters uncomfortable for the hermits , for the wind was their way , and it rolled down over their dens in a dense and billowy fog .
He poured out volumes of speech to match , and contorted his body and sawed the air with his hands in a most extraordinary way .
At the end of twenty minutes he dropped down panting , and about exhausted .
Now arrived the abbot and several hundred monks and nuns , and behind them a multitude of pilgrims and a couple of acres of foundlings , all drawn by the prodigious smoke , and all in a grand state of excitement .
The abbot inquired anxiously for results .
`` God 's wounds , then are we ruined ! ''
It was a home shot , and it made him wince ; for he was the worst weather-failure in the kingdom .
Whenever he ordered up the danger-signals along the coast there was a week 's dead calm , sure , and every time he prophesied fair weather it rained brickbats .
But I kept him in the weather bureau right along , to undermine his reputation .
However , that shot raised his bile , and instead of starting home to report my death , he said he would remain and enjoy it .
We knocked the head out of an empty hogshead and hoisted this hogshead to the flat roof of the chapel , where we clamped it down fast , poured in gunpowder till it lay loosely an inch deep on the bottom , then we stood up rockets in the hogshead as thick as they could loosely stand , all the different breeds of rockets there are ; and they made a portly and imposing sheaf , I can tell you .
We grounded the wire of a pocket electrical battery in that powder , we placed a whole magazine of Greek fire on each corner of the roof -- blue on one corner , green on another , red on another , and purple on the last -- and grounded a wire in each .
`` Would n't you like a bath ? ''
He shuddered at the thought -- the thought of the peril of it to the well -- but he said with feeling :
And then he sighed in such a sorrowful way that I was resolved he should have at least one layer of his real estate removed , if it sized up my whole influence and bankrupted the pile .
So I went to the abbot and asked for a permit for this Brother .
He blenched at the idea -- I do n't mean that you could see him blench , for of course you could n't see it without you scraped him , and I did n't care enough about it to scrape him , but I knew the blench was there , just the same , and within a book-cover 's thickness of the surface , too -- blenched , and trembled .
`` Well , this is the Valley of Holiness . ''
It did n't take ; I mean , he did n't start at the name , as I had supposed he would .
`` What is new ? ''
-- no , nor to any other in his realms , mayhap ; but the lads that holp you with your miracle will be his guide and lead the way , and appoint the places for rests at noons and sleeps at night . ''
`` Yes -- and now ye will marvel to know there 's not so much as one West Pointer in that regiment . ''
`` It is truly as I have said . ''
When I got back to the monastery , I found a thing of interest going on .
The abbot and his monks were assembled in the great hall , observing with childish wonder and faith the performances of a new magician , a fresh arrival .
His dress was the extreme of the fantastic ; as showy and foolish as the sort of thing an Indian medicine-man wears .
He was mowing , and mumbling , and gesticulating , and drawing mystical figures in the air and on the floor , -- the regular thing , you know .
He was a celebrity from Asia -- so he said , and that was enough .
That sort of evidence was as good as gold , and passed current everywhere .
You see , I was working up the interest .
It was getting pretty high , too ; you could see that by the craning necks all around , and the half-suspended breathing .
So now I climaxed it :
`` Then tell me what I am doing with my right hand . ''
There was a general gasp of surprise .
It had not occurred to anybody in the crowd -- that simple trick of inquiring about somebody who was n't ten thousand miles away .
The magician was hit hard ; it was an emergency that had never happened in his experience before , and it corked him ; he did n't know how to meet it .
He looked stunned , confused ; he could n't say a word .
`` Come , '' I said , `` what are you waiting for ?
Is it possible you can answer up , right off , and tell what anybody on the other side of the earth is doing , and yet ca n't tell what a person is doing who is n't three yards from you ?
Persons behind me know what I am doing with my right hand -- they will indorse you if you tell correctly . ''
He was still dumb .
`` Very well , I 'll tell you why you do n't speak up and tell ; it is because you do n't know .
Good friends , this tramp is a mere fraud and liar . ''
`` Most gladly , yea , and gratefully . ''
`` The king is weary with the chase , and lieth in his palace these two hours sleeping a dreamless sleep . ''
`` God 's benison upon him ! ''
said the abbot , and crossed himself ; `` may that sleep be to the refreshment of his body and his soul . ''
`` You have lived in the woods , and lost much by it .
I use incantations myself , as this good brotherhood are aware -- but only on occasions of moment . ''
`` And where will they be the day after to-morrow at vespers ? ''
`` Far to the north of Camelot , and half their journey will be done . ''
Next day I went up to the telephone office and found that the king had passed through two towns that were on the line .
I spotted his progress on the succeeding day in the same way .
I kept these matters to myself .
The third day 's reports showed that if he kept up his gait he would arrive by four in the afternoon .
There was still no sign anywhere of interest in his coming ; there seemed to be no preparations making to receive him in state ; a strange thing , truly .
Only one thing could explain this : that other magician had been cutting under me , sure .
I asked a friend of mine , a monk , about it , and he said , yes , the magician had tried some further enchantments and found out that the court had concluded to make no journey at all , but stay at home .
Observe how much a reputation was worth in such a country .
These people had seen me do the very showiest bit of magic in history , and the only one within their memory that had a positive value , and yet here they were , ready to take up with an adventurer who could offer no evidence of his powers but his mere unproven word .
`` It is sufficient .
Get you hence . ''
One of the young nobles was called up now .
I thought I would question him a little myself .
His face flushed indignantly , and he fired this at me :
`` Takest me for a clerk ?
I trow I am not of a blood that -- ''
`` How much is 9 times 6 ? ''
`` What do you know of the science of optics ? ''
`` A man not eligible for a lieutenancy in the army unless he can prove four generations of noble descent ? ''
`` Of what condition was the wife of the founder of your line ? ''
All the boys would join , I was sure of that ; so , all existing grants would be relinquished ; that the newly born would always join was equally certain .
Within sixty days that quaint and bizarre anomaly , the Royal Grant , would cease to be a living fact , and take its place among the curiosities of the past .
There was a very good lay-out for the king's-evil business -- very tidy and creditable .
The king sat under a canopy of state ; about him were clustered a large body of the clergy in full canonicals .
Conspicuous , both for location and personal outfit , stood Marinel , a hermit of the quack-doctor species , to introduce the sick .
All abroad over the spacious floor , and clear down to the doors , in a thick jumble , lay or sat the scrofulous , under a strong light .
It was as good as a tableau ; in fact , it had all the look of being gotten up for that , though it was n't .
There were eight hundred sick people present .
The work was slow ; it lacked the interest of novelty for me , because I had seen the ceremonies before ; the thing soon became tedious , but the proprieties required me to stick it out .
The doctor was there for the reason that in all such crowds there were many people who only imagined something was the matter with them , and many who were consciously sound but wanted the immortal honor of fleshly contact with a king , and yet others who pretended to illness in order to get the piece of coin that went with the touch .
Up to this time this coin had been a wee little gold piece worth about a third of a dollar .
When you consider how much that amount of money would buy , in that age and country , and how usual it was to be scrofulous , when not dead , you would understand that the annual king's-evil appropriation was just the River and Harbor bill of that government for the grip it took on the treasury and the chance it afforded for skinning the surplus .
So I had privately concluded to touch the treasury itself for the king's-evil .
I covered six-sevenths of the appropriation into the treasury a week before starting from Camelot on my adventures , and ordered that the other seventh be inflated into five-cent nickels and delivered into the hands of the head clerk of the King 's Evil Department ; a nickel to take the place of each gold coin , you see , and do its work for it .
It might strain the nickel some , but I judged it could stand it .
As a rule , I do not approve of watering stock , but I considered it square enough in this case , for it was just a gift , anyway .
Of course , you can water a gift as much as you want to ; and I generally do .
The old gold and silver coins of the country were of ancient and unknown origin , as a rule , but some of them were Roman ; they were ill-shapen , and seldom rounder than a moon that is a week past the full ; they were hammered , not minted , and they were so worn with use that the devices upon them were as illegible as blisters , and looked like them .
I judged that a sharp , bright new nickel , with a first-rate likeness of the king on one side of it and Guenever on the other , and a blooming pious motto , would take the tuck out of scrofula as handy as a nobler coin and please the scrofulous fancy more ; and I was right .
This batch was the first it was tried on , and it worked to a charm .
The saving in expense was a notable economy .
You will see that by these figures : We touched a trifle over 700 of the 800 patients ; at former rates , this would have cost the government about $ 240 ; at the new rate we pulled through for about $ 35 , thus saving upward of $ 200 at one swoop .
To appreciate the full magnitude of this stroke , consider these other figures : the annual expenses of a national government amount to the equivalent of a contribution of three days ' average wages of every individual of the population , counting every individual as if he were a man .
If you take a nation of 60,000,000 , where average wages are $ 2 per day , three days ' wages taken from each individual will provide $ 360,000,000 and pay the government 's expenses .
In my day , in my own country , this money was collected from imposts , and the citizen imagined that the foreign importer paid it , and it made him comfortable to think so ; whereas , in fact , it was paid by the American people , and was so equally and exactly distributed among them that the annual cost to the 100-millionaire and the annual cost to the sucking child of the day-laborer was precisely the same -- each paid $ 6 .
Nothing could be equaler than that , I reckon .
Well , Scotland and Ireland were tributary to Arthur , and the united populations of the British Islands amounted to something less than 1,000,000 .
A mechanic 's average wage was 3 cents a day , when he paid his own keep .
By this rule the national government 's expenses were $ 90,000 a year , or about $ 250 a day .
Thus , by the substitution of nickels for gold on a king's-evil day , I not only injured no one , dissatisfied no one , but pleased all concerned and saved four-fifths of that day 's national expense into the bargain -- a saving which would have been the equivalent of $ 800,000 in my day in America .
In making this substitution I had drawn upon the wisdom of a very remote source -- the wisdom of my boyhood -- for the true statesman does not despise any wisdom , howsoever lowly may be its origin : in my boyhood I had always saved my pennies and contributed buttons to the foreign missionary cause .
The buttons would answer the ignorant savage as well as the coin , the coin would answer me better than the buttons ; all hands were happy and nobody hurt .
The bdsiness end of the funeral of the late Sir Dalliance the duke 's son of Cornwall , killed in an encounter with the Giant of the Knotted Bludgeon last Tuesday on the borders of the Plain of Enchantment was in the hands of the ever affable and efficient Mumble , prince of un3ertakers , then whom there exists none by whom it were a more satisfying pleasure to have the last sad offices performed .
Give him a trial .
The cordial thanks of the Hosannah office are due , from editor down to devil , to the ever courteous and thought- ful Lord High Stew d of the Palace's Third Assistant V t for several sau- ceTs of ice crEam a quality calculated to make the ey of the recipients hu- mid with grt ude ; and it done it .
When this administration wants to chalk up a desirable name for early promotion , the Hosannah would like a chance to sudgest .
On Monday , the king rode in the park.
`` Tuesday , `` `` `` `` Wendesday `` `` `` `` Thursday `` `` `` `` Friday , `` `` `` `` Saturday `` `` `` `` Sunday , `` `` ``
`` Ah-h -- a miracle , a wonder !
Dark work of enchantment . ''
`` Is that a marvel ?
Let them come . ''
`` We have escaped divers dangers by wit -- thy wit -- but I have bethought me that it were but prudence if I bore a weapon , too .
Thine might fail thee in some pinch . ''
`` But , sire , how can I know what your thoughts are ? ''
`` But what are these in comparison with me ?
They are nothing . ''
`` How amazing that it should be so ! ''
The king was in a flaming fury , and launched out his challenge and epithets with a most royal vigor .
The knights were some little distance by now .
They halted , greatly surprised , and turned in their saddles and looked back , as if wondering if it might be worth while to bother with such scum as we .
Then they wheeled and started for us .
Not a moment must be lost .
I started for _them_ .
I passed them at a rattling gait , and as I went by I flung out a hair-lifting soul-scorching thirteen-jointed insult which made the king 's effort poor and cheap by comparison .
I got it out of the nineteenth century where they know how .
They had such headway that they were nearly to the king before they could check up ; then , frantic with rage , they stood up their horses on their hind hoofs and whirled them around , and the next moment here they came , breast to breast .
I was seventy yards off , then , and scrambling up a great bowlder at the roadside .
When they were within thirty yards of me they let their long lances droop to a level , depressed their mailed heads , and so , with their horse-hair plumes streaming straight out behind , most gallant to see , this lightning express came tearing for me !
When they were within fifteen yards , I sent that bomb with a sure aim , and it struck the ground just under the horses ' noses .
`` These people do not call _each other_ varlets . ''
`` Ah , but _we_ are pretending to be dirt like that , too . ''
`` Now , make believe you are in debt , and eaten up by relentless creditors ; you are out of work -- which is horse-shoeing , let us say -- and can get none ; and your wife is sick , your children are crying because they are hungry -- ''
`` Nor come not from the lord of the manor ? ''
`` No , I am a stranger . ''
`` Now all good spirits -- if there be any such -- bless thee for that word .
Would God I had a sup of water !
-- but hold , hold , forget I said it , and fly ; for there is that here that even he that feareth not the Church must fear : this disease whereof we die .
Leave us , thou brave , good stranger , and take with thee such whole and sincere blessing as them that be accursed can give . ''
I sprang to the king , and said in his ear :
`` Of a truth I shall remain -- and likewise help . ''
`` Is he asleep ? ''
`` Ah , no , that ye will not , for he is dead . ''
I drew the king toward the other end of the hut and whispered :
`` I am not sorry , I _think_ -- but -- ''
`` _If_ they did escape , then are we bound in duty to lay hands upon them and deliver them again to their lord ; for it is not seemly that one of his quality should suffer a so insolent and high-handed outrage from persons of their base degree . ''
There it was again .
He could see only one side of it .
He was born so , educated so , his veins were full of ancestral blood that was rotten with this sort of unconscious brutality , brought down by inheritance from a long procession of hearts that had each done its share toward poisoning the stream .
To imprison these men without proof , and starve their kindred , was no harm , for they were merely peasants and subject to the will and pleasure of their lord , no matter what fearful form it might take ; but for these men to break out of unjust captivity was insult and outrage , and a thing not to be countenanced by any conscientious person who knew his duty to his sacred caste .
`` Natheless , three did escape , '' said the king , `` and ye will do well to publish it and set justice upon their track , for these murthered the baron and fired the house . ''
The painful thing observable about all this business was the alacrity with which this oppressed community had turned their cruel hands against their own class in the interest of the common oppressor .
This man and woman seemed to feel that in a quarrel between a person of their own class and his lord , it was the natural and proper and rightful thing for that poor devil 's whole caste to side with the master and fight his battle for him , without ever stopping to inquire into the rights or wrongs of the matter .
This man had been out helping to hang his neighbors , and had done his work with zeal , and yet was aware that there was nothing against them but a mere suspicion , with nothing back of it describable as evidence , still neither he nor his wife seemed to see anything horrible about it .
Well , as it turned out , this charcoal burner was just the twin of the Southern `` poor white '' of the far future .
The king presently showed impatience , and said :
`` Come , friend , I will walk a little way with you , and explain which direction I think they would try to take .
If they were merely resisters of the gabelle or some kindred absurdity I would try to protect them from capture ; but when men murder a person of high degree and likewise burn his house , that is another matter . ''
`` What relation were these men to you -- cousins ? ''
It made him as glad as if I had called him an angel .
Fear and depression vanished from the man 's manner , and gratefulness and a brave animation took their place :
There it was , you see .
A man is a man , at bottom .
Whole ages of abuse and oppression can not crush the manhood clear out of him .
Whoever thinks it a mistake is himself mistaken .
Yes , there is plenty good enough material for a republic in the most degraded people that ever existed -- even the Russians ; plenty of manhood in them -- even in the Germans -- if one could but force it out of its timid and suspicious privacy , to overthrow and trample in the mud any throne that ever was set up and any nobility that ever supported it .
We should see certain things yet , let us hope and believe .
First , a modified monarchy , till Arthur 's days were done , then the destruction of the throne , nobility abolished , every member of it bound out to some useful trade , universal suffrage instituted , and the whole government placed in the hands of the men and women of the nation there to remain .
Yes , there was no occasion to give up my dream yet a while .
I got to know several master mechanics , but about the most interesting fellow among them was the blacksmith , Dowley .
He was a live man and a brisk talker , and had two journeymen and three apprentices , and was doing a raging business .
In fact , he was getting rich , hand over fist , and was vastly respected .
Marco was very proud of having such a man for a friend .
He had taken me there ostensibly to let me see the big establishment which bought so much of his charcoal , but really to let me see what easy and almost familiar terms he was on with this great man .
Dowley and I fraternized at once ; I had had just such picked men , splendid fellows , under me in the Colt Arms Factory .
I was bound to see more of him , so I invited him to come out to Marco 's Sunday , and dine with us .
Marco was appalled , and held his breath ; and when the grandee accepted , he was so grateful that he almost forgot to be astonished at the condescension .
`` It 's grand and good of you -- ''
And so we went gadding along , dropping in here and there , pricing things , and gossiping with the shopkeepers about the riot , and now and then running across pathetic reminders of it , in the persons of shunned and tearful and houseless remnants of families whose homes had been taken from them and their parents butchered or hanged .
The raiment of Marco and his wife was of coarse tow-linen and linsey-woolsey respectively , and resembled township maps , it being made up pretty exclusively of patches which had been added , township by township , in the course of five or six years , until hardly a hand's-breadth of the original garments was surviving and present .
Now I wanted to fit these people out with new suits , on account of that swell company , and I did n't know just how to get at it -- with delicacy , until at last it struck me that as I had already been liberal in inventing wordy gratitude for the king , it would be just the thing to back it up with evidence of a substantial sort ; so I said :
`` And now consider what is come to pass , '' said he , impressively .
`` Two times in every month there is fresh meat upon my table . ''
He made a pause here , to let that fact sink home , then added -- '' and eight times salt meat . ''
`` On my table appeareth white bread every Sunday in the year , '' added the master smith , with solemnity .
`` I leave it to your own consciences , friends , if this is not also true ? ''
The dame brought out the table now , and set it under the tree .
It caused a visible stir of surprise , it being brand new and a sumptuous article of deal .
But the surprise rose higher still when the dame , with a body oozing easy indifference at every pore , but eyes that gave it all away by absolutely flaming with vanity , slowly unfolded an actual simon-pure tablecloth and spread it .
That was a notch above even the blacksmith 's domestic grandeurs , and it hit him hard ; you could see it .
But Marco was in Paradise ; you could see that , too .
Then the dame brought two fine new stools -- whew !
that was a sensation ; it was visible in the eyes of every guest .
Then she brought two more -- as calmly as she could .
Sensation again -- with awed murmurs .
Again she brought two -- walking on air , she was so proud .
The guests were petrified , and the mason muttered :
The clerk hastened to say :
The clerk was astonished and charmed .
He asked me to retain one of the dollars as security , until he could go to town and -- I interrupted :
`` What , and fetch back nine cents ?
Keep the change . ''
`` Verily this being is _made_ of money !
He throweth it away even as if it were dirt . ''
The clerk took his money and reeled away drunk with fortune .
I said to Marco and his wife :
`` In your country , brother , what is the wage of a master bailiff , master hind , carter , shepherd , swineherd ? ''
With us they are allowed a hundred !
With us any good mechanic is allowed a cent a day !
I count out the tailor , but not the others -- they are all allowed a cent a day , and in driving times they get more -- yes , up to a hundred and ten and even fifteen milrays a day .
I 've paid a hundred and fifteen myself , within the week .
'Rah for protection -- to Sheol with free-trade ! ''
`` It varieth somewhat , but not much ; one may say seventy-five milrays the pound . ''
They are the _double_ -- ye have confessed it yourself . ''
`` Very good ; we allow but half as much ; we pay her only a tenth of a cent a day ; and -- ''
It knocked them absolutely dumb !
Not a man of them could get his breath for upwards of two minutes .
Then the coal-burner said prayerfully :
`` An earl , say ye ? ''
said Dowley ; `` ye could say more than that and speak no lie ; there 's no earl in the realm of Bagdemagus that hath an income like to that .
Income of an earl -- mf !
it 's the income of an angel ! ''
`` Now , then , that is what is going to happen as regards wages .
In that remote day , that man will earn , with _one_ week 's work , that bill of goods which it takes you upwards of _fifty_ weeks to earn now .
Some other pretty surprising things are going to happen , too .
Brother Dowley , who is it that determines , every spring , what the particular wage of each kind of mechanic , laborer , and servant shall be for that year ? ''
`` Sometimes the courts , sometimes the town council ; but most of all , the magistrate .
Ye may say , in general terms , it is the magistrate that fixes the wages . ''
`` Perdition catch such an age ! ''
shouted Dowley , in strong indignation .
`` An age of dogs , an age barren of reverence for superiors and respect for authority !
Dowley winced , visibly .
I judged he was hit .
But he did n't betray it by any spoken word .
As for the others , they spoke out plainly , and with strong feeling .
They said they had seen enough of the stocks to know what a man 's chance in them was , and they would never consent to enter them if they could compromise on a quick death by hanging .
In fact , as fine as any I ever produced , with so little time to work it up in .
Well , what had I better do ?
Nothing in a hurry , sure .
I must get up a diversion ; anything to employ me while I could think , and while these poor fellows could have a chance to come to life again .
There sat Marco , petrified in the act of trying to get the hang of his miller-gun -- turned to stone , just in the attitude he was in when my pile-driver fell , the toy still gripped in his unconscious fingers .
So I took it from him and proposed to explain its mystery .
a simple little thing like that ; and yet it was mysterious enough , for that race and that age .
He began , straight off , in the most innocently artful , and transparent , and lubberly way , to lead up to the subject of agriculture .
The cold sweat broke out all over me .
I wanted to whisper in his ear , `` Man , we are in awful danger !
every moment is worth a principality till we get back these men's confidence ; _don't_ waste any of this golden time . ''
But of course I could n't do it .
It would look as if we were conspiring .
So I had to sit there and look calm and pleasant while the king stood over that dynamite mine and mooned along about his damned onions and things .
At first the tumult of my own thoughts , summoned by the danger-signal and swarming to the rescue from every quarter of my skull , kept up such a hurrah and confusion and fifing and drumming that I could n't take in a word ; but presently when my mob of gathering plans began to crystallize and fall into position and form line of battle , a sort of order and quiet ensued and I caught the boom of the king 's batteries , as if out of remote distance :
`` -- were not the best way , methinks , albeit it is not to be denied that authorities differ as concerning this point , some contending that the onion is but an unwholesome berry when stricken early from the tree -- ''
`` -- whileas others do yet maintain , with much show of reason , that this is not of necessity the case , instancing that plums and other like cereals do be always dug in the unripe state -- ''
Well , while they were gradually playing out , it suddenly occurred to me to wonder what had become of Marco .
I looked around ; he was nowhere to be seen .
Oh , but this was ominous !
I pulled the king 's sleeve , and we glided away and rushed for the hut .
No Marco there , no Phyllis there !
They had gone to the road for help , sure .
I told the king to give his heels wings , and I would explain later .
We made good time across the open ground , and as we darted into the shelter of the wood I glanced back and saw a mob of excited peasants swarm into view , with Marco and his wife at their head .
They were making a world of noise , but that could n't hurt anybody ; the wood was dense , and as soon as we were well into its depths we would take to a tree and let them whistle .
Ah , but then came another sound -- dogs !
Yes , that was quite another matter .
It magnified our contract -- we must find running water .
So we climbed back .
The king listened a moment and said :
`` Yes , sire , that is about it , I am afraid , though I was hoping better things . ''
However , the mob soon came to that conclusion themselves ; wherefore they called off the assault and began to debate other plans .
They had no weapons , but there were plenty of stones , and stones might answer .
We had no objections .
A stone might possibly penetrate to us once in a while , but it was n't very likely ; we were well protected by boughs and foliage , and were not visible from any good aiming point .
If they would but waste half an hour in stone-throwing , the dark would come to our help .
We were feeling very well satisfied .
We could smile ; almost laugh .
`` What are ye doing to these people ? ''
`` Ye know not whence ?
Do ye pretend ye know them not ? ''
`` Most honored sir , we speak but the truth .
They are strangers and unknown to any in this region ; and they be the most violent and bloodthirsty madmen that ever -- ''
My lord merely said to his head miscreant , coolly :
Ah -- I remembered !
I came to myself ; I said nothing .
But the king stormed out :
Yes , we were sold at auction , like swine .
In a big town and an active market we should have brought a good price ; but this place was utterly stagnant and so we sold at a figure which makes me ashamed , every time I think of it .
The King of England brought seven dollars , and his prime minister nine ; whereas the king was easily worth twelve dollars and I as easily worth fifteen .
But that is the way things always go ; if you force a sale on a dull market , I do n't care what the property is , you are going to make a poor business of it , and you can make up your mind to it .
If the earl had had wit enough to --
However , there is no occasion for my working my sympathies up on his account .
Let him go , for the present ; I took his number , so to speak .
Confound him , he wearied me with arguments to show that in anything like a fair market he would have fetched twenty-five dollars , sure -- a thing which was plainly nonsense , and full or the baldest conceit ; I was n't worth it myself .
But it was tender ground for me to argue on .
In fact , I had to simply shirk argument and do the diplomatic instead .
I had to throw conscience aside , and brazenly concede that he ought to have brought twenty-five dollars ; whereas I was quite well aware that in all the ages , the world had never seen a king that was worth half the money , and during the next thirteen centuries would n't see one that was worth the fourth of it .
Yes , he tired me .
If he began to talk about the crops ; or about the recent weather ; or about the condition of politics ; or about dogs , or cats , or morals , or theology -- no matter what -- I sighed , for I knew what was coming ; he was going to get out of it a palliation of that tiresome seven-dollar sale .
Wherever we halted where there was a crowd , he would give me a look which said plainly : `` if that thing could be tried over again now , with this kind of folk , you would see a different result . ''
Well , when he was first sold , it secretly tickled me to see him go for seven dollars ; but before he was done with his sweating and worrying I wished he had fetched a hundred .
The thing never got a chance to die , for every day , at one place or another , possible purchasers looked us over , and , as often as any other way , their comment on the king was something like this :
At last this sort of remark produced an evil result .
Our owner was a practical person and he perceived that this defect must be mended if he hoped to find a purchaser for the king .
So he went to work to take the style out of his sacred majesty .
I could have given the man some valuable advice , but I did n't ; you mustn't volunteer advice to a slave-driver unless you want to damage the cause you are arguing for .
I had found it a sufficiently difficult job to reduce the king 's style to a peasant 's style , even when he was a willing and anxious pupil ; now then , to undertake to reduce the king 's style to a slave 's style -- and by force -- go to !
it was a stately contract .
Never mind the details -- it will save me trouble to let you imagine them .
I will only remark that at the end of a week there was plenty of evidence that lash and club and fist had done their work well ; the king 's body was a sight to see -- and to weep over ; but his spirit ?
-- why , it was n't even phased .
Even that dull clod of a slave-driver was able to see that there can be such a thing as a slave who will remain a man till he dies ; whose bones you can break , but whose manhood you ca n't .
This man found that from his first effort down to his latest , he could n't ever come within reach of the king , but the king was ready to plunge for him , and did it .
So he gave up at last , and left the king in possession of his style unimpaired .
The fact is , the king was a good deal more than a king , he was a man ; and when a man is a man , you ca n't knock it out of him .
Now came a diversion .
We heard shrieks and yells , and soon a woman came running and crying ; and seeing our group , she flung herself into our midst and begged for protection .
A mob of people came tearing after her , some with torches , and they said she was a witch who had caused several cows to die by a strange disease , and practiced her arts by help of a devil in the form of a black cat .
This poor woman had been stoned until she hardly looked human , she was so battered and bloody .
The mob wanted to burn her .
Well , now , what do you suppose our master did ?
When we closed around this poor creature to shelter her , he saw his chance .
He said , burn her here , or they should n't have her at all .
They fastened her to a post ; they brought wood and piled it about her ; they applied the torch while she shrieked and pleaded and strained her two young daughters to her breast ; and our brute , with a heart solely for business , lashed us into position about the stake and warmed us into life and commercial value by the same fire which took away the innocent life of that poor harmless mother .
That was the sort of master we had .
I took _his_ number .
That snow-storm cost him nine of his flock ; and he was more brutal to us than ever , after that , for many days together , he was so enraged over his loss .
`` When the judge put on his black cap , the owner of the stolen linen rose trembling up , his lip quivering , his face as gray as ashes ; and when the awful words came , he cried out , 'Oh , poor child , poor child , I did not know it was death ! '
and fell as a tree falls .
When they lifted him up his reason was gone ; before the sun was set , he had taken his own life .
A kindly man ; a man whose heart was right , at bottom ; add his murder to this that is to be now done here ; and charge them both where they belong -- to the rulers and the bitter laws of Britain .
The time is come , my child ; let me pray over thee -- not _for_ thee , dear abused poor heart and innocent , but for them that be guilty of thy ruin and death , who need it more . ''
After his prayer they put the noose around the young girl 's neck , and they had great trouble to adjust the knot under her ear , because she was devouring the baby all the time , wildly kissing it , and snatching it to her face and her breast , and drenching it with tears , and half moaning , half shrieking all the while , and the baby crowing , and laughing , and kicking its feet with delight over what it took for romp and play .
Even the hangman could n't stand it , but turned away .
When all was ready the priest gently pulled and tugged and forced the child out of the mother 's arms , and stepped quickly out of her reach ; but she clasped her hands , and made a wild spring toward him , with a shriek ; but the rope -- and the under-sheriff -- held her short .
Then she went on her knees and stretched out her hands and cried :
I had one little glimpse of another thing , one day , which gave me a great uplift .
It was a wire stretching from housetop to housetop .
Telegraph or telephone , sure .
I did very much wish I had a little piece of it .
It was just what I needed , in order to carry out my project of escape .
My idea was to get loose some night , along with the king , then gag and bind our master , change clothes with him , batter him into the aspect of a stranger , hitch him to the slave-chain , assume possession of the property , march to Camelot , and --
`` 'T is open till the morrow at this hour . ''
`` Your grace _will_ go for nothing , but after another fashion .
And so shall I. To-night we shall both be free . ''
Then the court begged my pardon , and hoped I would not fail to tell his lordship it was in no wise the court 's fault that this high-handed thing had happened .
I said I would make it all right , and so took my leave .
Took it just in time , too ; he was starting to ask me why I did n't fetch out these facts the moment I was arrested .
I said I would if I had thought of it -- which was true -- but that I was so battered by that man that all my wit was knocked out of me -- and so forth and so on , and got myself away , still mumbling .
I did n't wait for breakfast .
No grass grew under my feet .
I was soon at the slave quarters .
Empty -- everybody gone !
That is , everybody except one body -- the slave-master 's .
It lay there all battered to pulp ; and all about were the evidences of a terrific fight .
There was a rude board coffin on a cart at the door , and workmen , assisted by the police , were thinning a road through the gaping crowd in order that they might bring it in .
`` There were sixteen slaves here .
They rose against their master in the night , and thou seest how it ended . ''
`` Never mind Clarence who .
Say you want Clarence ; you 'll get an answer . ''
He vacated the place and cocked his ear to listen -- but it didn't win .
I used a cipher .
I did n't waste any time in sociabilities with Clarence , but squared away for business , straight-off -- thus :
`` They do n't know anything about the telegraph ; they have n't had any experience yet , the line to London is so new .
Better not venture that .
They might hang you .
Think up something else . ''
Little he knew how closely he was crowding the facts .
I could n't think up anything for the moment .
Then an idea struck me , and I started it along :
`` They shall start in half an hour . ''
`` You 're not going to be hanged .
None of us are . ''
`` Ye have not ranked as a fool -- before .
You might better keep your reputation , seeing the strain would not be for long . ''
`` It will stand it , I reckon .
Before to-morrow we shall be out of prison , and free to go where we will , besides . ''
`` I thought it not many minutes ago , for so the thing was decided and proclaimed . ''
`` Ah , then you 've changed your mind , is that it ? ''
`` That ye will all be hanged _to-day_ , at mid-afternoon !
that shot hit home !
Lean upon me . ''
`` Let him speak !
his humble subjects hunger and thirst for words of wisdom out of the mouth of their master his Serene and Sacred Raggedness ! ''
There was a jerk , and the slave hung dangling ; dangling and hideously squirming , for his limbs were not tied .
`` Good deal of a surprise , was n't it ?
I knew you 'd like it .
I've had the boys practicing this long time , privately ; and just hungry for a chance to show off . ''
Up to the day set , there was no talk in all Britain of anything but this combat .
All other topics sank into insignificance and passed out of men 's thoughts and interest .
It was not because a tournament was a great matter , it was not because Sir Sagramor had found the Holy Grail , for he had not , but had failed ; it was not because the second ( official ) personage in the kingdom was one of the duellists ; no , all these features were commonplace .
Yet there was abundant reason for the extraordinary interest which this coming fight was creating .
It was born of the fact that all the nation knew that this was not to be a duel between mere men , so to speak , but a duel between two mighty magicians ; a duel not of muscle but of mind , not of human skill but of superhuman art and craft ; a final struggle for supremacy between the two master enchanters of the age .
It was realized that the most prodigious achievements of the most renowned knights could not be worthy of comparison with a spectacle like this ; they could be but child's play , contrasted with this mysterious and awful battle of the gods .
Yes , all the world knew it was going to be in reality a duel between Merlin and me , a measuring of his magic powers against mine .
It was known that Merlin had been busy whole days and nights together , imbuing Sir Sagramor 's arms and armor with supernal powers of offense and defense , and that he had procured for him from the spirits of the air a fleecy veil which would render the wearer invisible to his antagonist while still visible to other men .
Against Sir Sagramor , so weaponed and protected , a thousand knights could accomplish nothing ; against him no known enchantments could prevail .
These facts were sure ; regarding them there was no doubt , no reason for doubt .
There was but one question : might there be still other enchantments , _unknown_ to Merlin , which could render Sir Sagramor 's veil transparent to me , and make his enchanted mail vulnerable to my weapons ?
This was the one thing to be decided in the lists .
Until then the world must remain in suspense .
`` Alack , Sir Boss , wilt fight naked , and without lance or sword or -- ''
Here he came , like a house afire ; I dodged : he passed like a flash , with my horse-hair coils settling around his neck ; a second or so later , _fst_ !
his saddle was empty .
I got another encore ; and another , and another , and still another .
When I had snaked five men out , things began to look serious to the ironclads , and they stopped and consulted together .
As a result , they decided that it was time to waive etiquette and send their greatest and best against me .
To the astonishment of that little world , I lassoed Sir Lamorak de Galis , and after him Sir Galahad .
So you see there was simply nothing to be done now , but play their right bower -- bring out the superbest of the superb , the mightiest of the mighty , the great Sir Launcelot himself !
`` It is stolen , sire . ''
`` And I will lend ! ''
said Sir Launcelot , limping up .
`` He is as brave a knight of his hands as any that be on live , and he shall have mine . ''
`` Thou'rt overwrought with passion ; it disorders thy mind .
Wouldst kill a naked man ? ''
Consider the three years sped .
Now look around on England .
A happy and prosperous country , and strangely altered .
Schools everywhere , and several colleges ; a number of pretty good newspapers .
Even authorship was taking a start ; Sir Dinadan the Humorist was first in the field , with a volume of gray-headed jokes which I had been familiar with during thirteen centuries .
If he had left out that old rancid one about the lecturer I would n't have said anything ; but I could n't stand that one .
I suppressed the book and hanged the author .
Clarence was with me as concerned the revolution , but in a modified way .
His idea was a republic , without privileged orders , but with a hereditary royal family at the head of it instead of an elective chief magistrate .
He believed that no nation that had ever known the joy of worshiping a royal family could ever be robbed of it and not fade away and die of melancholy .
I urged that kings were dangerous .
He said , then have cats .
He was sure that a royal family of cats would answer every purpose .
They would be as useful as any other royal family , they would know as much , they would have the same virtues and the same treacheries , the same disposition to get up shindies with other royal cats , they would be laughably vain and absurd and never know it , they would be wholly inexpensive ; finally , they would have as sound a divine right as any other royal house , and `` Tom VII , or Tom XI , or Tom XIV by the grace of God King , '' would sound as well as it would when applied to the ordinary royal tomcat with tights on .
`` And as a rule , '' said he , in his neat modern English , `` the character of these cats would be considerably above the character of the average king , and this would be an immense moral advantage to the nation , for the reason that a nation always models its morals after its monarch 's .
The worship of royalty being founded in unreason , these graceful and harmless cats would easily become as sacred as any other royalties , and indeed more so , because it would presently be noticed that they hanged nobody , beheaded nobody , imprisoned nobody , inflicted no cruelties or injustices of any sort , and so must be worthy of a deeper love and reverence than the customary human king , and would certainly get it .
The eyes of the whole harried world would soon be fixed upon this humane and gentle system , and royal butchers would presently begin to disappear ; their subjects would fill the vacancies with catlings from our own royal house ; we should become a factory ; we should supply the thrones of the world ; within forty years all Europe would be governed by cats , and we should furnish the cats .
The reign of universal peace would begin then , to end no more forever ... .
I shouted to Clarence ; `` telephone the king 's homeopath to come ! ''
That was a comfort .
She was far from dead yet .
I sent for preparations of sulphur , I rousted out the croup-kettle myself ; for I do n't sit down and wait for doctors when Sandy or the child is sick .
I knew how to nurse both of them , and had had experience .
This little chap had lived in my arms a good part of its small life , and often I could soothe away its troubles and get it to laugh through the tear-dews on its eye-lashes when even its mother could n't .
Sir Launcelot , in his richest armor , came striding along the great hall now on his way to the stock-board ; he was president of the stock-board , and occupied the Siege Perilous , which he had bought of Sir Galahad ; for the stock-board consisted of the Knights of the Round Table , and they used the Round Table for business purposes now .
Seats at it were worth -- well , you would never believe the figure , so it is no use to state it .
Sir Launcelot was a bear , and he had put up a corner in one of the new lines , and was just getting ready to squeeze the shorts to-day ; but what of that ?
He was the same old Launcelot , and when he glanced in as he was passing the door and found out that his pet was sick , that was enough for him ; bulls and bears might fight it out their own way for all him , he would come right in here and stand by little Hello-Central for all he was worth .
And that was what he did .
He shied his helmet into the corner , and in half a minute he had a new wick in the alcohol lamp and was firing up on the croup-kettle .
By this time Sandy had built a blanket canopy over the crib , and everything was ready .
This experiment was baseball .
In order to give the thing vogue from the start , and place it out of the reach of criticism , I chose my nines by rank , not capacity .
There was n't a knight in either team who was n't a sceptered sovereign .
As for material of this sort , there was a glut of it always around Arthur .
You couldn't throw a brick in any direction and not cripple a king .
Of course , I could n't get these people to leave off their armor ; they wouldn't do that when they bathed .
They consented to differentiate the armor so that a body could tell one team from the other , but that was the most they would do .
So , one of the teams wore chain-mail ulsters , and the other wore plate-armor made of my new Bessemer steel .
Their practice in the field was the most fantastic thing I ever saw .
Being ball-proof , they never skipped out of the way , but stood still and took the result ; when a Bessemer was at the bat and a ball hit him , it would bound a hundred and fifty yards sometimes .
And when a man was running , and threw himself on his stomach to slide to his base , it was like an iron-clad coming into port .
At first I appointed men of no rank to act as umpires , but I had to discontinue that .
These people were no easier to please than other nines .
The umpire 's first decision was usually his last ; they broke him in two with a bat , and his friends toted him home on a shutter .
When it was noticed that no umpire ever survived a game , umpiring got to be unpopular .
So I was obliged to appoint somebody whose rank and lofty position under the government would protect him .
I did n't laugh -- I am always thankful for that -- but the strain ruptured every cartilage in me , and for weeks afterward I could hear my bones clack when I walked .
She never found out her mistake .
The first time she heard that form of salute used at the telephone she was surprised , and not pleased ; but I told her I had given order for it : that henceforth and forever the telephone must always be invoked with that reverent formality , in perpetual honor and remembrance of my lost friend and her small namesake .
This was not true .
I approached England the next morning , with the wide highway of salt water all to myself .
There were ships in the harbor , at Dover , but they were naked as to sails , and there was no sign of life about them .
It was Sunday ; yet at Canterbury the streets were empty ; strangest of all , there was not even a priest in sight , and no stroke of a bell fell upon my ear .
The mournfulness of death was everywhere .
I could n't understand it .
At last , in the further edge of that town I saw a small funeral procession -- just a family and a few friends following a coffin -- no priest ; a funeral without bell , book , or candle ; there was a church there close at hand , but they passed it by weeping , and did not enter it ; I glanced up at the belfry , and there hung the bell , shrouded in black , and its tongue tied back .
Now I understood the stupendous calamity that had overtaken England .
Invasion is a triviality to it .
It was the INTERDICT !
`` Quick , now , tell me the meaning of this fearful disaster , '' I said .
`` How did it come about ? ''
`` Well , if there had n't been any Queen Guenever , it would n't have come so early ; but it would have come , anyway .
It would have come on your own account by and by ; by luck , it happened to come on the queen 's . ''
`` Oh , dear , only one thing could result -- I see that .
War , and the knights of the realm divided into a king 's party and a Sir Launcelot 's party . ''
Sir Mordred set himself at once to work to make his kingship permanent .
He was going to marry Guenever , as a first move ; but she fled and shut herself up in the Tower of London .
Mordred attacked ; the Bishop of Canterbury dropped down on him with the Interdict .
The king returned ; Mordred fought him at Dover , at Canterbury , and again at Barham Down .
Then there was talk of peace and a composition .
Terms , Mordred to have Cornwall and Kent during Arthur 's life , and the whole kingdom afterward . ''
The two armies lay near Salisbury .
Gawaine -- Gawaine 's head is at Dover Castle , he fell in the fight there -- Gawaine appeared to Arthur in a dream , at least his ghost did , and warned him to refrain from conflict for a month , let the delay cost what it might .
But battle was precipitated by an accident .
Arthur had given order that if a sword was raised during the consultation over the proposed treaty with Mordred , sound the trumpet and fall on !
for he had no confidence in Mordred .
Mordred had given a similar order to _his_ people .
Well , by and by an adder bit a knight 's heel ; the knight forgot all about the order , and made a slash at the adder with his sword .
Inside of half a minute those two prodigious hosts came together with a crash !
They butchered away all day .
Then the king -- however , we have started something fresh since you left -- our paper has . ''
`` Yes , the paper was booming right along , for the Interdict made no impression , got no grip , while the war lasted .
I had war correspondents with both armies .
I will finish that battle by reading you what one of the boys says :
`` That is a good piece of war correspondence , Clarence ; you are a first-rate newspaper man .
Well -- is the king all right ?
Did he get well ? ''
`` What do you mean by that ? ''
`` Yes , that 's right . ''
`` Right ; go on . ''
I do n't know how I overlooked that .
It 's not only cheaper , but it 's more effectual than the other way , for if wires break or get tangled , no harm is done . ''
`` That 's attended to .
It 's the prettiest garden that was ever planted .
It 's a belt forty feet wide , and goes around the outer fence -- distance between it and the fence one hundred yards -- kind of neutral ground that space is .
There is n't a single square yard of that whole belt but is equipped with a torpedo .
We laid them on the surface of the ground , and sprinkled a layer of sand over them .
It 's an innocent looking garden , but you let a man start in to hoe it once , and you 'll see . ''
`` That was the nature of it .
After that I put up some signs , for the protection of future committees , and we have had no intruders since . ''
THE BATTLE OF THE SAND BELT
We had a week of waiting .
It was not dull for me , because I was writing all the time .
During the first three days , I finished turning my old diary into this narrative form ; it only required a chapter or so to bring it down to date .
The rest of the week I took up in writing letters to my wife .
It was always my habit to write to Sandy every day , whenever we were separate , and now I kept up the habit for love of it , and of her , though I couldn't do anything with the letters , of course , after I had written them .
But it put in the time , you see , and was almost like talking ; it was almost as if I was saying , `` Sandy , if you and Hello-Central were here in the cave , instead of only your photographs , what good times we could have ! ''
And then , you know , I could imagine the baby goo-gooing something out in reply , with its fists in its mouth and itself stretched across its mother 's lap on its back , and she a-laughing and admiring and worshipping , and now and then tickling under the baby 's chin to set it cackling , and then maybe throwing in a word of answer to me herself -- and so on and so on -- well , do n't you know , I could sit there in the cave with my pen , and keep it up , that way , by the hour with them .
Why , it was almost like having us all together again .
The shout was unanimous and hearty .
I was ready for the enemy now .
Let the approaching big day come along -- it would find us on deck .
SOLDIERS , CHAMPIONS OF HUMAN LIBERTY AND EQUALITY : Your General congratulates you !
In the pride of his strength and the vanity of his renown , an arrogant enemy came against you .
The conflict was brief ; on your side , glorious .
This mighty victory , having been achieved utterly without loss , stands without example in history .
So long as the planets shall continue to move in their orbits , the BATTLE OF THE SAND-BELT will not perish out of the memories of men .
`` I certainly believe it is ; let us go and see . ''
We crept along on our hands and knees until we were pretty close , and then looked up .
Yes , it was a man -- a dim great figure in armor , standing erect , with both hands on the upper wire -- and , of course , there was a smell of burning flesh .
Poor fellow , dead as a door-nail , and never knew what hurt him .
He stood there like a statue -- no motion about him , except that his plumes swished about a little in the night wind .
We rose up and looked in through the bars of his visor , but could n't make out whether we knew him or not -- features too dim and shadowed .
One thing seemed to be sufficiently demonstrated : our current was so tremendous that it killed before the victim could cry out .
Pretty soon we detected a muffled and heavy sound , and next moment we guessed what it was .
It was a surprise in force coming !
I whispered Clarence to go and wake the army , and notify it to wait in silence in the cave for further orders .
He was soon back , and we stood by the inner fence and watched the silent lightning do its awful work upon that swarming host .
One could make out but little of detail ; but he could note that a black mass was piling itself up beyond the second fence .
That swelling bulk was dead men !
Our camp was enclosed with a solid wall of the dead -- a bulwark , a breastwork , of corpses , you may say .
One terrible thing about this thing was the absence of human voices ; there were no cheers , no war cries ; being intent upon a surprise , these men moved as noiselessly as they could ; and always when the front rank was near enough to their goal to make it proper for them to begin to get a shout ready , of course they struck the fatal line and went down without testifying .
Land , what a sight !
We were enclosed in three walls of dead men !
All the other fences were pretty nearly filled with the living , who were stealthily working their way forward through the wires .
The sudden glare paralyzed this host , petrified them , you may say , with astonishment ; there was just one instant for me to utilize their immobility in , and I did n't lose the chance .
You see , in another instant they would have recovered their faculties , then they 'd have burst into a cheer and made a rush , and my wires would have gone down before it ; but that lost instant lost them their opportunity forever ; while even that slight fragment of time was still unspent , I shot the current through all the fences and struck the whole host dead in their tracks !
_There_ was a groan you could _hear_ !
It voiced the death-pang of eleven thousand men .
It swelled out on the night with awful pathos .
A glance showed that the rest of the enemy -- perhaps ten thousand strong -- were between us and the encircling ditch , and pressing forward to the assault .
Consequently we had them _all !
_ and had them past help .
Time for the last act of the tragedy .
I fired the three appointed revolver shots -- which meant :
`` Stand to your guns , men !
`` No you ca n't , either . ''
`` Oh , of COURSE you will . ''
`` Well I WILL . ''
`` I AI N'T afraid . ''
`` Get away from here ! ''
`` Go away yourself ! ''
The new boy stepped over promptly , and said :
The new boy went off brushing the dust from his clothes , sobbing , snuffling , and occasionally looking back and shaking his head and threatening what he would do to Tom the `` next time he caught him out . ''
To which Tom responded with jeers , and started off in high feather , and as soon as his back was turned the new boy snatched up a stone , threw it and hit him between the shoulders and then turned tail and ran like an antelope .
Tom chased the traitor home , and thus found out where he lived .
He then held a position at the gate for some time , daring the enemy to come outside , but the enemy only made faces at him through the window and declined .
At last the enemy 's mother appeared , and called Tom a bad , vicious , vulgar child , and ordered him away .
So he went away ; but he said he `` 'lowed '' to `` lay '' for that boy .
`` And besides , if you will I 'll show you my sore toe . ''
Jim was only human -- this attraction was too much for him .
He put down his pail , took the white alley , and bent over the toe with absorbing interest while the bandage was being unwound .
In another moment he was flying down the street with his pail and a tingling rear , Tom was whitewashing with vigor , and Aunt Polly was retiring from the field with a slipper in her hand and triumph in her eye .
`` Ship up to back !
His arms straightened and stiffened down his sides .
Tom wheeled suddenly and said :
`` Why , it 's you , Ben !
I war n't noticing . ''
`` Well , maybe it is , and maybe it ai n't .
All I know , is , it suits Tom Sawyer . ''
The brush continued to move .
`` I 'll give you ALL of it ! ''
`` What , a'ready ?
How much have you done ? ''
`` Well , I never !
There 's no getting round it , you can work when you're a mind to , Tom . ''
And then she diluted the compliment by adding , `` But it 's powerful seldom you 're a mind to , I 'm bound to say .
Well , go 'long and play ; but mind you get back some time in a week , or I 'll tan you . ''
Then he skipped out , and saw Sid just starting up the outside stairway that led to the back rooms on the second floor .
Clods were handy and the air was full of them in a twinkling .
They raged around Sid like a hail-storm ; and before Aunt Polly could collect her surprised faculties and sally to the rescue , six or seven clods had taken personal effect , and Tom was over the fence and gone .
There was a gate , but as a general thing he was too crowded for time to make use of it .
His soul was at peace , now that he had settled with Sid for calling attention to his black thread and getting him into trouble .
He worshipped this new angel with furtive eye , till he saw that she had discovered him ; then he pretended he did not know she was present , and began to `` show off '' in all sorts of absurd boyish ways , in order to win her admiration .
He kept up this grotesque foolishness for some time ; but by-and-by , while he was in the midst of some dangerous gymnastic performances , he glanced aside and saw that the little girl was wending her way toward the house .
Tom came up to the fence and leaned on it , grieving , and hoping she would tarry yet awhile longer .
She halted a moment on the steps and then moved toward the door .
Tom heaved a great sigh as she put her foot on the threshold .
But his face lit up , right away , for she tossed a pansy over the fence a moment before she disappeared .
The window went up , a maid-servant 's discordant voice profaned the holy calm , and a deluge of water drenched the prone martyr 's remains !
`` Blessed are the -- a -- a -- ''
`` Oh , Tom , you poor thick-headed thing , I 'm not teasing you .
I wouldn't do that .
You must go and learn it again .
Do n't you be discouraged , Tom , you 'll manage it -- and if you do , I 'll give you something ever so nice .
There , now , that 's a good boy . ''
`` Never you mind , Tom .
You know if I say it 's nice , it is nice . ''
The visitors were given the highest seat of honor , and as soon as Mr. Walters ' speech was finished , he introduced them to the school .
The middle-aged man turned out to be a prodigious personage -- no less a one than the county judge -- altogether the most august creation these children had ever looked upon -- and they wondered what kind of material he was made of -- and they half wanted to hear him roar , and were half afraid he might , too .
He was from Constantinople , twelve miles away -- so he had travelled , and seen the world -- these very eyes had looked upon the county court-house -- which was said to have a tin roof .
The awe which these reflections inspired was attested by the impressive silence and the ranks of staring eyes .
This was the great Judge Thatcher , brother of their own lawyer .
Jeff Thatcher immediately went forward , to be familiar with the great man and be envied by the school .
It would have been music to his soul to hear the whisperings :
`` Look at him , Jim !
He 's a going up there .
he 's a going to shake hands with him -- he IS shaking hands with him !
By jings , do n't you wish you was Jeff ? ''
And now at this moment , when hope was dead , Tom Sawyer came forward with nine yellow tickets , nine red tickets , and ten blue ones , and demanded a Bible .
This was a thunderbolt out of a clear sky .
Walters was not expecting an application from this source for the next ten years .
But there was no getting around it -- here were the certified checks , and they were good for their face .
Tom was therefore elevated to a place with the Judge and the other elect , and the great news was announced from headquarters .
It was the most stunning surprise of the decade , and so profound was the sensation that it lifted the new hero up to the judicial one 's altitude , and the school had two marvels to gaze upon in place of one .
The boys were all eaten up with envy -- but those that suffered the bitterest pangs were those who perceived too late that they themselves had contributed to this hated splendor by trading tickets to Tom for the wealth he had amassed in selling whitewashing privileges .
These despised themselves , as being the dupes of a wily fraud , a guileful snake in the grass .
Amy Lawrence was proud and glad , and she tried to make Tom see it in her face -- but he would n't look .
She wondered ; then she was just a grain troubled ; next a dim suspicion came and went -- came again ; she watched ; a furtive glance told her worlds -- and then her heart broke , and she was jealous , and angry , and the tears came and she hated everybody .
Tom most of all ( she thought ) .
Tom was tugging at a button-hole and looking sheepish .
He blushed , now , and his eyes fell .
Mr. Walters ' heart sank within him .
He said to himself , it is not possible that the boy can answer the simplest question -- why DID the Judge ask him ?
Yet he felt obliged to speak up and say :
Whilst others fight to win the prize , and sail thro ' BLOODY seas ?
After the hymn had been sung , the Rev .
Mr. Sprague turned himself into a bulletin-board , and read off `` notices '' of meetings and societies and things till it seemed that the list would stretch out to the crack of doom -- a queer custom which is still kept up in America , even in cities , away here in this age of abundant newspapers .
Often , the less there is to justify a traditional custom , the harder it is to get rid of it .
The minister gave out his text and droned along monotonously through an argument that was so prosy that many a head by and by began to nod -- and yet it was an argument that dealt in limitless fire and brimstone and thinned the predestined elect down to a company so small as to be hardly worth the saving .
Tom counted the pages of the sermon ; after church he always knew how many pages there had been , but he seldom knew anything else about the discourse .
However , this time he was really interested for a little while .
The minister made a grand and moving picture of the assembling together of the world 's hosts at the millennium when the lion and the lamb should lie down together and a little child should lead them .
But the pathos , the lesson , the moral of the great spectacle were lost upon the boy ; he only thought of the conspicuousness of the principal character before the on-looking nations ; his face lit with the thought , and he said to himself that he wished he could be that child , if it was a tame lion .
Say , Tom ! ''
[ No response . ]
`` Here , Tom !
What is the matter , Tom ? ''
And he shook him and looked in his face anxiously .
`` Oh , do n't , Sid .
Do n't joggle me . ''
`` What 's the matter with you -- what is the matter with you , child ? ''
`` Aunt Polly , it SEEMED mortified , and it hurt so I never minded my tooth at all . ''
`` One of them 's loose , and it aches perfectly awful . ''
`` What 's that you got ? ''
`` Lem me see him , Huck .
My , he 's pretty stiff .
Where 'd you get him ? ''
`` Bought him off'n a boy . ''
I know something that 's better . ''
`` I bet you do n't .
What is it ? ''
I would n't give a dern for spunk-water . ''
`` You would n't , would n't you ?
D'you ever try it ? ''
`` You take and split the bean , and cut the wart so as to get some blood , and then you put the blood on one piece of the bean and take and dig a hole and bury it 'bout midnight at the crossroads in the dark of the moon , and then you burn up the rest of the bean .
You see that piece that 's got the blood on it will keep drawing and drawing , trying to fetch the other piece to it , and so that helps the blood to draw the wart , and pretty soon off she comes . ''
`` Why , you take your cat and go and get in the graveyard 'long about midnight when somebody that was wicked has been buried ; and when it's midnight a devil will come , or maybe two or three , but you ca n't see 'em , you can only hear something like the wind , or maybe hear 'em talk ; and when they 're taking that feller away , you heave your cat after 'em and say , 'Devil follow corpse , cat follow devil , warts follow cat , I'm done with ye ! '
That 'll fetch ANY wart . ''
`` Well , I reckon it 's so , then .
Becuz they say she 's a witch . ''
`` Out in the woods . ''
`` Well , why do n't you ?
Becuz you know mighty well you ca n't .
This is a pretty early tick , I reckon .
It 's the first one I 've seen this year . ''
`` Well , all right , '' said Huckleberry , `` it 's a trade . ''
When Tom reached the little isolated frame schoolhouse , he strode in briskly , with the manner of one who had come with all honest speed .
He hung his hat on a peg and flung himself into his seat with business-like alacrity .
The master , throned on high in his great splint-bottom arm-chair , was dozing , lulled by the drowsy hum of study .
The interruption roused him .
Tom knew that when his name was pronounced in full , it meant trouble .
Tom was about to take refuge in a lie , when he saw two long tails of yellow hair hanging down a back that he recognized by the electric sympathy of love ; and by that form was THE ONLY VACANT PLACE on the girls ' side of the schoolhouse .
`` I STOPPED TO TALK WITH HUCKLEBERRY FINN ! ''
Tom partly uncovered a dismal caricature of a house with two gable ends to it and a corkscrew of smoke issuing from the chimney .
Then the girl 's interest began to fasten itself upon the work and she forgot everything else .
When it was finished , she gazed a moment , then whispered :
`` Oh , will you ?
`` Good -- that 's a whack .
What 's your name ? ''
`` You 'll tell . ''
`` You wo n't tell anybody at all ?
Ever , as long as you live ? ''
`` Now , '' said he , `` as long as he is on your side you can stir him up and I 'll let him alone ; but if you let him get away and get on my side , you 're to leave him alone as long as I can keep him from crossing over . ''
`` Do you love rats ? ''
I hate them ! ''
`` Was you ever at a circus ? ''
`` Yes , and my pa 's going to take me again some time , if I 'm good . ''
`` I been to the circus three or four times -- lots of times .
Church ain't shucks to a circus .
There 's things going on at a circus all the time .
I 'm going to be a clown in a circus when I grow up . ''
`` Yes , that 's so .
And they get slathers of money -- most a dollar a day , Ben Rogers says .
Say , Becky , was you ever engaged ? ''
`` Why , engaged to be married . ''
`` I reckon so .
I do n't know .
What is it like ? ''
`` Why , that , you know , is to -- well , they always do that . ''
`` Ye -- yes . ''
`` Shall I tell YOU ? ''
`` Oh , do n't cry , Becky , I do n't care for her any more . ''
`` Yes , you do , Tom -- you know you do . ''
`` What has n't come here , come !
What 's here , stay here ! ''
`` Brother , go find your brother ! ''
`` Hold , my merry men !
Keep hid till I blow . ''
Who comes here into Sherwood Forest without my pass ? ''
`` Guy of Guisborne wants no man 's pass .
Who art thou that -- that -- ''
`` Oh , Tom , they can see in the dark , same as cats .
I wisht I hadn't come . ''
`` I 'll try to , Tom , but , Lord , I 'm all of a shiver . ''
The whisper died wholly out , now , for the three men had reached the grave and stood within a few feet of the boys ' hiding-place .
`` Now the cussed thing 's ready , Sawbones , and you 'll just out with another five , or here she stays . ''
`` That 's the talk ! ''
`` Oh , Joe , you 're an angel .
I 'll bless you for this the longest day I live . ''
And Potter began to cry .
Potter started on a trot that quickly increased to a run .
The half-breed stood looking after him .
`` Do you though ? ''
`` Who 'll tell ?
`` Tom , we GOT to keep mum .
That Injun devil wouldn't make any more of drownding us than a couple of cats , if we was to squeak 'bout this and they did n't hang him .
Now , look-a-here , Tom , less take and swear to one another -- that 's what we got to do -- swear to keep mum . ''
Tom 's whole being applauded this idea .
It was deep , and dark , and awful ; the hour , the circumstances , the surroundings , were in keeping with it .
He picked up a clean pine shingle that lay in the moonlight , took a little fragment of `` red keel '' out of his pocket , got the moon on his work , and painfully scrawled these lines , emphasizing each slow down-stroke by clamping his tongue between his teeth , and letting up the pressure on the up-strokes .
[ See next page . ]
A figure crept stealthily through a break in the other end of the ruined building , now , but they did not notice it .
[ * If Mr. Harbison owned a slave named Bull , Tom would have spoken of him as `` Harbison 's Bull , '' but a son or a dog of that name was `` Bull Harbison . ''
`` Quick , Tom , quick !
Who does he mean ? ''
What 's that ? ''
Then they separated , cogitating .
When Tom crept in at his bedroom window the night was almost spent .
He undressed with excessive caution , and fell asleep congratulating himself that nobody knew of his escapade .
He was not aware that the gently-snoring Sid was awake , and had been so for an hour .
Potter would have fallen if they had not caught him and eased him to the ground .
`` Something told me 't if I did n't come back and get -- '' He shuddered ; then waved his nerveless hand with a vanquished gesture and said , `` Tell 'em , Joe , tell 'em -- it ai n't any use any more . ''
Injun Joe helped to raise the body of the murdered man and put it in a wagon for removal ; and it was whispered through the shuddering crowd that the wound bled a little !
The boys thought that this happy circumstance would turn suspicion in the right direction ; but they were disappointed , for more than one villager remarked :
`` I do n't know , aunt , '' gasped the boy .
`` Why , I never see anything like it .
What did make him act so ? ''
`` They do , do they ? ''
There was something in the tone that made Tom apprehensive .
That is , I believe they do . ''
Aunt Polly felt a sudden pang of remorse .
This was putting the thing in a new light ; what was cruelty to a cat MIGHT be cruelty to a boy , too .
She began to soften ; she felt sorry .
Her eyes watered a little , and she put her hand on Tom 's head and said gently :
Just at this point he met his soul 's sworn comrade , Joe Harper -- hard-eyed , and with evidently a great and dismal purpose in his heart .
Plainly here were `` two souls with but a single thought . ''
Tom , wiping his eyes with his sleeve , began to blubber out something about a resolution to escape from hard usage and lack of sympathy at home by roaming abroad into the great world never to return ; and ended by hoping that Joe would not forget him .
But it transpired that this was a request which Joe had just been going to make of Tom , and had come to hunt him up for that purpose .
His mother had whipped him for drinking some cream which he had never tasted and knew nothing about ; it was plain that she was tired of him and wished him to go ; if she felt that way , there was nothing for him to do but succumb ; he hoped she would be happy , and never regret having driven her poor boy out into the unfeeling world to suffer and die .
`` Huck Finn the Red-Handed , and Joe Harper the Terror of the Seas . ''
Tom had furnished these titles , from his favorite literature .
`` What sail 's she carrying ? ''
`` Aye-aye , sir ! ''
They built a fire against the side of a great log twenty or thirty steps within the sombre depths of the forest , and then cooked some bacon in the frying-pan for supper , and used up half of the corn `` pone '' stock they had brought .
It seemed glorious sport to be feasting in that wild , free way in the virgin forest of an unexplored and uninhabited island , far from the haunts of men , and they said they never would return to civilization .
The climbing fire lit up their faces and threw its ruddy glare upon the pillared tree-trunks of their forest temple , and upon the varnished foliage and festooning vines .
But I would n't do that . ''
`` Why , I just would n't stand it .
I 'd run away . ''
`` Oh , they have just a bully time -- take ships and burn them , and get the money and bury it in awful places in their island where there's ghosts and things to watch it , and kill everybody in the ships -- make 'em walk a plank . ''
But the other boys told him the fine clothes would come fast enough , after they should have begun their adventures .
They made him understand that his poor rags would do to begin with , though it was customary for wealthy pirates to start with a proper wardrobe .
They came back to camp wonderfully refreshed , glad-hearted , and ravenous ; and they soon had the camp-fire blazing up again .
Huck found a spring of clear cold water close by , and the boys made cups of broad oak or hickory leaves , and felt that water , sweetened with such a wildwood charm as that , would be a good enough substitute for coffee .
While Joe was slicing bacon for breakfast , Tom and Huck asked him to hold on a minute ; they stepped to a promising nook in the river-bank and threw in their lines ; almost immediately they had reward .
Joe had not had time to get impatient before they were back again with some handsome bass , a couple of sun-perch and a small catfish -- provisions enough for quite a family .
They fried the fish with the bacon , and were astonished ; for no fish had ever seemed so delicious before .
They did not know that the quicker a fresh-water fish is on the fire after he is caught the better he is ; and they reflected little upon what a sauce open-air sleeping , open-air exercise , bathing , and a large ingredient of hunger make , too .
They lay around in the shade , after breakfast , while Huck had a smoke , and then went off through the woods on an exploring expedition .
They tramped gayly along , over decaying logs , through tangled underbrush , among solemn monarchs of the forest , hung from their crowns to the ground with a drooping regalia of grape-vines .
Now and then they came upon snug nooks carpeted with grass and jeweled with flowers .
`` I wonder , '' said Tom in a whisper .
`` Listen -- do n't talk . ''
`` Let 's go and see . ''
They sprang to their feet and hurried to the shore toward the town .
They parted the bushes on the bank and peered out over the water .
The little steam ferryboat was about a mile below the village , drifting with the current .
Her broad deck seemed crowded with people .
There were a great many skiffs rowing about or floating with the stream in the neighborhood of the ferryboat , but the boys could not determine what the men in them were doing .
Presently a great jet of white smoke burst from the ferryboat 's side , and as it expanded and rose in a lazy cloud , that same dull throb of sound was borne to the listeners again .
`` I know now ! ''
exclaimed Tom ; `` somebody 's drownded ! ''
`` Well , that 's funny , '' said Tom .
`` But maybe they say it to themselves .
Of COURSE they do .
Anybody might know that . ''
The other boys agreed that there was reason in what Tom said , because an ignorant lump of bread , uninstructed by an incantation , could not be expected to act very intelligently when set upon an errand of such gravity .
Tom withered him with derision !
Huck , being uncommitted as yet , joined in with Tom , and the waverer quickly `` explained , '' and was glad to get out of the scrape with as little taint of chicken-hearted homesickness clinging to his garments as he could .
Mutiny was effectually laid to rest for the moment .
Presently the cracked bell tapped and a voice gave the order to `` cast off . ''
A minute or two later the skiff 's head was standing high up , against the boat 's swell , and the voyage was begun .
Tom felt happy in his success , for he knew it was the boat 's last trip for the night .
At the end of a long twelve or fifteen minutes the wheels stopped , and Tom slipped overboard and swam ashore in the dusk , landing fifty yards downstream , out of danger of possible stragglers .
Tom disappeared under the bed just in time .
He lay and `` breathed '' himself for a time , and then crept to where he could almost touch his aunt 's foot .
`` I hope Tom 's better off where he is , '' said Sid , `` but if he 'd been better in some ways -- ''
`` Yes , yes , yes , I know just how you feel , Mrs. Harper , I know just exactly how you feel .
No longer ago than yesterday noon , my Tom took and filled the cat full of Pain-killer , and I did think the cretur would tear the house down .
And God forgive me , I cracked Tom 's head with my thimble , poor boy , poor dead boy .
But he 's out of all his troubles now .
And the last words I ever heard him say was to reproach -- ''
He had to keep still long after she went to bed , for she kept making broken-hearted ejaculations from time to time , tossing unrestfully , and turning over .
But at last she was still , only moaning a little in her sleep .
Now the boy stole out , rose gradually by the bedside , shaded the candle-light with his hand , and stood regarding her .
His heart was full of pity for her .
He took out his sycamore scroll and placed it by the candle .
But something occurred to him , and he lingered considering .
His face lighted with a happy solution of his thought ; he put the bark hastily in his pocket .
Then he bent over and kissed the faded lips , and straightway made his stealthy exit , latching the door behind him .
He sat down and took a long rest , torturing himself meanwhile to keep awake , and then started warily down the home-stretch .
The night was far spent .
It was broad daylight before he found himself fairly abreast the island bar .
He rested again until the sun was well up and gilding the great river with its splendor , and then he plunged into the stream .
A little later he paused , dripping , upon the threshold of the camp , and heard Joe say :
`` But , Joe , there ai n't such another swimming-place anywhere . ''
`` Swimming 's no good .
I do n't seem to care for it , somehow , when there ai n't anybody to say I sha'n't go in .
I mean to go home . ''
`` Well , go 'long -- who 's hendering you . ''
I want to tell you something ! ''
They presently stopped and turned around .
When he got to where they were , he began unfolding his secret , and they listened moodily till at last they saw the `` point '' he was driving at , and then they set up a war-whoop of applause and said it was `` splendid ! ''
and said if he had told them at first , they would n't have started away .
He made a plausible excuse ; but his real reason had been the fear that not even the secret would keep them with him any very great length of time , and so he had meant to hold it in reserve as a last seduction .
`` That 's just the way with me , hai n't it , Huck ?
You 've heard me talk just that way -- have n't you , Huck ?
I 'll leave it to Huck if I have n't . ''
`` I bet he would .
And Johnny Miller -- I wish could see Johnny Miller tackle it once . ''
`` Oh , do n't I ! ''
`` Why , I bet you Johnny Miller could n't any more do this than nothing .
Just one little snifter would fetch HIM . ''
`` I 've lost my knife .
I reckon I better go and find it . ''
By and by they separated into three hostile tribes , and darted upon each other from ambush with dreadful war-whoops , and killed and scalped each other by thousands .
It was a gory day .
Consequently it was an extremely satisfactory one .
And behold , they were glad they had gone into savagery , for they had gained something ; they found that they could now smoke a little without having to go and hunt for a lost knife ; they did not get sick enough to be seriously uncomfortable .
They were not likely to fool away this high promise for lack of effort .
No , they practised cautiously , after supper , with right fair success , and so they spent a jubilant evening .
They were prouder and happier in their new acquirement than they would have been in the scalping and skinning of the Six Nations .
We will leave them to smoke and chatter and brag , since we have no further use for them at present .
`` Well , Tom Sawyer he licked me once . ''
When the Sunday-school hour was finished , the next morning , the bell began to toll , instead of ringing in the usual way .
It was a very still Sabbath , and the mournful sound seemed in keeping with the musing hush that lay upon nature .
The villagers began to gather , loitering a moment in the vestibule to converse in whispers about the sad event .
But there was no whispering in the house ; only the funereal rustling of dresses as the women gathered to their seats disturbed the silence there .
None could remember when the little church had been so full before .
There was finally a waiting pause , an expectant dumbness , and then Aunt Polly entered , followed by Sid and Mary , and they by the Harper family , all in deep black , and the whole congregation , the old minister as well , rose reverently and stood until the mourners were seated in the front pew .
There was another communing silence , broken at intervals by muffled sobs , and then the minister spread his hands abroad and prayed .
A moving hymn was sung , and the text followed : `` I am the Resurrection and the Life . ''
Old Hundred swelled up with a triumphant burst , and while it shook the rafters Tom Sawyer the Pirate looked around upon the envying juveniles about him and confessed in his heart that this was the proudest moment of his life .
`` Tom , I hoped you loved me that much , '' said Aunt Polly , with a grieved tone that discomforted the boy .
`` It would have been something if you'd cared enough to THINK of it , even if you did n't DO it . ''
`` Now , auntie , that ai n't any harm , '' pleaded Mary ; `` it 's only Tom's giddy way -- he is always in such a rush that he never thinks of anything . ''
`` Well , so we did .
So we always do .
I 'm glad your dreams could take even that much trouble about us . ''
`` Somehow it seems to me that the wind -- the wind blowed the -- the -- ''
The sperrit was upon you !
You was a prophesying -- that 's what you was doing !
Land alive , go on , Tom ! ''
`` THERE , d'you hear that !
It was his very words ! ''
`` Why , Mary Austin !
you bad girl , why did n't you come to Sunday-school ? ''
`` Oh , goody ; I hope she 'll let ME come . ''
`` Any other boy ! ''
Tom thought , grating his teeth .
`` Any boy in the whole town but that Saint Louis smarty that thinks he dresses so fine and is aristocracy !
Oh , all right , I licked you the first day you ever saw this town , mister , and I 'll lick you again !
You just wait till I catch you out !
I 'll just take and -- ''
Alfred dropped alongside and was going to try to comfort her , but she said :
`` Auntie , what have I done ? ''
This was a new aspect of the thing .
His smartness of the morning had seemed to Tom a good joke before , and very ingenious .
It merely looked mean and shabby now .
He hung his head and could not think of anything to say for a moment .
`` Auntie , I wish I had n't done it -- but I did n't think . ''
The words sounded like truth .
The old lady could not hide a tremor in her voice when she said :
`` Kiss me again , Tom !
-- and be off with you to school , now , and don't bother me any more . ''
`` You ought to be ashamed of yourself , Tom Sawyer ; you know you're going to tell on me , and oh , what shall I do , what shall I do !
I 'll be whipped , and I never was whipped in school . ''
A whole hour drifted by , the master sat nodding in his throne , the air was drowsy with the hum of study .
By and by , Mr. Dobbins straightened himself up , yawned , then unlocked his desk , and reached for his book , but seemed undecided whether to take it out or leave it .
Most of the pupils glanced up languidly , but there were two among them that watched his movements with intent eyes .
Mr. Dobbins fingered his book absently for a while , then took it out and settled himself in his chair to read !
Tom shot a glance at Becky .
He had seen a hunted and helpless rabbit look as she did , with a gun levelled at its head .
Instantly he forgot his quarrel with her .
Quick -- something must be done !
done in a flash , too !
But the very imminence of the emergency paralyzed his invention .
-- he had an inspiration !
He would run and snatch the book , spring through the door and fly .
But his resolution shook for one little instant , and the chance was lost -- the master opened the volume .
If Tom only had the wasted opportunity back again !
There was no help for Becky now , he said .
The next moment the master faced the school .
Every eye sank under his gaze .
There was that in it which smote even the innocent with fear .
There was silence while one might count ten -- the master was gathering his wrath .
Then he spoke : `` Who tore this book ? ''
Then arose a slim , melancholy girl , whose face had the `` interesting '' paleness that comes of pills and indigestion , and read a `` poem . ''
Two stanzas of it will do :
`` Alabama , good-bye !
I love thee well !
But yet for a while do I leave thee now !
Sad , yes , sad thoughts of thee my heart doth swell , And burning recollections throng my brow !
For I have wandered through thy flowery woods ; Have roamed and read near Tallapoosa 's stream ; Have listened to Tallassee 's warring floods , And wooed on Coosa 's side Aurora 's beam .
Next appeared a dark-complexioned , black-eyed , black-haired young lady , who paused an impressive moment , assumed a tragic expression , and began to read in a measured , solemn tone :
NOTE : -- The pretended `` compositions '' quoted in this chapter are taken without alteration from a volume entitled `` Prose and Poetry , by a Western Lady '' -- but they are exactly and precisely after the schoolgirl pattern , and hence are much happier than any mere imitations could be .
The dreadful secret of the murder was a chronic misery .
It was a very cancer for permanency and pain .
`` Never a solitary word , so help me .
What makes you ask ? ''
`` Well , I was afeard . ''
Tom felt more comfortable .
`` Most always -- most always .
He ai n't no account ; but then he hain't ever done anything to hurt anybody .
Just fishes a little , to get money to get drunk on -- and loafs around considerable ; but lord , we all do that -- leastways most of us -- preachers and such like .
But he 's kind of good -- he give me half a fish , once , when there war n't enough for two ; and lots of times he 's kind of stood by me when I was out of luck . ''
Tom glanced at Injun Joe 's iron face and his tongue failed him .
The audience listened breathless , but the words refused to come .
After a few moments , however , the boy got a little of his strength back , and managed to put enough of it into his voice to make part of the house hear :
`` Were you hidden , or not ? ''
`` Any one with you ? ''
Tom began -- hesitatingly at first , but as he warmed to his subject his words flowed more and more easily ; in a little while every sound ceased but his own voice ; every eye fixed itself upon him ; with parted lips and bated breath the audience hung upon his words , taking no note of time , rapt in the ghastly fascinations of the tale .
The strain upon pent emotion reached its climax when the boy said :
THERE comes a time in every rightly-constructed boy 's life when he has a raging desire to go somewhere and dig for hidden treasure .
This desire suddenly came upon Tom one day .
He sallied out to find Joe Harper , but failed of success .
Next he sought Ben Rogers ; he had gone fishing .
Presently he stumbled upon Huck Finn the Red-Handed .
Tom took him to a private place and opened the matter to him confidentially .
Huck was always willing to take a hand in any enterprise that offered entertainment and required no capital , for he had a troublesome superabundance of that sort of time which is not money .
`` Where 'll we dig ? ''
`` Oh , most anywhere . ''
`` Why , is it hid all around ? ''
`` How you talk !
`` Then how you going to know which one to go for ? ''
`` Well , what of that ?
Suppose you find a brass pot with a hundred dollars in it , all rusty and gray , or rotten chest full of di'monds .
How 's that ? ''
`` That 's bully .
Plenty bully enough for me .
Just you gim me the hundred dollars and I do n't want no di'monds . ''
`` Oh , kings have slathers of them . ''
What 's his other name ? ''
`` He did n't have any other name .
Kings do n't have any but a given name . ''
`` Well , if they like it , Tom , all right ; but I do n't want to be a king and have only just a given name , like a nigger .
But say -- where you going to dig first ? ''
So they got a crippled pick and a shovel , and set out on their three-mile tramp .
They arrived hot and panting , and threw themselves down in the shade of a neighboring elm to rest and have a smoke .
`` So do I . ''
`` I 'm going to buy a new drum , and a sure-'nough sword , and a red necktie and a bull pup , and get married . ''
`` That 's it . ''
`` Tom , you -- why , you ai n't in your right mind . ''
So they chose a new spot and began again .
The labor dragged a little , but still they made progress .
They pegged away in silence for some time .
Finally Huck leaned on his shovel , swabbed the beaded drops from his brow with his sleeve , and said :
`` I bet I will .
We 've got to do it to-night , too , because if somebody sees these holes they 'll know in a minute what 's here and they 'll go for it . ''
`` Well , I 'll come around and maow to-night . ''
`` Say , Tom , let 's give this place up , and try somewheres else . ''
`` Yes , but , Huck , ghosts do n't travel around only at night .
They won't hender us from digging there in the daytime . ''
`` Well , that 's so .
But you know mighty well people do n't go about that ha'nted house in the day nor the night . ''
`` Well , where you see one of them blue lights flickering around , Tom , you can bet there 's a ghost mighty close behind it .
It stands to reason .
Becuz you know that they do n't anybody but ghosts use 'em . ''
`` Yes , that 's so .
But anyway they do n't come around in the daytime , so what 's the use of our being afeard ? ''
ABOUT noon the next day the boys arrived at the dead tree ; they had come for their tools .
Tom was impatient to go to the haunted house ; Huck was measurably so , also -- but suddenly said :
`` Why , he was one of the greatest men that was ever in England -- and the best .
He was a robber . ''
`` Cracky , I wisht I was .
Who did he rob ? ''
On Saturday , shortly after noon , the boys were at the dead tree again .
They had a smoke and a chat in the shade , and then dug a little in their last hole , not with great hope , but merely because Tom said there were so many cases where people had given up a treasure after getting down within six inches of it , and then somebody else had come along and turned it up with a single thrust of a shovel .
The thing failed this time , however , so the boys shouldered their tools and went away feeling that they had not trifled with fortune , but had fulfilled all the requirements that belong to the business of treasure-hunting .
grunted the `` deaf and dumb '' Spaniard -- to the vast surprise of the boys .
The boys drew a long , grateful breath .
`` I do n't know -- leave it here as we 've always done , I reckon .
No use to take it away till we start south .
Six hundred and fifty in silver's something to carry . ''
Joe 's knife struck upon something .
The two men examined the handful of coins .
The boys above were as excited as themselves , and as delighted .
He ran and brought the boys ' pick and shovel .
Injun Joe took the pick , looked it over critically , shook his head , muttered something to himself , and then began to use it .
The box was soon unearthed .
It was not very large ; it was iron bound and had been very strong before the slow years had injured it .
The men contemplated the treasure awhile in blissful silence .
Injun Joe got up and went about from window to window cautiously peeping out .
`` Who could have brought those tools here ?
Do you reckon they can be up-stairs ? ''
`` Oh , that thing yesterday .
I been half thinking it was . ''
... No , Tom , that ai n't it .
If it is , it ai n't in this one-horse town .
They ai n't no numbers here . ''
`` Lordy , what did you do ?
Did he wake up ? ''
`` Lookyhere , Huck , less not try that thing any more till we know Injun Joe 's not in there .
It 's too scary .
Now , if we watch every night , we'll be dead sure to see him go out , some time or other , and then we'll snatch that box quicker'n lightning . ''
`` Well , I 'm agreed .
I 'll watch the whole night long , and I 'll do it every night , too , if you 'll do the other part of the job . ''
`` I said I would , Tom , and I will .
I 'll ha'nt that tavern every night for a year !
I 'll sleep all day and I 'll stand watch all night . ''
`` That 's all right .
Now , where you going to sleep ? ''
And mind and behave yourself and do n't be any trouble . ''
Then Becky reflected a moment and said :
The Widow Douglas ' splendid hospitality was a tempting bait .
It and Tom 's persuasions presently carried the day .
So it was decided to say nothing anybody about the night 's programme .
Presently it occurred to Tom that maybe Huck might come this very night and give the signal .
The thought took a deal of the spirit out of his anticipations .
Still he could not bear to give up the fun at Widow Douglas ' .
And why should he give it up , he reasoned -- the signal did not come the night before , so why should it be any more likely to come to-night ?
The sure fun of the evening outweighed the uncertain treasure ; and , boy-like , he determined to yield to the stronger inclination and not allow himself to think of the box of money another time that day .
They moved up the river street three blocks , then turned to the left up a cross-street .
They went straight ahead , then , until they came to the path that led up Cardiff Hill ; this they took .
They passed by the old Welshman 's house , half-way up the hill , without hesitating , and still climbed upward .
Good , thought Huck , they will bury it in the old quarry .
But they never stopped at the quarry .
They passed on , up the summit .
They plunged into the narrow path between the tall sumach bushes , and were at once hidden in the gloom .
Huck closed up and shortened his distance , now , for they would never be able to see him .
He trotted along awhile ; then slackened his pace , fearing he was gaining too fast ; moved on a piece , then stopped altogether ; listened ; no sound ; none , save that he seemed to hear the beating of his own heart .
The hooting of an owl came over the hill -- ominous sound !
Heavens , was everything lost !
He was about to spring with winged feet , when a man cleared his throat not four feet from him !
Huck 's heart shot into his throat , but he swallowed it again ; and then he stood there shaking as if a dozen agues had taken charge of him at once , and so weak that he thought he must surely fall to the ground .
He knew where he was .
He knew he was within five steps of the stile leading into Widow Douglas ' grounds .
Very well , he thought , let them bury it there ; it wo n't be hard to find .
Now there was a voice -- a very low voice -- Injun Joe 's :
`` Give it up , and I just leaving this country forever !
Give it up and maybe never have another chance .
I tell you again , as I 've told you before , I do n't care for her swag -- you may have it .
But her husband was rough on me -- many times he was rough on me -- and mainly he was the justice of the peace that jugged me for a vagrant .
And that ai n't all .
It ai n't a millionth part of it !
He had me HORSEWHIPPED !
-- horsewhipped in front of the jail , like a nigger !
-- with all the town looking on !
-- do you understand ?
He took advantage of me and died .
But I 'll take it out of HER . ''
Who said anything about killing ?
I would kill HIM if he was here ; but not her .
When you want to get revenge on a woman you don't kill her -- bosh !
you go for her looks .
You slit her nostrils -- you notch her ears like a sow ! ''
`` Do it NOW ?
Look here -- I 'll get suspicious of you , first thing you know .
No -- we 'll wait till the lights are out -- there's no hurry . ''
`` What 's the row there ?
What do you want ? ''
`` It 's a name that can open this door night or day , lad !
-- and welcome ! ''
Huck would not explain , further than to say that he already knew too much about one of those men and would not have the man know that he knew anything against him for the whole world -- he would be killed for knowing it , sure .
`` Then they went on , and you -- ''
`` Follered 'em -- yes .
I wanted to see what was up -- they sneaked along so .
I dogged 'em to the widder 's stile , and stood in the dark and heard the ragged one beg for the widder , and the Spaniard swear he 'd spile her looks just as I told you and your two -- ''
Huck looked into the old man 's honest eyes a moment , then bent over and whispered in his ear :
`` Is my Becky going to sleep all day ?
I just expected she would be tired to death . ''
`` Oh , Tom , never mind the bats , let 's go back that way !
We seem to get worse and worse off all the time . ''
Profound silence ; silence so deep that even their breathings were conspicuous in the hush .
The call went echoing down the empty aisles and died out in the distance in a faint sound that resembled a ripple of mocking laughter .
`` Maybe not , maybe not .
Cheer up , Becky , and let 's go on trying . ''
`` It 's our wedding-cake , Tom . ''
The hours wasted away , and hunger came to torment the captives again .
A portion of Tom 's half of the cake was left ; they divided and ate it .
But they seemed hungrier than before .
The poor morsel of food only whetted desire .
The children groped their way back to the spring .
The weary time dragged on ; they slept again , and awoke famished and woe-stricken .
Tom believed it must be Tuesday by this time .
The village was illuminated ; nobody went to bed again ; it was the greatest night the little town had ever seen .
During the first half-hour a procession of villagers filed through Judge Thatcher 's house , seized the saved ones and kissed them , squeezed Mrs. Thatcher 's hand , tried to speak but could n't -- and drifted out raining tears all over the place .
Aunt Polly 's happiness was complete , and Mrs. Thatcher 's nearly so .
It would be complete , however , as soon as the messenger dispatched with the great news to the cave should get the word to her husband .
Tom lay upon a sofa with an eager auditory about him and told the history of the wonderful adventure , putting in many striking additions to adorn it withal ; and closed with a description of how he left Becky and went on an exploring expedition ; how he followed two avenues as far as his kite-line would reach ; how he followed a third to the fullest stretch of the kite-line , and was about to turn back when he glimpsed a far-off speck that looked like daylight ; dropped the line and groped toward it , pushed his head and shoulders through a small hole , and saw the broad Mississippi rolling by !
And if it had only happened to be night he would not have seen that speck of daylight and would not have explored that passage any more !
He told how he went back for Becky and broke the good news and she told him not to fret her with such stuff , for she was tired , and knew she was going to die , and wanted to .
He described how he labored with her and convinced her ; and how she almost died for joy when she had groped to where she actually saw the blue speck of daylight ; how he pushed his way out at the hole and then helped her out ; how they sat there and cried for gladness ; how some men came along in a skiff and Tom hailed them and told them their situation and their famished condition ; how the men did n't believe the wild tale at first , `` because , '' said they , `` you are five miles down the river below the valley the cave is in '' -- then took them aboard , rowed to a house , gave them supper , made them rest till two or three hours after dark and then brought them home .
Tom learned of Huck 's sickness and went to see him on Friday , but could not be admitted to the bedroom ; neither could he on Saturday or Sunday .
He was admitted daily after that , but was warned to keep still about his adventure and introduce no exciting topic .
The Widow Douglas stayed by to see that he obeyed .
At home Tom learned of the Cardiff Hill event ; also that the `` ragged man 's '' body had eventually been found in the river near the ferry-landing ; he had been drowned while trying to escape , perhaps .
About a fortnight after Tom 's rescue from the cave , he started off to visit Huck , who had grown plenty strong enough , now , to hear exciting talk , and Tom had some that would interest him , he thought .
Judge Thatcher 's house was on Tom 's way , and he stopped to see Becky .
The Judge and some friends set Tom to talking , and some one asked him ironically if he would n't like to go to the cave again .
Tom said he thought he would n't mind it .
`` Because I had its big door sheathed with boiler iron two weeks ago , and triple-locked -- and I 've got the keys . ''
`` I bet I will !
I will if it 's where we can blaze our way to it and not get lost . ''
`` Oh , most anybody .
Waylay people -- that 's mostly the way . ''
`` And kill them ? ''
`` Tom , it 's a CROSS ! ''
Tom 's `` real Barlow '' was out at once , and he had not dug four inches before he struck wood .
The money was soon in the bags and the boys took it up to the cross rock .
Come along with me , boys , you are keeping everybody waiting .
Here -- hurry up , trot ahead -- I 'll haul the wagon for you .
Why , it 's not as light as it might be .
Got bricks in it ?
-- or old metal ? ''
`` Never mind ; you 'll see , when we get to the Widow Douglas ' . ''
`` Why , old Mr. Jones is going to try to spring something on the people here to-night , but I overheard him tell auntie to-day about it , as a secret , but I reckon it 's not much of a secret now .
Everybody knows -- the widow , too , for all she tries to let on she do n't .
Mr. Jones was bound Huck should be here -- could n't get along with his grand secret without Huck , you know ! ''
`` About Huck tracking the robbers to the widow 's .
I reckon Mr. Jones was going to make a grand time over his surprise , but I bet you it will drop pretty flat . ''
`` Huck do n't need it .
Huck 's rich . ''
THE reader may rest satisfied that Tom 's and Huck 's windfall made a mighty stir in the poor little village of St. Petersburg .
So vast a sum , all in actual cash , seemed next to incredible .
It was talked about , gloated over , glorified , until the reason of many of the citizens tottered under the strain of the unhealthy excitement .
Every `` haunted '' house in St. Petersburg and the neighboring villages was dissected , plank by plank , and its foundations dug up and ransacked for hidden treasure -- and not by boys , but men -- pretty grave , unromantic men , too , some of them .
Wherever Tom and Huck appeared they were courted , admired , stared at .
The boys were not able to remember that their remarks had possessed weight before ; but now their sayings were treasured and repeated ; everything they did seemed somehow to be regarded as remarkable ; they had evidently lost the power of doing and saying commonplace things ; moreover , their past history was raked up and discovered to bear marks of conspicuous originality .
The village paper published biographical sketches of the boys .
`` Huck , I would n't want to , and I DO N'T want to -- but what would people say ?
Why , they 'd say , 'Mph !
Tom Sawyer 's Gang !
pretty low characters in it ! '
They 'd mean you , Huck .
You would n't like that , and I would n't . ''
`` Will you , Tom -- now will you ?
If she 'll let up on some of the roughest things , I 'll smoke private and cuss private , and crowd through or bust .
When you going to start the gang and turn robbers ? ''
`` What 's that ? ''
`` It 's to swear to stand by one another , and never tell the gang's secrets , even if you 're chopped all to flinders , and kill anybody and all his family that hurts one of the gang . ''
`` That 's gay -- that 's mighty gay , Tom , I tell you . ''
When a man has a passion for Shakespeare , it goes without saying that he keeps company with other standard authors .
Ealer always had several high-class books in the pilot-house , and he read the same ones over and over again , and did not care to change to newer and fresher ones .
He played well on the flute , and greatly enjoyed hearing himself play .
He had a notion that a flute would keep its health better if you took it apart when it was not standing a watch ; and so , when it was not on duty it took its rest , disjointed , on the compass-shelf under the breast-board .
When the _Pennsylvania_ blew up and became a drifting rack-heap freighted with wounded and dying poor souls ( my young brother Henry among them ) , pilot Brown had the watch below , and was probably asleep and never knew what killed him ; but Ealer escaped unhurt .
He and his pilot-house were shot up into the air ; then they fell , and Ealer sank through the ragged cavern where the hurricane deck and the boiler deck had been , and landed in a nest of ruins on the main deck , on top of one of the unexploded boilers , where he lay prone in a fog of scalding and deadly steam .
But not for long .
He did not lose his head : long familiarity with danger had taught him to keep it , in any and all emergencies .
He held his coat-lappels to his nose with one hand , to keep out the steam , and scrabbled around with the other till he found the joints of his flute , then he is took measures to save himself alive , and was successful .
I was not on board .
I had been put ashore in New Orleans by Captain Klinefelter .
The reason -- however , I have told all about it in the book called _Old Times on the Mississippi_ , and it isn't important anyway , it is so long ago .
Of good farmer-class parents who could not read , could not write , could not sign their names .
On the 27th of November ( 1582 ) William Shakespeare took out a license to marry Anne Whateley .
William Shakespeare married Anne Hathaway .
By grace of a reluctantly-granted dispensation there was but one publication of the banns .
Within six months the first child was born .
Next year -- 1593 -- his name appears in the official list of players .
Meantime his name , liberally and variously spelt , had become associated with a number of great plays and poems , as ( ostensibly ) author of the same .
He left her that `` second-best bed . ''
The will mentioned _not a play_ , _ not a poem_ , _ not an unfinished literary work_ , _not a scrap of manuscript of any kind_ .
In earlier years he signed two other official documents .
These five signatures still exist .
In the list as above set down , will be found _every positively known_ fact of Shakespeare 's life , lean and meagre as the invoice is .
Beyond these details we know _not a thing_ about him .
All the rest of his vast history , as furnished by the biographers , is built up , course upon course , of guesses , inferences , theories , conjectures -- an Eiffel Tower of artificialities rising sky-high from a very flat and very thin foundation of inconsequential facts .
In the usual way : by surmise .
It is _surmised_ that he travelled in Italy and Germany and around , and qualified himself to put their scenic and social aspects upon paper ; that he perfected himself in French , Italian and Spanish on the road ; that he went in Leicester 's expedition to the Low Countries , as soldier or sutler or something , for several months or years -- or whatever length of time a surmiser needs in his business -- and thus became familiar with soldiership and soldier-ways and soldier-talk , and generalship and general-ways and general-talk , and seamanship and sailor-ways and sailor-talk .
The Shakespearite knows that Shakespeare wrote Shakespeare 's Works ; the Baconian knows that Francis Bacon wrote them ; the Brontosaurian doesn't really know which of them did it , but is quite composedly and contentedly sure that Shakespeare _didn't_ , and strongly suspects that Bacon _did_ .
We all have to do a good deal of assuming , but I am fairly certain that in every case I can call to mind the Baconian assumers have come out ahead of the Shakespearites .
Both parties handle the same materials , but the Baconians seem to me to get much more reasonable and rational and persuasive results out of them than is the case with the Shakespearites .
The Shakespearite conducts his assuming upon a definite principle , an unchanging and immutable law -- which is : 2 and 8 and 7 and 14 , added together , make 165 .
I believe this to be an error .
No matter , you can not get a habit-sodden Shakespearite to cipher-up his materials upon any other basis .
With the Baconian it is different .
If you place before him the above figures and set him to adding them up , he will never in any case get more than 45 out of them , and in nine cases out of ten he will get just the proper 31 .
We know what the Baconian 's verdict would be : `` _There is not a rag of evidence that the kitten has had any training_ , _any education_ , _any experience qualifying it for the present occasion_ , _or is indeed equipped for any achievement above lifting such unclaimed milk as comes its way_ ; _but there is abundant evidence_ -- _unassailable proof_ , _in fact_ -- _that the other animal is equipped_ , _to the last detail_ , _with every qualification necessary for the event_ .
_Without shadow of doubt the tomcat contains the mouse_ . ''
Then inquiries into Shakespeare 's Stratford life began to be made , of Stratfordians .
Of Stratfordians who had known Shakespeare or had seen him ?
Then of Stratfordians who had seen people who had known or seen people who had seen Shakespeare ?
Apparently the inquiries were only made of Stratfordians who were not Stratfordians of Shakespeare 's day , but later comers ; and what they had learned had come to them from persons who had not seen Shakespeare ; and what they had learned was not claimed as _fact_ , but only as legend -- dim and fading and indefinite legend ; legend of the calf-slaughtering rank , and not worth remembering either as history or fiction .
Shakespeare died young -- he was only fifty-two .
He had lived in his native village twenty-six years , or about that .
He died celebrated ( if you believe everything you read in the books ) .
Yet when he died nobody there or elsewhere took any notice of it ; and for sixty years afterward no townsman remembered to say anything about him or about his life in Stratford .
When the inquirer came at last he got but one fact -- no , _legend_ -- and got that one at second hand , from a person who had only heard it as a rumor , and did n't claim copyright in it as a production of his own .
He could n't , very well , for its date antedated his own birth-date .
But necessarily a number of persons were still alive in Stratford who , in the days of their youth , had seen Shakespeare nearly every day in the last five years of his life , and they would have been able to tell that inquirer some first-hand things about him if he had in those last days been a celebrity and therefore a person of interest to the villagers .
Why did not the inquirer hunt them up and interview them ?
Was n't it worth while ?
Was n't the matter of sufficient consequence ?
Had the inquirer an engagement to see a dog-fight and could n't spare the time ?
Having hove short , cast off the gaskets , and made the bunt of each sail fast by the jigger , with a man on each yard , at the word the whole canvas of the ship was loosed , and with the greatest rapidity possible everything was sheeted home and hoisted up , the anchor tripped and cat-headed , and the ship under headway .
If a man should write a book and in it make one of his characters say , `` Here , devil , empty the quoins into the standing galley and the imposing stone into the hell-box ; assemble the comps around the frisket and let them jeff for takes and be quick about it , '' I should recognize a mistake or two in the phrasing , and would know that the writer was only a printer theoretically , not practically .
The Plays and Poems of Shakespeare supply ample evidence that their author not only had a very extensive and accurate knowledge of law , but that he was well acquainted with the manners and customs of members of the Inns of Court and with legal life generally .
Ordinarily when an unsigned poem sweeps across the continent like a tidal wave , whose roar and boom and thunder are made up of admiration , delight and applause , a dozen obscure people rise up and claim the authorship .
Why a dozen , instead of only one or two ?
One reason is , because there's a dozen that are recognizably competent to do that poem .
Do you remember `` Beautiful Snow '' ?
Do you remember `` Rock Me to Sleep , Mother , Rock Me to Sleep '' ?
Do you remember `` Backward , turn backward , O Time , in thy flight !
Make me a child again just for to-night '' ?
I remember them very well .
Their authorship was claimed by most of the grown-up people who were alive at the time , and every claimant had one plausible argument in his favor , at least : to wit , he could have done the authoring ; he was competent .
Have the Works been claimed by a dozen ?
There was good reason .
The world knows there was but one man on the planet at the time who was competent -- not a dozen , and not two .
A long time ago the dwellers in a far country used now and then to find a procession of prodigious footprints stretching across the plain -- footprints that were three miles apart , each footprint a third of a mile long and a furlong deep , and with forests and villages mashed to mush in it .
Was there any doubt as to who had made that mighty trail ?
Were there a dozen claimants ?
No -- the people knew who it was that had been along there : there was only one Hercules .
The author of the Plays was equipped , beyond every other man of his time , with wisdom , erudition , imagination , capaciousness of mind , grace and majesty of expression .
Every one has said it , no one doubts it .
Also , he had humor , humor in rich abundance , and always wanting to break out .
We have no evidence of any kind that Shakespeare of Stratford possessed any of these gifts or any of these acquirements .
The only lines he ever wrote , so far as we know , are substantially barren of them -- barren of all of them .
Even Sir Thomas Bodley , after perusing the _Cogitata et Visa_ , one of the most precious of those scattered leaves out of which the great oracular volume was afterward made up , acknowledged that `` in all proposals and plots in that book , Bacon showed himself a master workman '' ; and that `` it could not be gainsaid but all the treatise over did abound with choice conceits of the present state of learning , and with worthy contemplations of the means to procure it . ''
Nor did these pursuits distract Bacon 's attention from a work the most arduous , the most glorious , and the most useful that even his mighty powers could have achieved , `` the reducing and recompiling , '' to use his own phrase , `` of the laws of England . ''
To serve the exacting and laborious offices of Attorney General and Solicitor General would have satisfied the appetite of any other man for hard work , but Bacon had to add the vast literary industries just described , to satisfy his .
He was a born worker .
He commenced a digest of the laws of England , a History of England under the Princes of the House of Tudor , a body of National History , a Philosophical Romance .
He made extensive and valuable additions to his Essays .
He published the inestimable _Treatise De Argumentis Scientiarum_ .
In truth much of Bacon 's life was passed in a visionary world -- amid things as strange as any that are described in the `` Arabian Tales '' .
amid buildings more sumptuous than the palace of Aladdin , fountains more wonderful than the golden water of Parizade , conveyances more rapid than the hippogryph of Ruggiero , arms more formidable than the lance of Astolfo , remedies more efficacious than the balsam of Fierabras .
Yet in his magnificent day-dreams there was nothing wild -- nothing but what sober reason sanctioned .
And here is another extract from a Hannibal paper .
Of date twenty days ago :
En he begin to shiver en shake , en say , `` Oh , my !
OH , my lan ' ! ''
en de win ' blow de lantern out , en de snow en sleet blow in his face en mos' choke him , en he start a-plowin ' knee-deep towards home mos ' dead , he so sk'yerd -- en pooty soon he hear de voice agin , en ( pause ) it 'us comin' after him !
`` Bzzz -- zzz -- zzz -- W-h-o -- g-o-t m-y -- g-o-l-d-e-n -- arm ? ''
Several years ago I made a campaign on the platform with Mr. George W. Cable .
In Montreal we were honored with a reception .
It began at two in the afternoon in a long drawing-room in the Windsor Hotel .
Mr. Cable and I stood at one end of this room , and the ladies and gentlemen entered it at the other end , crossed it at that end , then came up the long left-hand side , shook hands with us , said a word or two , and passed on , in the usual way .
My sight is of the telescopic sort , and I presently recognized a familiar face among the throng of strangers drifting in at the distant door , and I said to myself , with surprise and high gratification , `` That is Mrs. R. ; I had forgotten that she was a Canadian . ''
She had been a great friend of mine in Carson City , Nevada , in the early days .
I had not seen her or heard of her for twenty years ; I had not been thinking about her ; there was nothing to suggest her to me , nothing to bring her to my mind ; in fact , to me she had long ago ceased to exist , and had disappeared from my consciousness .
But I knew her instantly ; and I saw her so clearly that I was able to note some of the particulars of her dress , and did note them , and they remained in my mind .
I was impatient for her to come .
In the midst of the hand-shakings I snatched glimpses of her and noted her progress with the slow-moving file across the end of the room ; then I saw her start up the side , and this gave me a full front view of her face .
I saw her last when she was within twenty-five feet of me .
For an hour I kept thinking she must still be in the room somewhere and would come at last , but I was disappointed .
`` DEAR MR. CLEMENS , -- It is so long since Archibald Forbes and I spent that pleasant afternoon in your comfortable house at Hartford that you have probably quite forgotten the occasion . ''
In the following month -- March -- I was in America .
I spent a Sunday at Irvington-on-the-Hudson with Mr. John Brisben Walker , of the Cosmopolitan magazine .
We came into New York next morning , and went to the Century Club for luncheon .
He said some praiseful things about the character of the club and the orderly serenity and pleasantness of its quarters , and asked if I had never tried to acquire membership in it .
I said I had not , and that New York clubs were a continuous expense to the country members without being of frequent use or benefit to them .
Two years and a half ago I and the family arrived at Milan on our way to Rome , and stopped at the Continental .
After dinner I went below and took a seat in the stone-paved court , where the customary lemon-trees stand in the customary tubs , and said to myself , `` Now this is comfort , comfort and repose , and nobody to disturb it ; I do not know anybody in Milan . ''
We had a visit with my niece in the parlor , then started for the trolley again .
Outside the house we encountered a double rank of twenty or thirty of Miss Porter 's young ladies arriving from a walk , and we stood aside , ostensibly to let them have room to file past , but really to look at them .
Presently one of them stepped out of the rank and said :
`` 'Twould 'a ' ben a dum sight better , all around , if they 'd started him along last summer . ''
Pretty soon it was plain that something had got to be done .
Thompson thought it was a good idea .
`` Likely it 'll modify him some . ''
In Boston they ask , How much does he know ?
in New York , How much is he worth ?
in Philadelphia , Who were his parents ?
And when an alien observer turns his telescope upon us -- advertisedly in our own special interest -- a natural apprehension moves us to ask , What is the diameter of his reflector ?
I take a great interest in M. Bourget 's chapters , for I know by the newspapers that there are several Americans who are expecting to get a whole education out of them ; several who foresaw , and also foretold , that our long night was over , and a light almost divine about to break upon the land .
`` His utterances concerning us are bound to be weighty and well timed . ''
`` He gives us an object-lesson which should be thoughtfully and profitably studied . ''
These well-considered and important verdicts were of a nature to restore public confidence , which had been disquieted by questionings as to whether so young a teacher would be qualified to take so large a class as 70,000,000 , distributed over so extensive a schoolhouse as America , and pull it through without assistance .
I was even disquieted myself , although I am of a cold , calm temperament , and not easily disturbed .
I feared for my country .
And I was not wholly tranquilized by the verdicts rendered as above .
It seemed to me that there was still room for doubt .
In fact , in looking the ground over I became more disturbed than I was before .
Many worrying questions came up in my mind .
Where had the teacher gotten his equipment ?
What was his method ?
He had gotten his equipment in France .
Then as to his method !
I saw by his own intimations that he was an Observer , and had a System that used by naturalists and other scientists .
The naturalist collects many bugs and reptiles and butterflies and studies their ways a long time patiently .
By this means he is presently able to group these creatures into families and subdivisions of families by nice shadings of differences observable in their characters .
Then he labels all those shaded bugs and things with nicely descriptive group names , and is now happy , for his great work is completed , and as a result he intimately knows every bug and shade of a bug there , inside and out .
It may be true , but a person who was not a naturalist would feel safer about it if he had the opinion of the bug .
I think it is a pleasant System , but subject to error .
The Observer of Peoples has to be a Classifier , a Grouper , a Deducer , a Generalizer , a Psychologizer ; and , first and last , a Thinker .
He has to be all these , and when he is at home , observing his own folk , he is often able to prove competency .
But history has shown that when he is abroad observing unfamiliar peoples the chances are heavily against him .
He is then a naturalist observing a bug , with no more than a naturalist 's chance of being able to tell the bug anything new about itself , and no more than a naturalist 's chance of being able to teach it any new ways which it will prefer to its own .
To return to that first question .
M. Bourget , as teacher , would simply be France teaching America .
It seemed to me that the outlook was dark -- almost Egyptian , in fact .
What would the new teacher , representing France , teach us ?
France knows nothing valuable about railroading .
France has no superiorities over us in that matter .
French steamboating is still of Fulton 's date -- 1809 .
France is a back number there .
No , we taught her that ourselves .
No , that is our own specialty .
No ; Liberty , Equality , Fraternity , Nobility , Democracy , Adultery the system is too variegated for our climate .
No , not variegated enough for our climate .
No , we can not rob the poor to enrich ourselves .
M. Bourget and the others know only one plan , and when that is expurgated there is nothing left of the book .
I wish I could think what he is going to teach us .
Can it be Deportment ?
But he experimented in that at Newport and failed to give satisfaction , except to a few .
Those few are pleased .
They are enjoying their joy as well as they can .
They confess their happiness to the interviewer .
They feel pretty striped , but they remember with reverent recognition that they had sugar between the cuts .
True , sugar with sand in it , but sugar .
And true , they had some trouble to tell which was sugar and which was sand , because the sugar itself looked just like the sand , and also had a gravelly taste ; still , they knew that the sugar was there , and would have been very good sugar indeed if it had been screened .
Yes , they are pleased ; not noisily so , but pleased ; invaded , or streaked , as one may say , with little recurrent shivers of joy -- subdued joy , so to speak , not the overdone kind .
And they commune together , these , and massage each other with comforting sayings , in a sweet spirit of resignation and thankfulness , mixing these elements in the same proportions as the sugar and the sand , as a memorial , and saying , the one to the other , and to the interviewer : `` It was severe -- yes , it was bitterly severe ; but oh , how true it was ; and it will do us so much good ! ''
If it is n't Deportment , what is left ?
It was at this point that I seemed to get on the right track at last .
M. Bourget would teach us to know ourselves ; that was it : he would reveal us to ourselves .
That would be an education .
He would explain us to ourselves .
Then we should understand ourselves ; and after that be able to go on more intelligently .
It seemed a doubtful scheme .
He could explain us to himself -- that would be easy .
That would be the same as the naturalist explaining the bug to himself .
But to explain the bug to the bug -- that is quite a different matter .
The bug may not know himself perfectly , but he knows himself better than the naturalist can know him , at any rate .
A foreigner can photograph the exteriors of a nation , but I think that that is as far as he can get .
I think that no foreigner can report its interior -- its soul , its life , its speech , its thought .
I think that a knowledge of these things is acquirable in only one way ; not two or four or six -- absorption ; years and years of unconscious absorption ; years and years of intercourse with the life concerned ; of living it , indeed ; sharing personally in its shames and prides , its joys and griefs , its loves and hates , its prosperities and reverses , its shows and shabbinesses , its deep patriotisms , its whirlwinds of political passion , its adorations -- of flag , and heroic dead , and the glory of the national name .
Of what real value is it ?
One learns peoples through the heart , not the eyes or the intellect .
There is only one expert who is qualified to examine the souls and the life of a people and make a valuable report -- the native novelist .
This expert is so rare that the most populous country can never have fifteen conspicuously and confessedly competent ones in stock at one time .
This native specialist is not qualified to begin work until he has been absorbing during twenty-five years .
How much of his competency is derived from conscious `` observation '' ?
The amount is so slight that it counts for next to nothing in the equipment .
Almost the whole capital of the novelist is the slow accumulation of unconscious observation -- absorption .
The native expert 's intentional observation of manners , speech , character , and ways of life can have value , for the native knows what they mean without having to cipher out the meaning .
But I should be astonished to see a foreigner get at the right meanings , catch the elusive shades of these subtle things .
Even the native novelist becomes a foreigner , with a foreigner 's limitations , when he steps from the State whose life is familiar to him into a State whose life he has not lived .
Bret Harte got his California and his Californians by unconscious absorption , and put both of them into his tales alive .
But when he came from the Pacific to the Atlantic and tried to do Newport life from study-conscious observation -- his failure was absolutely monumental .
Newport is a disastrous place for the unacclimated observer , evidently .
To return to novel-building .
Does the native novelist try to generalize the nation ?
No , he lays plainly before you the ways and speech and life of a few people grouped in a certain place -- his own place -- and that is one book .
In time he and his brethren will report to you the life and the people of the whole nation -- the life of a group in a New England village ; in a New York village ; in a Texan village ; in an Oregon village ; in villages in fifty States and Territories ; then the farm-life in fifty States and Territories ; a hundred patches of life and groups of people in a dozen widely separated cities .
And the Indians will be attended to ; and the cowboys ; and the gold and silver miners ; and the negroes ; and the Idiots and Congressmen ; and the Irish , the Germans , the Italians , the Swedes , the French , the Chinamen , the Greasers ; and the Catholics , the Methodists , the Presbyterians , the Congregationalists , the Baptists , the Spiritualists , the Mormons , the Shakers , the Quakers , the Jews , the Campbellites , the infidels , the Christian Scientists , the Mind-Curists , the Faith-Curists , the train-robbers , the White Caps , the Moonshiners .
And when a thousand able novels have been written , there you have the soul of the people , the life of the people , the speech of the people ; and not anywhere else can these be had .
And the shadings of character , manners , feelings , ambitions , will be infinite .
`` 'The nature of a people ' is always of a similar shade in its vices and its virtues , in its frivolities and in its labor .
'It is this physiognomy which it is necessary to discover ' , and every document is good , from the hall of a casino to the church , from the foibles of a fashionable woman to the suggestions of a revolutionary leader .
I am therefore quite sure that this 'American soul ' , the principal interest and the great object of my voyage , appears behind the records of Newport for those who choose to see it. ''
[ The italics ( '' ) are mine . ]
It is a large contract which he has undertaken .
`` Records '' is a pretty poor word there , but I think the use of it is due to hasty translation .
In the original the word is 'fastes ' .
I think M. Bourget meant to suggest that he expected to find the great `` American soul '' secreted behind the ostentatious of Newport ; and that he was going to get it out and examine it , and generalize it , and psychologize it , and make it reveal to him its hidden vast mystery : `` the nature of the people '' of the United States of America .
We have been accused of being a nation addicted to inventing wild schemes .
I trust that we shall be allowed to retire to second place now .
In his Chapter IV .
M. Bourget has two or three columns gravely devoted to the collating and examining and psychologizing of these sorry little frauds .
One is not moved to laugh .
There is nothing funny in the situation ; it is only pathetic .
The stranger gave those people his confidence , and they dishonorably treated him in return .
Again , this is defective observation .
It is human to like to be praised ; one can even notice it in the French .
But it is not human to like to be ridiculed , even when it comes in the form of a `` tribute . ''
I think a little psychologizing ought to have come in there .
Something like this : A dog does not like to be ridiculed , a redskin does not like to be ridiculed , a negro does not like to be ridiculed , a Chinaman does not like to be ridiculed ; let us deduce from these significant facts this formula : the American 's grade being higher than these , and the chain-of argument stretching unbroken all the way up to him , there is room for suspicion that the person who said the American likes to be ridiculed , and regards it as a tribute , is not a capable observer .
It seems to be conceded that there are a few human peculiarities that can be generalized and located here and there in the world and named by the name of the nation where they are found .
I wonder what they are .
Perhaps one of them is temperament .
One speaks of French vivacity and German gravity and English stubbornness .
There is no American temperament .
The nearest that one can come at it is to say there are two -- the composed Northern and the impetuous Southern ; and both are found in other countries .
Purity of women may fairly be called universal with us , but that is the case in some other countries .
We have no monopoly of it ; it can not be named American .
I think that there is but a single specialty with us , only one thing that can be called by the wide name `` American . ''
That is the national devotion to ice-water .
All Germans drink beer , but the British nation drinks beer , too ; so neither of those peoples is the beer-drinking nation .
I suppose we do stand alone in having a drink that nobody likes but ourselves .
When we have been a month in Europe we lose our craving for it , and we finally tell the hotel folk that they need n't provide it any more .
Yet we hardly touch our native shore again , winter or summer , before we are eager for it .
The reasons for this state of things have not been psychologized yet .
I drop the hint and say no more .
Let us suppose that the first easy divorce law went into effect forty years ago , and got noised around and fairly started in business thirty-five years ago , when we had , say , 25,000,000 of white population .
Let us suppose that among 5,000,000 of them the young married women were `` protected '' by the surviving shudder of that ancient Puritan scare -- what is M. Bourget going to do about those who lived among the 20,000,000 ?
They were clean in their morals , they were pure , yet there was no easy divorce law to protect them .
Giordano Bruno also was outspoken in his praises of Leverrier's important contribution to astronomical science , and was at first inclined to regard it as conclusive ; but later , conceiving it to be erroneous , he pronounced against it , and advanced the hypothesis that the Milky Way was a detachment or corps of stars which became arrested and held in 'suspenso suspensorum ' by refraction of gravitation while on the march to join their several constellations ; a proposition for which he was afterwards burned at the stake in Jacksonville , Illinois .
`` In history they are all false '' -- a sufficiently broad statement -- '' in literature all libelous '' -- also a sufficiently sweeping statement , coming from a critic who notes that we are `` a people who are peculiarly extravagant in our language -- '' and when it is a matter of social life , `` almost all biased . ''
It seems to amount to stultification , almost .
He has built two or three breeds of American coquettes out of anecdotes -- mainly `` biased '' ones , I suppose ; and , as they occur `` in literature , '' furnished by his pen , they must be `` all libelous . ''
Or did he mean not in literature or anecdotes about literature or literary people ?
I am not able to answer that .
Perhaps the original would be clearer , but I have only the translation of this installment by me .
I think the remark had an intention ; also that this intention was booked for the trip ; but that either in the hurry of the remark 's departure it got left , or in the confusion of changing cars at the translator's frontier it got side-tracked .
I have followed his pleasant but devious trail through those columns , but I was not able to get hold of his argument and find out what it was .
I was not even able to find out where it left off .
It seemed to gradually dissolve and flow off into other matters .
I followed it with interest , for I was anxious to learn how easy-divorce eradicated adultery in America , but I was disappointed ; I have no idea yet how it did it .
I only know it did n't .
But that is not valuable ; I knew it before .
Well , you should have heard him just whoop , and cackle , and carry on !
He reached up and hit me one on the shoulder , and says :
You have every right , my dear M. Bourget , to retort upon me by dictation , if you prefer that method to writing at me with your pen ; but if I may say it without hurt -- and certainly I mean no offence -- I believe you would have acquitted yourself better with the pen .
With the pen you are at home ; it is your natural weapon ; you use it with grace , eloquence , charm , persuasiveness , when men are to be convinced , and with formidable effect when they have earned a castigation .
But I am sure I see signs in the above article that you are either unaccustomed to dictating or are out of practice .
If you will re-read it you will notice , yourself , that it lacks definiteness ; that it lacks purpose ; that it lacks coherence ; that it lacks a subject to talk about ; that it is loose and wabbly ; that it wanders around ; that it loses itself early and does not find itself any more .
There are some other defects , as you will notice , but I think I have named the main ones .
I feel sure that they are all due to your lack of practice in dictating .
It 's his NAME I want -- his NAME .
It relates to manners , customs , and morals -- three things concerning which we can never have exhaustive and determinate statistics , and so the verdicts delivered upon them must always lack conclusiveness and be subject to revision ; but you have stated the truth , possibly , as nearly as any one could do it , in the circumstances .
But why did you choose a detail of my question which could be answered only with vague hearsay evidence , and go right by one which could have been answered with deadly facts ?
-- facts in everybody 's reach , facts which none can dispute .
I asked what France could teach us about government .
I laid myself pretty wide open , there ; and I thought I was handsomely generous , too , when I did it .
France can teach us how to levy village and city taxes which distribute the burden with a nearer approach to perfect fairness than is the case in any other land ; and she can teach us the wisest and surest system of collecting them that exists .
She can teach us how to elect a President in a sane way ; and also how to do it without throwing the country into earthquakes and convulsions that cripple and embarrass business , stir up party hatred in the hearts of men , and make peaceful people wish the term extended to thirty years .
France can teach us -- but enough of that part of the question .
And what else can France teach us ?
She can teach us all the fine arts -- and does .
She throws open her hospitable art academies , and says to us , `` Come '' -- and we come , troops and troops of our young and gifted ; and she sets over us the ablest masters in the world and bearing the greatest names ; and she , teaches us all that we are capable of learning , and persuades us and encourages us with prizes and honors , much as if we were somehow children of her own ; and when this noble education is finished and we are ready to carry it home and spread its gracious ministries abroad over our nation , and we come with homage and gratitude and ask France for the bill -- there is nothing to pay .
And in return for this imperial generosity , what does America do ?
She charges a duty on French works of art !
Needs a `` lesson in politeness and good manners . ''
I was once booked by my manager to give a causerie in the drawing-room of a New York millionaire .
I accepted with reluctance .
I do not like private engagements .
At five o'clock on the day the causerie was to be given , the lady sent to my manager to say that she would expect me to arrive at nine o'clock and to speak for about an hour .
Then she wrote a postscript .
Many women are unfortunate there .
Their minds are full of after-thoughts , and the most important part of their letters is generally to be found after their signature .
This lady 's P. S. ran thus : `` I suppose he will not expect to be entertained after the lecture . ''
Now , I could fill a book on America with reminiscences of this sort , adding a few chapters on bosses and boodlers , on New York 'chronique scandaleuse ' , on the tenement houses of the large cities , on the gambling-hells of Denver , and the dens of San Francisco , and what not !
[ But not even your nasty article on my country , Mark , will make me do it . ]
-- We should not think it kind .
No matter how much we might have associated with kings and nobilities , we should not think it right to crush her with it and make her ashamed of her lowlier walk in life ; for we have a saying , `` Who humiliates my mother includes his own . ''
Now that hits only a few of us , I grant -- just the upper crust only -- but it hits exceedingly hard .
`` I reckon a Frenchman 's got his little standby for a dull time , too ; because when all other interests fail , he can turn in and see if he ca n't find out who his father was . ''
Now , then , your anecdote about the grandfathers hurt me .
Because it had a point .
It would n't have hurt me if it had n't had point .
You would n't have wasted space on it if it had n't had point .
Do you get the idea ?
The whole harm in the anecdotes is in the point , you see ; and when we swap them around that way , they have n't any .
FESTIVITY AND TEARS CHAPTER III .
CHAPTER V. THE FRIGHTFUL CATASTROPHE .
Two or three persons having at different times intimated that if I would write an autobiography they would read it , when they got leisure , I yield at last to this frenzied public demand , and herewith tender my history : Ours is a noble old house , and stretches a long way back into antiquity .
The earliest ancestor the Twains have any record of was a friend of the family by the name of Higgins .
This was in the eleventh century , when our people were living in Aberdeen , county of Cork , England .
Why it is that our long line has ever since borne the maternal name ( except when one of them now and then took a playful refuge in an alias to avert foolishness ) , instead of Higgins , is a mystery which none of us has ever felt much desire to stir .
It is a kind of vague , pretty romance , and we leave it alone .
All the old families do that way .
Arthour Twain was a man of considerable note -- a solicitor on the highway in William Rufus ' time .
At about the age of thirty he went to one of those fine old English places of resort called Newgate , to see about something , and never returned again .
While there he died suddenly .
Augustus Twain , seems to have made something of a stir about the year 1160 .
He was as full of fun as he could be , and used to take his old sabre and sharpen it up , and get in a convenient place on a dark night , and stick it through people as they went by , to see them jump .
He was a born humorist .
But he got to going too far with it ; and the first time he was found stripping one of these parties , the authorities removed one end of him , and put it up on a nice high place on Temple Bar , where it could contemplate the people and have a good time .
He never liked any situation so much or stuck to it so long .
Then for the next two hundred years the family tree shows a succession of soldiers -- noble , high-spirited fellows , who always went into battle singing ; right behind the army , and always went out a-whooping , right ahead of it .
This is a scathing rebuke to old dead Froissart 's poor witticism that our family tree never had but one limb to it , and that that one stuck out at right angles , and bore fruit winter , and summer .
||=======|==== || | || | || O || / || \ || || || || || || || OUR FAMILY TREE Early in the fifteenth century we have Beau Twain , called `` the Scholar . ''
He wrote a beautiful , beautiful hand .
And he could imitate anybody's hand so closely that it was enough to make a person laugh his head off to see it .
He had infinite sport with his talent .
But by and by he took a contract to break stone for a road , and the roughness of the work spoiled his hand .
Still , he enjoyed life all the time he was in the stone business , which , with inconsiderable intervals , was some forty-two years .
In fact , he died in harness .
During all those long years he gave such satisfaction that he never was through with one contract a week till government gave him another .
He was a perfect pet .
And he was always a favorite with his fellow-artists , and was a conspicuous member of their benevolent secret society , called the Chain Gang .
He always wore his hair short , had a preference for striped clothes , and died lamented by the government .
He was a sore loss to his country .
For he was so regular .
Some years later we have the illustrious John Morgan Twain .
He came over to this country with Columbus in 1492 , as a passenger .
He appears to have been of a crusty , uncomfortable disposition .
He complained of the food all the way over , and was always threatening to go ashore unless there was a change .
He wanted fresh shad .
Hardly a day passed over his head that he did not go idling about the ship with his nose in the air , sneering about the commander , and saying he did not believe Columbus knew where he was going to or had ever been there before .
The memorable cry of `` Land ho ! ''
thrilled every heart in the ship but his .
He gazed a while through a piece of smoked glass at the penciled line lying on the distant water , and then said : `` Land be hanged , -- it 's a raft ! ''
When this questionable passenger came on board the ship , he brought nothing with him but an old newspaper containing a handkerchief marked `` B. G. , '' one cotton sock marked `` L. W. C. '' one woollen one marked `` D. F. '' and a night-shirt marked `` O. M. R. '' And yet during the voyage he worried more about his `` trunk , '' and gave himself more airs about it , than all the rest of the passengers put together .
If the ship was `` down by the head , '' and would not steer , he would go and move his `` trunk '' farther aft , and then watch the effect .
If the ship was `` by the stern , '' he would suggest to Columbus to detail some men to `` shift that baggage . ''
In storms he had to be gagged , because his wailings about his `` trunk '' made it impossible for the men to hear the orders .
The man does not appear to have been openly charged with any gravely unbecoming thing , but it is noted in the ship 's log as a `` curious circumstance '' that albeit he brought his baggage on board the ship in a newspaper , he took it ashore in four trunks , a queensware crate , and a couple of champagne baskets .
But when he came back insinuating in an insolent , swaggering way , that some of his things were missing , and was going to search the other passengers ' baggage , it was too much , and they threw him overboard .
They watched long and wonderingly for him to come up , but not even a bubble rose on the quietly ebbing tide .
But while every one was most absorbed in gazing over the side , and the interest was momentarily increasing , it was observed with consternation that the vessel was adrift and the anchor cable hanging limp from the bow .
Then in the ship 's dimmed and ancient log we find this quaint note : `` In time it was discouvered yt ye troblesome passenger hadde gonne downe and got ye anchor , and toke ye same and solde it to ye dam sauvages from ye interior , saying yt he hadde founde it , ye sonne of a ghun ! ''
Yet this ancestor had good and noble instincts , and it is with pride that we call to mind the fact that he was the first white person who ever interested himself in the work of elevating and civilizing our Indians .
He built a commodious jail and put up a gallows , and to his dying day he claimed with satisfaction that he had had a more restraining and elevating influence on the Indians than any other reformer that ever labored among them .
At this point the chronicle becomes less frank and chatty , and closes abruptly by saying that the old voyager went to see his gallows perform on the first white man ever hanged in America , and while there received injuries which terminated in his death .
The great grandson of the `` Reformer '' flourished in sixteen hundred and something , and was known in our annals as , `` the old Admiral , '' though in history he had other titles .
He was long in command of fleets of swift vessels , well armed and manned , and did great service in hurrying up merchantmen .
Vessels which he followed and kept his eagle eye on , always made good fair time across the ocean .
But if a ship still loitered in spite of all he could do , his indignation would grow till he could contain himself no longer -- and then he would take that ship home where he lived and , keep it there carefully , expecting the owners to come for it , but they never did .
And he would try to get the idleness and sloth out of the sailors of that ship by compelling them to take invigorating exercise and a bath .
He called it `` walking a plank . ''
All the pupils liked it .
At any rate , they never found any fault with it after trying it .
When the owners were late coming for their ships , the Admiral always burned them , so that the insurance money should not be lost .
At last this fine old tar was cut down in the fulness of his years and honors .
And to her dying day , his poor heart-broken widow believed that if he had been cut down fifteen minutes sooner he might have been resuscitated .
Charles Henry Twain lived during the latter part of the seventeenth century , and was a zealous and distinguished missionary .
He converted sixteen thousand South Sea islanders , and taught them that a dog-tooth necklace and a pair of spectacles was not enough clothing to come to divine service in .
His poor flock loved him very , very dearly ; and when his funeral was over , they got up in a body ( and came out of the restaurant ) with tears in their eyes , and saying , one to another , that he was a good tender missionary , and they wished they had some more of him .
PAH-GO-TO-WAH-WAH-PUKKETEKEEWIS ( Mighty-Hunter-with-a-Hog-Eye ) TWAIN adorned the middle of the eighteenth century , and aided Gen. Braddock with all his heart to resist the oppressor Washington .
It was this ancestor who fired seventeen times at our Washington from behind a tree .
So far the beautiful romantic narrative in the moral story-books is correct ; but when that narrative goes on to say that at the seventeenth round the awe-stricken savage said solemnly that that man was being reserved by the Great Spirit for some mighty mission , and he dared not lift his sacrilegious rifle against him again , the narrative seriously impairs the integrity of history .
What he did say was :
`` My daughter , the time is come for the revealing of the mystery that hath puzzled all your young life .
Know , then , that it had its birth in the matters which I shall now unfold .
My brother Ulrich is the great Duke of Brandenburgh .
Our father , on his deathbed , decreed that if no son were born to Ulrich , the succession should pass to my house , provided a son were born to me .
And further , in case no son were born to either , but only daughters , then the succession should pass to Ulrich's daughter , if she proved stainless ; if she did not , my daughter should succeed , if she retained a blameless name .
And so I , and my old wife here , prayed fervently for the good boon of a son , but the prayer was vain .
You were born to us .
I was in despair .
I saw the mighty prize slipping from my grasp , the splendid dream vanishing away .
And I had been so hopeful !
Five years had Ulrich lived in wedlock , and yet his wife had borne no heir of either sex .
`` Now it hath come to pass that age hath laid its hand upon my brother , and he waxes feeble .
The cares of state do tax him sore .
Therefore he wills that you shall come to him and be already Duke -- in act , though not yet in name .
Your servitors are ready -- you journey forth to-night .
`` Oh ; my father , is it for this my life hath been a lie !
Was it that I might cheat my unoffending cousin of her rights ?
Spare me , father , spare your child ! ''
`` You know not what you ask !
It is forever and ever impossible ! ''
And then he fled like a criminal and left the princess stupefied with amazement .
A minute afterward she was crying and sobbing there , and Conrad was crying and sobbing in his chamber .
Both were in despair .
Both saw ruin staring them in the face .
`` To think that he was despising my love at the very moment that I thought it was melting his cruel heart !
He spurned me -- did this man -- he spurned me from him like a dog ! ''
When the lord of Klugenstein heard it , he swung his plumed helmet thrice around his head and shouted :
The trial was at hand .
All the great lords and barons of Brandenburgh were assembled in the Hall of Justice in the ducal palace .
No space was left unoccupied where there was room for a spectator to stand or sit .
Conrad , clad in purple and ermine , sat in the premier 's chair , and on either side sat the great judges of the realm .
The old Duke had sternly commanded that the trial of his daughter should proceed , without favor , and then had taken to his bed broken-hearted .
His days were numbered .
Poor Conrad had begged , as for his very life , that he might be spared the misery of sitting in judgment upon his cousin 's crime , but it did not avail .
A solemn hush fell upon the great court -- a silence so profound that men could hear their own hearts beat .
Then the princess slowly turned , with eyes gleaming with hate , and pointing her finger straight at Conrad , said :
Tom could always find something going on around the Maypole in Cheapside , and at the fairs ; and now and then he and the rest of London had a chance to see a military parade when some famous unfortunate was carried prisoner to the Tower , by land or boat .
One summer 's day he saw poor Anne Askew and three men burned at the stake in Smithfield , and heard an ex-Bishop preach a sermon to them which did not interest him .
Yes , Tom's life was varied and pleasant enough , on the whole .
By-and-by Tom 's reading and dreaming about princely life wrought such a strong effect upon him that he began to ACT the prince , unconsciously .
His speech and manners became curiously ceremonious and courtly , to the vast admiration and amusement of his intimates .
But Tom 's influence among these young people began to grow now , day by day ; and in time he came to be looked up to , by them , with a sort of wondering awe , as a superior being .
He seemed to know so much !
and he could do and say such marvellous things !
and withal , he was so deep and wise !
Tom 's remarks , and Tom 's performances , were reported by the boys to their elders ; and these , also , presently began to discuss Tom Canty , and to regard him as a most gifted and extraordinary creature .
Full-grown people brought their perplexities to Tom for solution , and were often astonished at the wit and wisdom of his decisions .
In fact he was become a hero to all who knew him except his own family -- these , only , saw nothing in him .
And still his desire to look just once upon a real prince , in the flesh , grew upon him , day by day , and week by week , until at last it absorbed all other desires , and became the one passion of his life .
And when he awoke in the morning and looked upon the wretchedness about him , his dream had had its usual effect -- it had intensified the sordidness of his surroundings a thousandfold .
Then came bitterness , and heart-break , and tears .
Tom discovered Charing Village presently , and rested himself at the beautiful cross built there by a bereaved king of earlier days ; then idled down a quiet , lovely road , past the great cardinal 's stately palace , toward a far more mighty and majestic palace beyond -- Westminster .
Tom stared in glad wonder at the vast pile of masonry , the wide-spreading wings , the frowning bastions and turrets , the huge stone gateway , with its gilded bars and its magnificent array of colossal granite lions , and other the signs and symbols of English royalty .
Was the desire of his soul to be satisfied at last ?
Here , indeed , was a king 's palace .
Might he not hope to see a prince now -- a prince of flesh and blood , if Heaven were willing ?
You should have seen that fickle crowd snatch off their hats then .
You should have heard them cheer , and shout , `` Long live the Prince of Wales ! ''
`` Fifteen , an ' it please you , sir . ''
`` None , sir .
Would'st have them take off their garment , and sleep without -- like the beasts ? ''
`` It is a quaint and marvellous thought !
Thy pardon , I had not meant to laugh .
But thy good Nan and thy Bet shall have raiment and lackeys enow , and that soon , too : my cofferer shall look to it .
No , thank me not ; 't is nothing .
Thou speakest well ; thou hast an easy grace in it .
`` I know not if I am or not , sir .
The good priest that is called Father Andrew taught me , of his kindness , from his books . ''
`` We lads of Offal Court do strive against each other with the cudgel , like to the fashion of the 'prentices , sometimes . ''
`` That would I like also .
`` 'Twould be worth my father 's kingdom but to enjoy it once !
Prithee go on . ''
`` Oh , prithee , say no more , 't is glorious !
If that I could but clothe me in raiment like to thine , and strip my feet , and revel in the mud once , just once , with none to rebuke me or forbid , meseemeth I could forego the crown ! ''
A few minutes later the little Prince of Wales was garlanded with Tom's fluttering odds and ends , and the little Prince of Pauperdom was tricked out in the gaudy plumage of royalty .
The two went and stood side by side before a great mirror , and lo , a miracle : there did not seem to have been any change made !
They stared at each other , then at the glass , then at each other again .
At last the puzzled princeling said --
`` What dost thou make of this ? ''
`` Then will _I_ utter it .
Thou hast the same hair , the same eyes , the same voice and manner , the same form and stature , the same face and countenance that I bear .
Fared we forth naked , there is none could say which was you , and which the Prince of Wales .
And , now that I am clothed as thou wert clothed , it seemeth I should be able the more nearly to feel as thou didst when the brute soldier -- Hark ye , is not this a bruise upon your hand ? ''
`` Take that , thou beggar 's spawn , for what thou got'st me from his Highness ! ''
The soldier brought his halberd to a present-arms and said mockingly --
`` Way for his Royal Highness !
Way for the Prince of Wales ! ''
A great shout went up at this , and one rude fellow said --
This sally brought more laughter .
Poor Edward drew himself up proudly and said --
`` Gone stark mad as any Tom o ' Bedlam ! ''
-- then collared him once more , and said with a coarse laugh and an oath , `` But mad or no mad , I and thy Gammer Canty will soon find where the soft places in thy bones lie , or I 'm no true man ! ''
`` The Lady Jane Grey . ''
The door closed and a sweet young girl , richly clad , bounded toward him .
But she stopped suddenly , and said in a distressed voice --
`` O my lord , on thy knees ?
-- and to ME ! ''
Let none list to this false and foolish matter , upon pain of death , nor discuss the same , nor carry it abroad .
In the name of the King ! ''
`` Dost not know thy father , child ?
Break not mine old heart ; say thou know'st me .
Thou DOST know me , dost thou not ? ''
`` I pray thee of thy grace believe me , I did but speak the truth , most dread lord ; for I am the meanest among thy subjects , being a pauper born , and 't is by a sore mischance and accident I am here , albeit I was therein nothing blameful .
I am but young to die , and thou canst save me with one little word .
Oh speak it , sir ! ''
`` Peradventure I mistook ; but I did think me free , and so was I moved to seek again the kennel where I was born and bred to misery , yet which harboureth my mother and my sisters , and so is home to me ; whereas these pomps and splendours whereunto I am not used -- oh , please you , sir , to let me go ! ''
Then he asked Tom a question in Latin , and Tom answered him lamely in the same tongue .
The lords and doctors manifested their gratification also .
`` I have no knowledge of this tongue , so please your majesty . ''
The King fell back upon his couch .
The attendants flew to his assistance ; but he put them aside , and said --
`` The King 's majesty knoweth that the Hereditary Great Marshal of England lieth attainted in the Tower .
It were not meet that one attainted -- ''
`` But is it not I that speed him hence , my liege ?
How long might he not live , but for me ? ''
His old dreams had been so pleasant ; but this reality was so dreary !
Observing that Tom did not seem to know how to proceed , Hertford whispered him to make a sign with his hand , and not trouble himself to speak unless he chose .
When the waiting gentlemen had retired , Lord St. John said --
`` Thy memory still wrongeth thee , and thou hast shown surprise -- but suffer it not to trouble thee , for 't is a matter that will not bide , but depart with thy mending malady .
My Lord of Hertford speaketh of the city's banquet which the King 's majesty did promise , some two months flown , your highness should attend .
Thou recallest it now ? ''
`` So please your highness , it is for you to command , it is for us to obey .
That thou should'st rest is indeed a needful thing , since thou must journey to the city presently . ''
He touched a bell , and a page appeared , who was ordered to desire the presence of Sir William Herbert .
This gentleman came straightway , and conducted Tom to an inner apartment .
Tom 's first movement there was to reach for a cup of water ; but a silk-and-velvet servitor seized it , dropped upon one knee , and offered it to him on a golden salver .
`` Plainly , what dost thou think ? ''
After some further talk , in which the Lord St. John covered up his mistake as well as he could by repeated protests that his faith was thoroughly grounded now , and could not be assailed by doubts again , the Lord Hertford relieved his fellow-keeper , and sat down to keep watch and ward alone .
He was soon deep in meditation , and evidently the longer he thought , the more he was bothered .
By-and-by he began to pace the floor and mutter .
Poor Tom ate with his fingers mainly ; but no one smiled at it , or even seemed to observe it .
He inspected his napkin curiously , and with deep interest , for it was of a very dainty and beautiful fabric , then said with simplicity --
By his own request our small friend was now conducted to his private cabinet , and left there alone to his own devices .
Hanging upon hooks in the oaken wainscoting were the several pieces of a suit of shining steel armour , covered all over with beautiful designs exquisitely inlaid in gold .
This martial panoply belonged to the true prince -- a recent present from Madam Parr the Queen .
Tom put on the greaves , the gauntlets , the plumed helmet , and such other pieces as he could don without assistance , and for a while was minded to call for help and complete the matter , but bethought him of the nuts he had brought away from dinner , and the joy it would be to eat them with no crowd to eye him , and no Grand Hereditaries to pester him with undesired services ; so he restored the pretty things to their several places , and soon was cracking nuts , and feeling almost naturally happy for the first time since God for his sins had made him a prince .
When the nuts were all gone , he stumbled upon some inviting books in a closet , among them one about the etiquette of the English court .
This was a prize .
He lay down upon a sumptuous divan , and proceeded to instruct himself with honest zeal .
Let us leave him there for the present .
The King 's face lit up with a fierce joy .
`` According to the King 's command , so shall it be .
Will't please your majesty to order that the Seal be now restored to me , so that I may forth upon the business ? ''
We left John Canty dragging the rightful prince into Offal Court , with a noisy and delighted mob at his heels .
There was but one person in it who offered a pleading word for the captive , and he was not heeded ; he was hardly even heard , so great was the turmoil .
The Prince continued to struggle for freedom , and to rage against the treatment he was suffering , until John Canty lost what little patience was left in him , and raised his oaken cudgel in a sudden fury over the Prince 's head .
The single pleader for the lad sprang to stop the man 's arm , and the blow descended upon his own wrist .
`` Thou'lt meddle , wilt thou ?
Then have thy reward . ''
The insulted blood mounted to the little prince 's cheek once more , and he lifted a steady and indignant gaze to the man 's face and said --
`` Oh , my poor boy !
Thy foolish reading hath wrought its woeful work at last , and ta'en thy wit away .
why did'st thou cleave to it when I so warned thee 'gainst it ?
Thou'st broke thy mother 's heart . ''
By this time she had crept to the slumbering boy 's side , with the candle , shaded , in her hand .
She bent heedfully and warily over him , scarcely breathing in her suppressed excitement , and suddenly flashed the light in his face and struck the floor by his ear with her knuckles .
The sleeper 's eyes sprang wide open , and he cast a startled stare about him -- but he made no special movement with his hands .
The poor mother 's interruptions having ceased , and the Prince 's pains having gradually lost their power to disturb him , utter weariness at last sealed his eyes in a profound and restful sleep .
Hour after hour slipped away , and still he slept like the dead .
Thus four or five hours passed .
Then his stupor began to lighten .
Presently , while half asleep and half awake , he murmured --
`` Nay , whither so fast , friend ?
Dost canker thy soul with sordid business when all that be leal men and true make holiday ? ''
The speaker was a sort of Don Caesar de Bazan in dress , aspect , and bearing .
He was tall , trim-built , muscular .
His doublet and trunks were of rich material , but faded and threadbare , and their gold-lace adornments were sadly tarnished ; his ruff was rumpled and damaged ; the plume in his slouched hat was broken and had a bedraggled and disreputable look ; at his side he wore a long rapier in a rusty iron sheath ; his swaggering carriage marked him at once as a ruffler of the camp .
The speech of this fantastic figure was received with an explosion of jeers and laughter .
Some cried , `` 'T is another prince in disguise ! ''
`` 'Ware thy tongue , friend : belike he is dangerous ! ''
`` Marry , he looketh it -- mark his eye ! ''
`` Pluck the lad from him -- to the horse-pond wi ' the cub ! ''
Instantly a hand was laid upon the Prince , under the impulse of this happy thought ; as instantly the stranger 's long sword was out and the meddler went to the earth under a sounding thump with the flat of it .
The next moment a score of voices shouted , `` Kill the dog !
and the mob closed in on the warrior , who backed himself against a wall and began to lay about him with his long weapon like a madman .
His victims sprawled this way and that , but the mob-tide poured over their prostrate forms and dashed itself against the champion with undiminished fury .
His moments seemed numbered , his destruction certain , when suddenly a trumpet-blast sounded , a voice shouted , `` Way for the King 's messenger ! ''
and a troop of horsemen came charging down upon the mob , who fled out of harm 's reach as fast as their legs could carry them .
The bold stranger caught up the Prince in his arms , and was soon far away from danger and the multitude .
`` Long live the King ! ''
Hendon 's lodgings were in the little inn on the Bridge .
As he neared the door with his small friend , a rough voice said --
Miles Hendon stepped in the way and said --
`` If thou do but touch him , thou animated offal , I will spit thee like a goose ! ''
said Hendon , barring the way and laying his hand upon his sword hilt .
`` Now mark ye , '' continued Hendon , `` I took this lad under my protection when a mob of such as thou would have mishandled him , mayhap killed him ; dost imagine I will desert him now to a worser fate ?
-- for whether thou art his father or no -- and sooth to say , I think it is a lie -- a decent swift death were better for such a lad than life in such brute hands as thine .
So go thy ways , and set quick about it , for I like not much bandying of words , being not over-patient in my nature . ''
John Canty moved off , muttering threats and curses , and was swallowed from sight in the crowd .
Hendon ascended three flights of stairs to his room , with his charge , after ordering a meal to be sent thither .
It was a poor apartment , with a shabby bed and some odds and ends of old furniture in it , and was vaguely lighted by a couple of sickly candles .
The little King dragged himself to the bed and lay down upon it , almost exhausted with hunger and fatigue .
He had been on his feet a good part of a day and a night ( for it was now two or three o'clock in the morning ) , and had eaten nothing meantime .
`` Prithee call me when the table is spread , '' and sank into a deep sleep immediately .
A smile twinkled in Hendon 's eye , and he said to himself --
He bent over the boy and contemplated him with kind and pitying interest , tapping the young cheek tenderly and smoothing back the tangled curls with his great brown hand .
A slight shiver passed over the boy 's form .
Hendon , suppressing a horse-laugh , and saying to himself , `` By all the saints , but this is admirable ! ''
stepped briskly forward and did the small insolent 's bidding ; then stood by , in a sort of stupefaction , until the command , `` Come -- the towel ! ''
woke him sharply up .
He took up a towel , from under the boy 's nose , and handed it to him without comment .
He now proceeded to comfort his own face with a wash , and while he was at it his adopted child seated himself at the table and prepared to fall to .
Hendon despatched his ablutions with alacrity , then drew back the other chair and was about to place himself at table , when the boy said , indignantly --
This blow staggered Hendon to his foundations .
He muttered to himself , `` Lo , the poor thing 's madness is up with the time !
It hath changed with the great change that is come to the realm , and now in fancy is he KING !
Good lack , I must humour the conceit , too -- there is no other way -- faith , he would order me to the Tower , else ! ''
`` Yet did my brother Hugh turn these faults to good account -- he seeing that our brother Arthur 's health was but indifferent , and hoping the worst might work him profit were I swept out of the path -- so -- but 'twere a long tale , good my liege , and little worth the telling .
Briefly , then , this brother did deftly magnify my faults and make them crimes ; ending his base work with finding a silken ladder in mine apartments -- conveyed thither by his own means -- and did convince my father by this , and suborned evidence of servants and other lying knaves , that I was minded to carry off my Edith and marry with her in rank defiance of his will .
`` Lo , what an imagination he hath !
Verily , this is no common mind ; else , crazed or sane , it could not weave so straight and gaudy a tale as this out of the airy nothings wherewith it hath wrought this curious romaunt .
Poor ruined little head , it shall not lack friend or shelter whilst I bide with the living .
He shall never leave my side ; he shall be my pet , my little comrade .
And he shall be cured !
-- ay , made whole and sound -- then will he make himself a name -- and proud shall I be to say , 'Yes , he is mine -- I took him , a homeless little ragamuffin , but I saw what was in him , and I said his name would be heard some day -- behold him , observe him -- was I right ? '
`` Remove these rags . ''
-- meaning his clothing .
`` Thou wilt sleep athwart the door , and guard it . ''
In a moment more he was out of his troubles , in a deep slumber .
`` Dear heart , he should have been born a king ! ''
muttered Hendon , admiringly ; `` he playeth the part to a marvel . ''
`` 'T is done , now , my liege , '' said Hendon ; `` I have a bit of business outside , but will presently return ; sleep thou again -- thou needest it .
There -- let me cover thy head also -- thou'lt be warm the sooner . ''
`` 'She loved her hus -- '
`` And so thou'rt a fool !
-- a fool and easily cozened -- hang all thy breed !
Yet mayhap no hurt is done .
Possibly no harm is meant the boy .
I will go fetch him .
Make the table ready .
the coverings of the bed were disposed as if one lay beneath them -- happened that by accident ? ''
After a moment 's thought , the servant said --
`` Just then the crowd lapped them up and closed them in , and I saw no more , being called by my master , who was in a rage because a joint that the scrivener had ordered was forgot , though I take all the saints to witness that to blame ME for that miscarriage were like holding the unborn babe to judgment for sins com -- ''
`` Art here YET !
Vanish , lest I throttle thee ! ''
Hendon followed after him , passed him , and plunged down the stairs two steps at a stride , muttering , `` 'T is that scurvy villain that claimed he was his son .
I have lost thee , my poor little mad master -- it is a bitter thought -- and I had come to love thee so !
by book and bell , NOT lost !
Not lost , for I will ransack the land till I find thee again .
Poor child , yonder is his breakfast -- and mine , but I have no hunger now ; so , let the rats have it -- speed , speed !
that is the word ! ''
As he wormed his swift way through the noisy multitudes upon the Bridge he several times said to himself -- clinging to the thought as if it were a particularly pleasing one -- '' He grumbled , but he WENT -- he went , yes , because he thought Miles Hendon asked it , sweet lad -- he would ne'er have done it for another , I know it well . ''
`` I know thee .
Thou art a good lad , and a deserving ; thy distresses shall end , for the day of thy reward is come .
Dig here every seventh day , and thou shalt find always the same treasure , twelve bright new pennies .
Tell none -- keep the secret . ''
The body of illustrious men named by the late King as his executors appeared , to ask Tom 's approval of certain acts of theirs -- rather a form , and yet not wholly a form , since there was no Protector as yet .
The Archbishop of Canterbury made report of the decree of the Council of Executors concerning the obsequies of his late most illustrious Majesty , and finished by reading the signatures of the Executors , to wit : the Archbishop of Canterbury ; the Lord Chancellor of England ; William Lord St. John ; John Lord Russell ; Edward Earl of Hertford ; John Viscount Lisle ; Cuthbert Bishop of Durham --
`` The sixteenth of the coming month , my liege . ''
Poor chap , he was still new to the customs of royalty ; he was used to seeing the forlorn dead of Offal Court hustled out of the way with a very different sort of expedition .
However , the Lord Hertford set his mind at rest with a word or two .
Tom did as he was bidden .
Another secretary began to read a preamble concerning the expenses of the late King 's household , which had amounted to 28,000 pounds during the preceding six months -- a sum so vast that it made Tom Canty gasp ; he gasped again when the fact appeared that 20,000 pounds of this money was still owing and unpaid ; { 4 } and once more when it appeared that the King 's coffers were about empty , and his twelve hundred servants much embarrassed for lack of the wages due them .
Tom spoke out , with lively apprehension --
`` We be going to the dogs , 't is plain .
'T is meet and necessary that we take a smaller house and set the servants at large , sith they be of no value but to make delay , and trouble one with offices that harass the spirit and shame the soul , they misbecoming any but a doll , that hath nor brains nor hands to help itself withal .
I remember me of a small house that standeth over against the fish-market , by Billingsgate -- ''
A sharp pressure upon Tom 's arm stopped his foolish tongue and sent a blush to his face ; but no countenance there betrayed any sign that this strange speech had been remarked or given concern .
A secretary made report that forasmuch as the late King had provided in his will for conferring the ducal degree upon the Earl of Hertford and raising his brother , Sir Thomas Seymour , to the peerage , and likewise Hertford 's son to an earldom , together with similar aggrandisements to other great servants of the Crown , the Council had resolved to hold a sitting on the 16th of February for the delivering and confirming of these honours , and that meantime , the late King not having granted , in writing , estates suitable to the support of these dignities , the Council , knowing his private wishes in that regard , had thought proper to grant to Seymour '500 pound lands , ' and to Hertford 's son '800 pound lands , and 300 pound of the next bishop 's lands which should fall vacant , ' -- his present Majesty being willing .
`` Of a surety thou must remember me , my lord .
I am thy whipping-boy . ''
Tom perceived that here was someone whom his keepers ought to have posted him about .
The situation was delicate .
What should he do ?
-- pretend he knew this lad , and then betray by his every utterance that he had never heard of him before ?
No , that would not do .
An idea came to his relief : accidents like this might be likely to happen with some frequency , now that business urgencies would often call Hertford and St. John from his side , they being members of the Council of Executors ; therefore perhaps it would be well to strike out a plan himself to meet the requirements of such emergencies .
Yes , that would be a wise course -- he would practise on this boy , and see what sort of success he might achieve .
So he stroked his brow perplexedly a moment or two , and presently said --
`` Now I seem to remember thee somewhat -- but my wit is clogged and dim with suffering -- ''
`` 'T is strange how my memory doth wanton with me these days , '' said Tom .
`` But mind it not -- I mend apace -- a little clue doth often serve to bring me back again the things and names which had escaped me .
( And not they , only , forsooth , but e'en such as I ne'er heard before -- as this lad shall see . )
Give thy business speech . ''
`` 'T is matter of small weight , my liege , yet will I touch upon it , an ' it please your Grace .
Two days gone by , when your Majesty faulted thrice in your Greek -- in the morning lessons , -- dost remember it ? ''
`` Y-e-s -- methinks I do .
( It is not much of a lie -- an ' I had meddled with the Greek at all , I had not faulted simply thrice , but forty times . )
Yes , I do recall it , now -- go on . ''
Tom stared at the tranquil boy , observing to himself , `` Lo , it is a wonderful thing , -- a most strange and curious trade ; I marvel they have not hired a boy to take my combings and my dressings for me -- would heaven they would !
-- an ' they will do this thing , I will take my lashings in mine own person , giving God thanks for the change . ''
Then he said aloud --
Seeing Master Humphrey hesitate , Tom encouraged him to go on , saying he was `` in the granting mood . ''
Tom was touched with this pathetic distress .
He said , with a right royal burst of generosity --
`` Thanks , O most noble master , this princely lavishness doth far surpass my most distempered dreams of fortune .
Now shall I be happy all my days , and all the house of Marlow after me . ''
Then the Earl proceeded , very delicately , to instruct Tom as to the observances proper to the stately occasion , under the rather thin disguise of 'reminding ' him concerning things already known to him ; but to his vast gratification it turned out that Tom needed very little help in this line -- he had been making use of Humphrey in that direction , for Humphrey had mentioned that within a few days he was to begin to dine in public ; having gathered it from the swift-winged gossip of the Court .
Tom kept these facts to himself , however .
The third day of Tom Canty 's kingship came and went much as the others had done , but there was a lifting of his cloud in one way -- he felt less uncomfortable than at first ; he was getting a little used to his circumstances and surroundings ; his chains still galled , but not all the time ; he found that the presence and homage of the great afflicted and embarrassed him less and less sharply with every hour that drifted over his head .
Late in the forenoon he was in a large audience-chamber , conversing with the Earl of Hertford and dully awaiting the striking of the hour appointed for a visit of ceremony from a considerable number of great officials and courtiers .
`` If ever thou shouldst know misfortune -- which God forefend !
-- may thy goodness to me this day be remembered and requited ! ''
The Earl 's face showed profound gratification , for he was a man of merciful and generous impulses -- a thing not very common with his class in that fierce age .
`` These your Grace 's noble words have sealed its doom .
History will remember it to the honour of your royal house . ''
`` Did any see the poison given ?
Was poison found ? ''
`` Who was there present ? ''
`` Nine years , please your Majesty . ''
`` Always , my liege -- at least if the woman desire it , and utter the needful words , either in her mind or with her tongue . ''
The woman prostrated herself , and protested , with tears , that she had no power to do the miracle , else she would gladly win her child 's life alone , and be content to lose her own , if by obedience to the King's command so precious a grace might be acquired .
`` I think the woman hath said true .
An ' MY mother were in her place and gifted with the devil 's functions , she had not stayed a moment to call her storms and lay the whole land in ruins , if the saving of my forfeit life were the price she got !
It is argument that other mothers are made in like mould .
Thou art free , goodwife -- thou and thy child -- for I do think thee innocent .
NOW thou'st nought to fear , being pardoned -- pull off thy stockings !
-- an ' thou canst make me a storm , thou shalt be rich ! ''
`` There , good soul , trouble thyself no further , thy power is departed out of thee .
Go thy way in peace ; and if it return to thee at any time , forget me not , but fetch me a storm . ''
So end the solemn preliminaries .
Now , far down the echoing corridors we hear a bugle-blast , and the indistinct cry , `` Place for the King !
Way for the King 's most excellent majesty ! ''
These sounds are momently repeated -- they grow nearer and nearer -- and presently , almost in our faces , the martial note peals and the cry rings out , `` Way for the King ! ''
At this instant the shining pageant appears , and files in at the door , with a measured march .
Let the chronicler speak again : --
`` First come Gentlemen , Barons , Earls , Knights of the Garter , all richly dressed and bareheaded ; next comes the Chancellor , between two , one of which carries the royal sceptre , the other the Sword of State in a red scabbard , studded with golden fleurs-de-lis , the point upwards ; next comes the King himself -- whom , upon his appearing , twelve trumpets and many drums salute with a great burst of welcome , whilst all in the galleries rise in their places , crying 'God save the King ! '
After him come nobles attached to his person , and on his right and left march his guard of honour , his fifty Gentlemen Pensioners , with gilt battle-axes . ''
`` Who art thou ?
What is thy business here ? ''
John Canty replied , in a stern and measured voice --
Hobbs and Hugo fell to talking together , in low voices , and the King removed himself as far as he could from their disagreeable company .
He withdrew into the twilight of the farther end of the barn , where he found the earthen floor bedded a foot deep with straw .
He lay down here , drew straw over himself in lieu of blankets , and was soon absorbed in thinking .
He had many griefs , but the minor ones were swept almost into forgetfulness by the supreme one , the loss of his father .
To the rest of the world the name of Henry VIII .
brought a shiver , and suggested an ogre whose nostrils breathed destruction and whose hand dealt scourgings and death ; but to this boy the name brought only sensations of pleasure ; the figure it invoked wore a countenance that was all gentleness and affection .
He called to mind a long succession of loving passages between his father and himself , and dwelt fondly upon them , his unstinted tears attesting how deep and real was the grief that possessed his heart .
As the afternoon wasted away , the lad , wearied with his troubles , sank gradually into a tranquil and healing slumber .
`` I am Yokel , once a farmer and prosperous , with loving wife and kids -- now am I somewhat different in estate and calling ; and the wife and kids are gone ; mayhap they are in heaven , mayhap in -- in the other place -- but the kindly God be thanked , they bide no more in ENGLAND !
My good old blameless mother strove to earn bread by nursing the sick ; one of these died , the doctors knew not how , so my mother was burnt for a witch , whilst my babes looked on and wailed .
-- up , all , with your cups !
-- now all together and with a cheer !
-- drink to the merciful English law that delivered HER from the English hell !
Thank you , mates , one and all .
I begged , from house to house -- I and the wife -- bearing with us the hungry kids -- but it was crime to be hungry in England -- so they stripped us and lashed us through three towns .
Drink ye all again to the merciful English law !
-- for its lash drank deep of my Mary 's blood and its blessed deliverance came quick .
She lies there , in the potter 's field , safe from all harms .
And the kids -- well , whilst the law lashed me from town to town , they starved .
Drink , lads -- only a drop -- a drop to the poor kids , that never did any creature harm .
I begged again -- begged , for a crust , and got the stocks and lost an ear -- see , here bides the stump ; I begged again , and here is the stump of the other to keep me minded of it .
And still I begged again , and was sold for a slave -- here on my cheek under this stain , if I washed it off , ye might see the red S the branding-iron left there !
Do you understand that word ?
-- that is he that stands before ye .
I have run from my master , and when I am found -- the heavy curse of heaven fall on the law of the land that hath commanded it !
-- I shall hang ! ''
The boy stood unconfused in the midst of all those surprised and questioning eyes , and answered with princely dignity --
A wild burst of laughter followed , partly of derision and partly of delight in the excellence of the joke .
The King was stung .
He said more , with angry voice and excited gesture , but it was lost in a whirlwind of laughter and mocking exclamations .
'John Hobbs ' made several attempts to make himself heard above the din , and at last succeeded -- saying --
The response came with such a thundergust from the motley crew that the crazy building vibrated to the sound .
The little King 's face lighted with pleasure for an instant , and he slightly inclined his head , and said with grave simplicity --
A tinker shrieked out a suggestion --
These and twenty other cries broke out at once !
and almost before the poor little victim could draw a breath he was crowned with a tin basin , robed in a tattered blanket , throned upon a barrel , and sceptred with the tinker 's soldering-iron .
Then all flung themselves upon their knees about him and sent up a chorus of ironical wailings , and mocking supplications , whilst they swabbed their eyes with their soiled and ragged sleeves and aprons --
About noon , after a long and weary tramp , the gang came to a halt behind a hedge on the outskirts of a considerable village .
An hour was allowed for rest , then the crew scattered themselves abroad to enter the village at different points to ply their various trades -- 'Jack ' was sent with Hugo .
They wandered hither and thither for some time , Hugo watching for opportunities to do a stroke of business , but finding none -- so he finally said --
`` Come , play not thy merry game of madman so far , mate ; use it for thy amusement , not thy hurt .
An ' I tell him this , he will scorch thee finely for it . ''
The King said , impatiently --
The King was not only delighted to find that the creature was only a calf , but delighted to have the calf 's company ; for he had been feeling so lonesome and friendless that the company and comradeship of even this humble animal were welcome .
And he had been so buffeted , so rudely entreated by his own kind , that it was a real comfort to him to feel that he was at last in the society of a fellow-creature that had at least a soft heart and a gentle spirit , whatever loftier attributes might be lacking .
So he resolved to waive rank and make friends with the calf .
The children looked at each other -- then at him -- then at each other again -- wonderingly , perplexedly ; then one said --
`` How can it be else but true , Prissy ?
Would he say a lie ?
For look you , Prissy , an ' it were not true , it WOULD be a lie .
It surely would be .
Now think o n't .
For all things that be not true , be lies -- thou canst make nought else out of it . ''
It was a good tight argument , without a leak in it anywhere ; and it left Prissy 's half-doubts not a leg to stand on .
She considered a moment , then put the King upon his honour with the simple remark --
Full of eagerness to prove her sagacity , she told the King to mind the cooking a moment -- hinting that he might manufacture and add a dish or two , if he chose ; then she went out of the room and gave her children a sign to follow after .
He made a sufficiently poor job of it ; and to his surprise too , for the cleaning of wooden spoons and trenchers had seemed an easy thing to do .
It was a tedious and troublesome piece of work , but he finished it at last .
He was becoming impatient to get away on his journey now ; however , he was not to lose this thrifty dame 's society so easily .
She furnished him some little odds and ends of employment , which he got through with after a fair fashion and with some credit .
Then she set him and the little girls to paring some winter apples ; but he was so awkward at this service that she retired him from it and gave him a butcher knife to grind .
Afterwards she kept him carding wool until he began to think he had laid the good King Alfred about far enough in the shade for the present in the matter of showy menial heroisms that would read picturesquely in story-books and histories , and so he was half-minded to resign .
And when , just after the noonday dinner , the goodwife gave him a basket of kittens to drown , he did resign .
At least he was just going to resign -- for he felt that he must draw the line somewhere , and it seemed to him that to draw it at kitten-drowning was about the right thing -- when there was an interruption .
The interruption was John Canty -- with a peddler 's pack on his back -- and Hugo .
The hermit rose from his knees ; the King knocked .
A deep voice responded --
`` I am an archangel ! ''
This happy state of things continued while the two ate the supper ; then , after a prayer before the shrine , the hermit put the boy to bed , in a small adjoining room , tucking him in as snugly and lovingly as a mother might ; and so , with a parting caress , left him and sat down by the fire , and began to poke the brands about in an absent and aimless way .
Presently he paused ; then tapped his forehead several times with his fingers , as if trying to recall some thought which had escaped from his mind .
Apparently he was unsuccessful .
Now he started quickly up , and entered his guest 's room , and said --
`` Thou art King ? ''
And so he wrought , and still wrought -- mumbling , chuckling a low rasping chuckle at times -- and at times breaking again into words --
The old man glided away , stooping , stealthy , cat-like , and brought the low bench .
He seated himself upon it , half his body in the dim and flickering light , and the other half in shadow ; and so , with his craving eyes bent upon the slumbering boy , he kept his patient vigil there , heedless of the drift of time , and softly whetted his knife , and mumbled and chuckled ; and in aspect and attitude he resembled nothing so much as a grizzly , monstrous spider , gloating over some hapless insect that lay bound and helpless in his web .
`` Son of Henry the Eighth , hast thou prayed ? ''
`` Then pray again .
Pray the prayer for the dying ! ''
The rest was lost in inarticulate mutterings .
The old man sank upon his knees , his knife in his hand , and bent himself over the moaning boy .
`` Homage and greeting , reverend sir !
Where is the boy -- MY boy ? ''
The King heard the two pass out , talking ; heard their footsteps die quickly away -- then he was alone with a boding , brooding , awful silence .
`` He -- but wait ; I will go with thee . ''
`` Good -- good !
Why , truly thou art better than thy looks .
Marry I do not think there 's not another archangel with so right a heart as thine .
Wilt take the wee donkey that 's for my boy , or wilt thou fork thy holy legs over this ill-conditioned slave of a mule that I have provided for myself ?
-- and had been cheated in too , had he cost but the indifferent sum of a month 's usury on a brass farthing let to a tinker out of work . ''
Then followed a confusion of kicks , cuffs , tramplings and plungings , accompanied by a thunderous intermingling of volleyed curses , and finally a bitter apostrophe to the mule , which must have broken its spirit , for hostilities seemed to cease from that moment .
A moment or two later his limbs were at liberty , and his captors , each gripping him by an arm , were hurrying him with all speed through the forest .
The morning after that combat , Hugo got up with a heart filled with vengeful purposes against the King .
He had two plans , in particular .
One was to inflict upon the lad what would be , to his proud spirit and 'imagined ' royalty , a peculiar humiliation ; and if he failed to accomplish this , his other plan was to put a crime of some kind upon the King , and then betray him into the implacable clutches of the law .
The King wanted to borrow his deliverer 's cudgel and warm the jackets of the two rascals on the spot ; but the man said no , it would bring trouble -- leave the matter till night ; the whole tribe being together , then , the outside world would not venture to interfere or interrupt .
He marched the party back to camp and reported the affair to the Ruffler , who listened , pondered , and then decided that the King should not be again detailed to beg , since it was plain he was worthy of something higher and better -- wherefore , on the spot he promoted him from the mendicant rank and appointed him to steal !
The King 's heart was filled with joy -- he could make his escape , now , if Hugo 's quest only carried him far enough away .
But he was to have no such luck .
Hugo crept behind the woman , snatched the package , and came running back , wrapping it in an old piece of blanket which he carried on his arm .
The hue and cry was raised in a moment , by the woman , who knew her loss by the lightening of her burden , although she had not seen the pilfering done .
Hugo thrust the bundle into the King 's hands without halting , saying --
The crowd fell apart to admit a constable , who approached and was about to lay his hand upon the King 's shoulder , when Hendon said --
The officer led , with the woman and her bundle ; Miles and the King followed after , with the crowd at their heels .
The King was inclined to rebel ; but Hendon said to him in a low voice --
The justice glanced around uncomfortably upon the crowd , then nodded to the constable , and said --
The little King started , wide-eyed with consternation , but controlled himself and held his peace ; but not so the woman .
She sprang to her feet , shaking with fright , and cried out --
`` There , there , dear heart , say no more , I am content .
Give me the eightpence , and hold thy peace about the matter . ''
`` WILL you trust in me ?
and forbear to worsen our chances with dangerous speech .
What God wills , will happen ; thou canst not hurry it , thou canst not alter it ; therefore wait , and be patient -- 'twill be time enow to rail or rejoice when what is to happen has happened . ''
The man was dumb with fear and distress , for a moment ; then he rallied , and said with forced lightness --
`` Kept you the woman 's pig for amusement ? ''
`` And the penalty is death ! ''
now thou'rt wise and reasonable .
And thou'lt restore the pig ? ''
All possible hurry was made ; still , it was after three o'clock before the village was reached .
The travellers scampered through it , Hendon's tongue going all the time .
`` Here is the church -- covered with the same ivy -- none gone , none added . ''
`` Yonder is the inn , the old Red Lion , -- and yonder is the market-place . ''
`` Here is the Maypole , and here the pump -- nothing is altered ; nothing but the people , at any rate ; ten years make a change in people ; some of these I seem to know , but none know me . ''
So his chat ran on .
The end of the village was soon reached ; then the travellers struck into a crooked , narrow road , walled in with tall hedges , and hurried briskly along it for half a mile , then passed into a vast flower garden through an imposing gateway , whose huge stone pillars bore sculptured armorial devices .
A noble mansion was before them .
`` And whom dost thou imagine thyself to be ? ''
He seized Miles by the arm , dragged him to the window , and began to devour him from head to foot with his eyes , turning him this way and that , and stepping briskly around him and about him to prove him from all points of view ; whilst the returned prodigal , all aglow with gladness , smiled , laughed , and kept nodding his head and saying --
Miles , amazed , could not speak for a moment ; then he found his tongue , and cried out --
Am I not thy brother ? ''
`` One that came from over sea , some six or seven years ago .
It said my brother died in battle . ''
`` The five arch-villains have survived the two-and-twenty leal and honest -- 't is an odd thing . ''
`` Mind not thy mischance , good man ; there be others in the world whose identity is denied , and whose claims are derided .
Thou hast company . ''
`` I thank thee out of my heart ! ''
exclaimed Hendon with a fervency which showed that he was touched .
The King added , with the same gentle simplicity --
`` Dost thou doubt ME ? ''
A beautiful lady , richly clothed , followed Hugh , and after her came several liveried servants .
The lady walked slowly , with her head bowed and her eyes fixed upon the floor .
The face was unspeakably sad .
Miles Hendon sprang forward , crying out --
At the sound of Miles 's voice the woman had started slightly , and her cheeks had flushed ; she was trembling now .
She stood still , during an impressive pause of several moments ; then slowly lifted up her head and looked into Hendon 's eyes with a stony and frightened gaze ; the blood sank out of her face , drop by drop , till nothing remained but the grey pallor of death ; then she said , in a voice as dead as the face , `` I know him not ! ''
and turned , with a moan and a stifled sob , and tottered out of the room .
`` The servants know you not , sir .
I fear there is some mistake .
You have seen that my wife knew you not . ''
This reminder did not hearten the servants much ; they still held back .
`` No , it is not strange , my liege .
I know him , and this conduct is but natural .
He was a rascal from his birth . ''
`` Not of him ?
What is it that is strange ? ''
`` Most true , my King , I had forgot . ''
Then Hendon sighed , and muttered to himself , `` Poor ruined mind -- still busy with its pathetic dream . ''
`` An ' it were dark , I should think it WAS a king that spoke ; there 's no denying it , when the humour 's upon on him he doth thunder and lighten like your true King ; now where got he that trick ?
See him scribble and scratch away contentedly at his meaningless pot-hooks , fancying them to be Latin and Greek -- and except my wit shall serve me with a lucky device for diverting him from his purpose , I shall be forced to pretend to post away to-morrow on this wild errand he hath invented for me . ''
Miles sprang forward , with a happy confidence , to meet her , but she checked him with a hardly perceptible gesture , and he stopped where he was .
She seated herself , and asked him to do likewise .
Thus simply did she take the sense of old comradeship out of him , and transform him into a stranger and a guest .
The surprise of it , the bewildering unexpectedness of it , made him begin to question , for a moment , if he WAS the person he was pretending to be , after all .
The Lady Edith said --
`` Here , '' he said ; `` scan this big animal , and grant me an opinion . ''
The jailer finished by lifting himself a-tip-toe with an imaginary halter , at the same time making a gurgling noise in his throat suggestive of suffocation .
The old man said , vindictively --
`` Let him bless God an ' he fare no worse .
An ' _I_ had the handling o ' the villain he should roast , or I am no true man ! ''
`` There is rumour that the King is mad .
But in charity forbear to say _I_ mentioned it , for 't is death to speak of it , they say . ''
`` The King is NOT mad , good man -- and thou'lt find it to thy advantage to busy thyself with matters that nearer concern thee than this seditious prattle . ''
Hendon was watching the King .
He said to himself , with satisfaction , `` His disorder mendeth ; he hath changed , and groweth gentler .
If he had followed his wont , he would have stormed at these varlets , and said he was King , and commanded that the women be turned loose unscathed .
Soon his delusion will pass away and be forgotten , and his poor mind will be whole again .
God speed the day ! ''
When Hendon 's term of service in the stocks was finished , he was released and ordered to quit the region and come back no more .
His sword was restored to him , and also his mule and his donkey .
He mounted and rode off , followed by the King , the crowd opening with quiet respectfulness to let them pass , and then dispersing when they were gone .
Hendon was soon absorbed in thought .
There were questions of high import to be answered .
What should he do ?
Whither should he go ?
Powerful help must be found somewhere , or he must relinquish his inheritance and remain under the imputation of being an impostor besides .
Where could he hope to find this powerful help ?
It was a knotty question .
By-and-by a thought occurred to him which pointed to a possibility -- the slenderest of slender possibilities , certainly , but still worth considering , for lack of any other that promised anything at all .
He remembered what old Andrews had said about the young King 's goodness and his generous championship of the wronged and unfortunate .
Why not go and try to get speech of him and beg for justice ?
Ah , yes , but could so fantastic a pauper get admission to the august presence of a monarch ?
Never mind -- let that matter take care of itself ; it was a bridge that would not need to be crossed till he should come to it .
He was an old campaigner , and used to inventing shifts and expedients : no doubt he would be able to find a way .
Yes , he would strike for the capital .
Maybe his father 's old friend Sir Humphrey Marlow would help him -- 'good old Sir Humphrey , Head Lieutenant of the late King 's kitchen , or stables , or something ' -- Miles could not remember just what or which .
Now that he had something to turn his energies to , a distinctly defined object to accomplish , the fog of humiliation and depression which had settled down upon his spirits lifted and blew away , and he raised his head and looked about him .
He was surprised to see how far he had come ; the village was away behind him .
The King was jogging along in his wake , with his head bowed ; for he , too , was deep in plans and thinkings .
A sorrowful misgiving clouded Hendon 's new-born cheerfulness : would the boy be willing to go again to a city where , during all his brief life , he had never known anything but ill-usage and pinching want ?
But the question must be asked ; it could not be avoided ; so Hendon reined up , and called out --
He even learned to enjoy sitting in throned state in council , and seeming to be something more than the Lord Protector 's mouthpiece .
He liked to receive great ambassadors and their gorgeous trains , and listen to the affectionate messages they brought from illustrious monarchs who called him brother .
O happy Tom Canty , late of Offal Court !
He enjoyed his splendid clothes , and ordered more : he found his four hundred servants too few for his proper grandeur , and trebled them .
The adulation of salaaming courtiers came to be sweet music to his ears .
He remained kind and gentle , and a sturdy and determined champion of all that were oppressed , and he made tireless war upon unjust laws : yet upon occasion , being offended , he could turn upon an earl , or even a duke , and give him a look that would make him tremble .
Once , when his royal 'sister , ' the grimly holy Lady Mary , set herself to reason with him against the wisdom of his course in pardoning so many people who would otherwise be jailed , or hanged , or burned , and reminded him that their august late father 's prisons had sometimes contained as high as sixty thousand convicts at one time , and that during his admirable reign he had delivered seventy-two thousand thieves and robbers over to death by the executioner , { 9 } the boy was filled with generous indignation , and commanded her to go to her closet , and beseech God to take away the stone that was in her breast , and give her a human heart .
When Tom Canty awoke the next morning , the air was heavy with a thunderous murmur : all the distances were charged with it .
It was music to him ; for it meant that the English world was out in its strength to give loyal welcome to the great day .
Every now and then rose the cry , `` A largess !
and Tom responded by scattering a handful of bright new coins abroad for the multitude to scramble for .
The procession moved on , and still on , through ever augmenting splendours and ever augmenting tempests of welcome ; but to Tom Canty they were as if they had not been .
He neither saw nor heard .
Royalty had lost its grace and sweetness ; its pomps were become a reproach .
Remorse was eating his heart out .
He said , `` Would God I were free of my captivity ! ''
`` My liege , it is an ill time for dreaming .
The people observe thy downcast head , thy clouded mien , and they take it for an omen .
Be advised : unveil the sun of royalty , and let it shine upon these boding vapours , and disperse them .
Lift up thy face , and smile upon the people . ''
There was a waiting pause ; then , at a signal , a triumphant peal of music burst forth , and Tom Canty , clothed in a long robe of cloth of gold , appeared at a door , and stepped upon the platform .
The entire multitude rose , and the ceremony of the Recognition ensued .
A deep hush pervaded the Abbey .
At this impressive moment , a startling apparition intruded upon the scene -- an apparition observed by none in the absorbed multitude , until it suddenly appeared , moving up the great central aisle .
It was a boy , bareheaded , ill shod , and clothed in coarse plebeian garments that were falling to rags .
He raised his hand with a solemnity which ill comported with his soiled and sorry aspect , and delivered this note of warning --
The Duke asked him many questions about the Court , the late King , the prince , the princesses -- the boy answered them correctly and without hesitating .
He described the rooms of state in the palace , the late King 's apartments , and those of the Prince of Wales .
Now the Lord St. John was seen returning .
As he advanced up the mid-aisle the interest was so intense that the low murmur of conversation in the great assemblage died out and was succeeded by a profound hush , a breathless stillness , through which his footfalls pulsed with a dull and distant sound .
Every eye was fastened upon him as he moved along .
He reached the platform , paused a moment , then moved toward Tom Canty with a deep obeisance , and said --
The Lord Protector was perplexed in the last degree .
He said to the Lord St. John --
The Lord Protector spoke up --
Toward eleven o'clock he approached the palace ; and although a host of showy people were about him , moving in the same direction , he was not inconspicuous -- his costume took care of that .
He watched these people's faces narrowly , hoping to find a charitable one whose possessor might be willing to carry his name to the old lieutenant -- as to trying to get into the palace himself , that was simply out of the question .
Hendon followed , saying to himself , `` An ' I were not travelling to death and judgment , and so must needs economise in sin , I would throttle this knave for his mock courtesy . ''
Two persons , who , through delay , had only arrived from the country during this morning , and had now been in this room only five minutes , stood listening to these words and looking at the King , then at the scarecrow , then at the King again , in a sort of torpid bewilderment .
These were Sir Hugh and the Lady Edith .
But the new Earl did not see them .
He was still staring at the monarch , in a dazed way , and muttering --
When the mysteries were all cleared up , it came out , by confession of Hugh Hendon , that his wife had repudiated Miles by his command , that day at Hendon Hall -- a command assisted and supported by the perfectly trustworthy promise that if she did not deny that he was Miles Hendon , and stand firmly to it , he would have her life ; whereupon she said , `` Take it ! ''
-- she did not value it -- and she would not repudiate Miles ; then the husband said he would spare her life but have Miles assassinated !
This was a different matter ; so she gave her word and kept it .
He saved from the gallows the boy who had captured the stray falcon , and also the woman who had stolen a remnant of cloth from a weaver ; but he was too late to save the man who had been convicted of killing a deer in the royal forest .
He showed favour to the justice who had pitied him when he was supposed to have stolen a pig , and he had the gratification of seeing him grow in the public esteem and become a great and honoured man .
Miles Hendon and Tom Canty were favourites of the King , all through his brief reign , and his sincere mourners when he died .
The good Earl of Kent had too much sense to abuse his peculiar privilege ; but he exercised it twice after the instance we have seen of it before he was called from this world -- once at the accession of Queen Mary , and once at the accession of Queen Elizabeth .
A descendant of his exercised it at the accession of James I .
Before this one 's son chose to use the privilege , near a quarter of a century had elapsed , and the 'privilege of the Kents' had faded out of most people 's memories ; so , when the Kent of that day appeared before Charles I. and his court and sat down in the sovereign's presence to assert and perpetuate the right of his house , there was a fine stir indeed !
But the matter was soon explained , and the right confirmed .
The last Earl of the line fell in the wars of the Commonwealth fighting for the King , and the odd privilege ended with him .
Tom Canty lived to be a very old man , a handsome , white-haired old fellow , of grave and benignant aspect .
As long as he lasted he was honoured ; and he was also reverenced , for his striking and peculiar costume kept the people reminded that 'in his time he had been royal ; ' so , wherever he appeared the crowd fell apart , making way for him , and whispering , one to another , `` Doff thy hat , it is the King 's Ward ! ''
-- and so they saluted , and got his kindly smile in return -- and they valued it , too , for his was an honourable history .
NOTE 3 , Chapter V. The Duke of Norfolk 's Condemnation commanded .
The loving-cup , and the peculiar ceremonies observed in drinking from it , are older than English history .
It is thought that both are Danish importations .
As far back as knowledge goes , the loving-cup has always been drunk at English banquets .
Tradition explains the ceremonies in this way .
In the rude ancient times it was deemed a wise precaution to have both hands of both drinkers employed , lest while the pledger pledged his love and fidelity to the pledgee , the pledgee take that opportunity to slip a dirk into him !
NOTE 8 , Chapter XIV .
NOTE 10 , Chapter XVII .
So young a King and so ignorant a peasant were likely to make mistakes ; and this is an instance in point .
This peasant was suffering from this law BY ANTICIPATION ; the King was venting his indignation against a law which was not yet in existence ; for this hideous statute was to have birth in this little King 's OWN REIGN .
However , we know , from the humanity of his character , that it could never have been suggested by him .
The curious old book called The English Rogue makes the limit thirteen pence ha'penny : death being the portion of any who steal a thing 'above the value of thirteen pence ha'penny . '
`` Well , yes -- it does .
That is -- that is -- ''
The husband seemed perplexed for an answer ; the wife kept a steady eye upon him , and waited .
Finally Richards said , with the hesitancy of one who is making a statement which is likely to encounter doubt ,
`` He is not a bad man .
The whole of his unpopularity had its foundation in that one thing -- the thing that made so much noise . ''
If the town had found it out -- ''
It scares me yet , to think of it .
I repented of it the minute it was done ; and I was even afraid to tell you lest your face might betray it to somebody .
I did n't sleep any that night , for worrying .
But after a few days I saw that no one was going to suspect me , and after that I got to feeling glad I did it .
And I feel glad yet , Mary -- glad through and through . ''
The men were starting up-stairs ; at this moment they were overtaken by a boy , and Cox asked ,
`` It 's already gone , sir . ''
The men turned and walked slowly away , not waiting to hear the rest .
Neither of them spoke during ten minutes ; then Cox said , in a vexed tone ,
Then the friends separated without a good-night , and dragged themselves home with the gait of mortally stricken men .
At their homes their wives sprang up with an eager `` Well ? ''
-- then saw the answer with their eyes and sank down sorrowing , without waiting for it to come in words .
In both houses a discussion followed of a heated sort -- a new thing ; there had been discussions before , but not heated ones , not ungentle ones .
The discussions to-night were a sort of seeming plagiarisms of each other .
`` That is nothing ; it also said do it privately , if you liked .
There , now -- is that true , or not ? ''
`` But , Mary , you know how we have been trained all our lives long , like the whole village , till it is absolutely second nature to us to stop not a single moment to think when there 's an honest thing to be done -- ''
A long silence followed ; both were sunk in thought .
At last the wife looked up and said :
`` You were thinking , if a body could only guess out WHAT THE REMARK WAS that Goodson made to the stranger . ''
`` It 's perfectly true .
I feel guilty and ashamed .
The pallet was made , and Mary said :
The reason that the village telegraph-office was open later than usual that night was this : The foreman of Cox 's paper was the local representative of the Associated Press .
One might say its honorary representative , for it was n't four times a year that he could furnish thirty words that would be accepted .
But this time it was different .
His despatch stating what he had caught got an instant answer :
The foreman filled the bill ; and he was the proudest man in the State .
By breakfast-time the next morning the name of Hadleyburg the Incorruptible was on every lip in America , from Montreal to the Gulf , from the glaciers of Alaska to the orange-groves of Florida ; and millions and millions of people were discussing the stranger and his money-sack , and wondering if the right man would be found , and hoping some more news about the matter would come soon -- right away .
Then a change came .
It was a gradual change ; so gradual that its beginnings were hardly noticed ; maybe were not noticed at all , except by Jack Halliday , who always noticed everything ; and always made fun of it , too , no matter what it was .
He began to throw out chaffing remarks about people not looking quite so happy as they did a day or two ago ; and next he claimed that the new aspect was deepening to positive sadness ; next , that it was taking on a sick look ; and finally he said that everybody was become so moody , thoughtful , and absent-minded that he could rob the meanest man in town of a cent out of the bottom of his breeches pocket and not disturb his reverie .
And straightway -- with a shudder -- came this , from the man 's wife :
`` Oh , DO N'T !
What horrible thing are you mulling in your mind ?
Put it away from you , for God 's sake ! ''
And the third night the men uttered the question yet again -- with anguish , and absently .
This time -- and the following night -- the wives fidgeted feebly , and tried to say something .
`` Oh , if we COULD only guess ! ''
The postman left a letter .
Richards glanced listlessly at the superscription and the post-mark -- unfamiliar , both -- and tossed the letter on the table and resumed his might-have-beens and his hopeless dull miseries where he had left them off .
Two or three hours later his wife got wearily up and was going away to bed without a good-night -- custom now -- but she stopped near the letter and eyed it awhile with a dead interest , then broke it open , and began to skim it over .
Richards , sitting there with his chair tilted back against the wall and his chin between his knees , heard something fall .
It was his wife .
He sprang to her side , but she cried out :
`` Leave me alone , I am too happy .
Read the letter -- read it ! ''
`` You CA N'T ?
WHY ca n't you ? ''
She was troubled and silent for a moment , then she laid her hand within his and said :
Edward found it something of an effort to comply , for his mind kept wandering -- trying to remember what the service was that he had done Goodson .
The couple lay awake the most of the night , Mary happy and busy , Edward busy , but not so happy .
Mary was planning what she would do with the money .
Edward was trying to recall that service .
At first his conscience was sore on account of the lie he had told Mary -- if it was a lie .
After much reflection -- suppose it WAS a lie ?
Was it such a great matter ?
Are n't we always ACTING lies ?
Then why not tell them ?
Look at Mary -- look what she had done .
While he was hurrying off on his honest errand , what was she doing ?
Lamenting because the papers had n't been destroyed and the money kept .
Is theft better than lying ?
THAT point lost its sting -- the lie dropped into the background and left comfort behind it .
The next point came to the front : HAD he rendered that service ?
Well , here was Goodson 's own evidence as reported in Stephenson 's letter ; there could be no better evidence than that -- it was even PROOF that he had rendered it .
So that point was settled ... No , not quite .
He recalled with a wince that this unknown Mr. Stephenson was just a trifle unsure as to whether the performer of it was Richards or some other -- and , oh dear , he had put Richards on his honour !
He must himself decide whither that money must go -- and Mr. Stephenson was not doubting that if he was the wrong man he would go honourably and find the right one .
Oh , it was odious to put a man in such a situation -- ah , why could n't Stephenson have left out that doubt ?
What did he want to intrude that for ?
And while they were at this work , which was difficult , their wives put in the night spending the money , which was easy .
During that one night the nineteen wives spent an average of seven thousand dollars each out of the forty thousand in the sack -- a hundred and thirty-three thousand altogether .
So he began , in a dazed and sleep-walker fashion :
People jumped up and crowded around Wilson , wringing his hand and congratulating fervently -- meantime the Chair was hammering with the gavel and shouting :
`` 'GO , AND REFORM -- OR , MARK MY WORDS -- SOME DAY , FOR YOUR SINS YOU WILL DIE AND GO TO HELL OR HADLEYBURG -- TRY AND MAKE IT THE FORMER . '
Then the house let go , strangers and all .
Even Mr. Burgess 's gravity broke down presently , then the audience considered itself officially absolved from all restraint , and it made the most of its privilege .
It was a good long laugh , and a tempestuously wholehearted one , but it ceased at last -- long enough for Mr. Burgess to try to resume , and for the people to get their eyes partially wiped ; then it broke out again , and afterward yet again ; then at last Burgess was able to get out these serious words :
A low murmur sifted through the house ; its import was , `` He 's got them both . ''
There is nothing in the world like a persuasive speech to fuddle the mental apparatus and upset the convictions and debauch the emotions of an audience not practised in the tricks and delusions of oratory .
Wilson sat down victorious .
The house submerged him in tides of approving applause ; friends swarmed to him and shook him by the hand and congratulated him , and Billson was shouted down and not allowed to say a word .
The Chair hammered and hammered with its gavel , and kept shouting :
`` But what is there to proceed with , sir , but to deliver the money ? ''
You forget that there is still a document to be read . ''
When quiet had been restored he took up the document , and was going to read it , but laid it down again saying `` I forgot ; this is not to be read until all written communications received by me have first been read . ''
He took an envelope out of his pocket , removed its enclosure , glanced at it -- seemed astonished -- held it out and gazed at it -- stared at it .
`` 'The remark which I made to the stranger -- ( Voices .
) -- was this : `` You are far from being a bad man .
`` Great Scott ! ''
) Go , and reform . ''
`` Oh , saw my leg off ! ''
) Signed by Mr. Pinkerton the banker . ''
`` Four Symbols ! ''
`` 'Rah for Yates ! ''
`` Fish again ! ''
The house roared it out .
A third line was at once furnished --
`` Together with those that have been already examined , there are nineteen . ''
`` My friends , you have known us two -- Mary and me -- all our lives , and I think you have liked us and respected us -- ''
' '' You are far from being a bad man -- ' Signature , 'Eliphalet Weeks . '
`` Be ready , '' Mary whispered .
`` Your name comes now ; he has read eighteen . ''
`` But the Symbols are here , you bet ! ''
They were given with great and moving heartiness ; then somebody proposed that `` Richards be elected sole Guardian and Symbol of the now Sacred Hadleyburg Tradition , with power and right to stand up and look the whole sarcastic world in the face . ''
A Cyclone of Voices .
The Eighteen to the front !
Committee on Propagation of the Tradition !
Forward -- the Incorruptibles ! ''
At the beginning of the auction Richards whispered in distress to his wife : `` Oh , Mary , can we allow it ?
It -- it -- you see , it is an honour -- reward , a testimonial to purity of character , and -- and -- can we allow it ?
Had n't I better get up and -- Oh , Mary , what ought we to do ?
-- what do you think we -- '' ( Halliday 's voice .
`` Fifteen I'm bid !
-- fifteen for the sack !
-- ah , thanks !
-- thirty -- thanks again !
Thirty , thirty , thirty !
-- do I hear forty ?
-- forty it is !
Keep the ball rolling , gentlemen , keep it rolling !
-- thanks , noble Roman !
-- going at fifty , fifty , fifty !
-- pile it up , pile it up !
-- hundred and twenty -- forty !
-- just in time !
-- hundred and fifty !
Do I hear two h -- thanks !
-- two hundred and fifty !
He was watching the bidding .
At a thousand , the market broke : the prices tumbled swiftly .
He waited -- and still watched .
One competitor dropped out ; then another , and another .
He put in a bid or two now .
When the bids had sunk to ten dollars , he added a five ; some one raised him a three ; he waited a moment , then flung in a fifty-dollar jump , and the sack was his -- at $ 1,282 .
The house broke out in cheers -- then stopped ; for he was on his feet , and had lifted his hand .
He began to speak .
`` What is your price for the sack ? ''
`` I 'll give you twenty . ''
Then he slipped out , and left the audience making a vast noise , which was composed of a mixture of cheers , the `` Mikado '' song , dog-disapproval , and the chant , `` You are f-a-r from being a b-a-a-d man -- a-a-a a-men ! ''
`` We -- we could n't help it , Mary .
It -- well it was ordered .
ALL things are . ''
Mary glanced up and looked at him steadily , but he did n't return the look .
`` In the morning -- by note . ''
`` And does it all come to us , do you think -- instead of the ten thousand ? ''
`` I am a disappointed man .
Your honesty is beyond the reach of temptation .
I had a different idea about it , but I wronged you in that , and I beg pardon , and do it sincerely .
I honour you -- and that is sincere too .
This town is not worthy to kiss the hem of your garment .
Dear sir , I made a square bet with myself that there were nineteen debauchable men in your self-righteous community .
Take the whole pot , you are entitled to it . ''
`` If those beautiful words were deserved , Mary -- and God knows I believed I deserved them once -- I think I could give the forty thousand dollars for them .
And I would put that paper away , as representing more than gold and jewels , and keep it always .
But now -- We could not live in the shadow of its accusing presence , Mary . ''
A messenger arrived and delivered an envelope .
Richards took from it a note and read it ; it was from Burgess :
`` Saved , once more .
And on such terms ! ''
He put the note in the lire .
`` I -- I wish I were dead , Mary , I wish I were out of it all ! ''
Three days before the election each of two thousand voters suddenly found himself in possession of a prized memento -- one of the renowned bogus double-eagles .
Around one of its faces was stamped these words : `` THE REMARK I MADE TO THE POOR STRANGER WAS -- '' Around the other face was stamped these : `` GO , AND REFORM .
( SIGNED ) PINKERTON . ''
Thus the entire remaining refuse of the renowned joke was emptied upon a single head , and with calamitous effect .
It revived the recent vast laugh and concentrated it upon Pinkerton ; and Harkness 's election was a walk-over .
The following day the nurses had more news -- and wonderful .
They had concluded to hide the cheques , lest harm come to them ; but when they searched they were gone from under the patient 's pillow -- vanished away .
`` You will never see them again -- they are destroyed .
They came from Satan .
I saw the hell-brand on them , and I knew they were sent to betray me to sin . ''
Then he fell to gabbling strange and dreadful things which were not clearly understandable , and which the doctor admonished them to keep to themselves .
said Richards ; `` I want witnesses .
I want you all to hear my confession , so that I may die a man , and not a dog .
I was clean -- artificially -- like the rest ; and like the rest I fell when temptation came .
I signed a lie , and claimed the miserable sack .
Mr. Burgess remembered that I had done him a service , and in gratitude ( and ignorance ) he suppressed my claim and saved me .
You know the thing that was charged against Burgess years ago .
My testimony , and mine alone , could have cleared him , and I was a coward and left him to suffer disgrace -- ''
Burgess 's impassioned protestations fell upon deaf ears ; the dying man passed away without knowing that once more he had done poor Burgess a wrong .
The old wife died that night .
What I am arriving at is this : When whole races and peoples conspire to propagate gigantic mute lies in the interest of tyrannies and shams , why should we care anything about the trifling lies told by individuals ?
Why should we try to make it appear that abstention from lying is a virtue ?
Why should we want to beguile ourselves in that way ?
Why should we without shame help the nation lie , and then be ashamed to do a little lying on our own account ?
Why should n't we be honest and honourable , and lie every time we get a chance ?
That is to say , why should n't we be consistent , and either lie all the time or not at all ?
Why should we help the nation lie the whole day long and then object to telling one little individual private lie in our own interest to go to bed on ?
Just for the refreshment of it , I mean , and to take the rancid taste out of our mouth .
'How did you feel after that performance ? '
Just then he lifted his hat and smiled a basketful of surprised and delighted smiles down at a gentleman who was passing in a hansom .
'Then why did you do that ? '
'Because I saw he thought he knew me and was expecting it of me .
If I had n't done it he would have been hurt .
I did n't want to embarrass him before the whole street . '
'Well , your heart was right , G -- - , and your act was right .
What you did was kindly and courteous and beautiful ; I would have done it myself ; but it was a lie . '
'I know you did n't speak , still you said to him very plainly and enthusiastically in dumb show , `` Hello !
Awful glad to see you , old fellow ; when did you get back ? ''
Concealed in your actions was what you have called `` a misleading reservation of an explanatory fact '' -- the act that you had never seen him before .
You expressed joy in encountering him -- a lie ; and you made that reservation -- another lie .
It was my pair over again .
But do n't be troubled -- we all do it . '
As regards that time that George Washington told the truth , a word must be said , of course .
It is the principal jewel in the crown of America , and it is but natural that we should work it for all it is worth , as Milton says in his 'Lay of the Last Minstrel . '
It was a timely and judicious truth , and I should have told it myself in the circumstances .
But I should have stopped there .
It was a stately truth , a lofty truth -- a Tower ; and I think it was a mistake to go on and distract attention from its sublimity by building another Tower alongside of it fourteen times as high .
I refer to his remark that he 'could not lie . '
I should have fed that to the marines ; or left it to Carlyle ; it is just in his style .
It would have taken a medal at any European fair , and would have got an honourable mention even at Chicago if it had been saved up .
But let it pass ; the Father of his Country was excited .
I have been in those circumstances , and I recollect .
'And then the slop-tubs .
We have two in the parlour , and two in the rest of the house .
It is very seldom that one has two in the parlour .
Have you two in the parlour at home ? '
Her lovely eyes stood wide with amazement , and she said , slowly , and with a sort of awe in her voice :
'I regard them as an absolute necessity .
Are you fond of them ? '
Her eyes fairly danced , and she exclaimed :
Do n't mention it !
'Yes ; for my father is much the richest man in this tribe -- or in any tribe in these regions . '
She was frightened and troubled .
'You see , Lasca , if you had said five or six hooks , to start with , and then gradually -- '
'Oh , it was a crime !
But you forgive me -- say you forgive me .
I said no , this was the first one I had ever seen .
It cost me a pang to tell that generous lie , for I had seen a million of them in my time , this humble jewel of hers being nothing but a battered old New York Central baggage check .
said I , 'you do n't go about with it on your person this way , alone and with no protection , not even a dog ? '
not so loud , ' she said .
'Nobody knows I carry it with me .
They think it is in papa 's treasury .
That is where it generally is . '
' '' Ah , it is you who are the renowned millionaire ! ''
' '' Ah , indeed , sir , I was never worth the value of the barb of one of those precious things , and I have never seen any man before who was so rich in them as to render the counting of his hoard worth while , since the wealthiest man I have ever known , till now , was possessed of but three . ''
There was a long silence , the steam from the many breaths rising about me like a fog .
At last one elder after another nodded his head slowly several times , and muttered , `` There is force in what the child has said . ''
Oh , the heart-lift that was in those words !
-- so transient , but , oh , so precious !
' '' In the night a form passed by me in the gloom , going toward the treasury and presently returned .
I think , now , it was the stranger . ''
' '' It was I. I could not sleep for thinking of the beautiful hooks .
I went there and kissed them and fondled them , to appease my spirit and drown it in a harmless joy , then I put them back .
I may have dropped one , but I stole none . ''
'But I am hungry and thirsty , and in desperate pain . '
'But if it hurts , just the same -- '
'She can not imagine a pain , for imagination is an effect of mind ; without mind , there is no imagination .
A cat has no imagination . '
'Then she had a real pain ? '
'I have already told you there is no such thing as real pain . '
It seemed nebulous : it did not seem to say anything about the difficulty in hand -- how non-existent matter can propagate illusions .
I said , with some hesitancy :
'Does -- does it explain ? '
IDEA -- An image in Mind ; the immediate object of understanding .
There it is -- the whole sublime Arcana of Christian Science in a nutshell .
Do you find a weak place in it anywhere ? '
And with that exhaustive exactness your choice and arrangement of words confirms and establishes what you have claimed for the powers and functions of the Third Degree .
The Second could probably produce only temporary absence of mind , it is reserved to the Third to make it permanent .
A sentence framed under the auspices of the Second could have a kind of meaning -- a sort of deceptive semblance of it -- whereas it is only under the magic of the Third that that defect would disappear .
Also , without doubt , it is the Third Degree that contributes another remarkable specialty to Christian Science : viz.
, ease and flow and lavishness of words , and rhythm and swing and smoothness .
There must be a special reason for this ? '
When did this occur ? '
'Yes , she wrote it all , herself .
The title is `` Science and Health , with Key to the Scriptures '' -- for she explains the Scriptures ; they were not understood before .
Not even by the twelve Disciples .
She begins thus -- I will read it to you . '
But she had forgotten to bring her glasses .
'I am sorry if I have offended , but you see the mention seemed in some way inconsistent , and -- '
'There are no inconsistencies in Christian Science .
The thing is impossible , for the Science is absolute .
It can not be otherwise , since it proceeds directly from the All-in-all and the Everything-in-Which , also Soul , Bones , Truth , one of a series , alone and without equal .
It is Mathematics purified from material dross and made spiritual . '
'It rests upon the immovable basis of an Apodictical Principle . '
'But without your glasses your failing eyesight does not permit you to -- '
'The comparisons are not respectful , since they refer to trivialities -- but let it pass .
I will answer in the Discoverer 's own words : `` God had been graciously fitting me , during many years , for the reception of a final revelation of the absolute Principle of Scientific Mind-healing . ''
'That is our Head , our Chief , our Discoverer of Christian Science -- nothing can be plainer , nothing surer .
I was obliged to do this because I had a stomach-ache and a cold in the head , and I was not willing to trust these things any longer in the hands of a woman whom I did not know , and in whose ability to successfully treat mere disease I had lost all confidence .
My position was justified by the fact that the cold and the ache had been in her charge from the first , along with the fractures , but had experienced not a shade of relief ; and indeed the ache was even growing worse and worse , and more and more bitter , now , probably on account of the protracted abstention from food and drink .
I took up the 'Christian Scientist ' book and read half of it , then took a dipperful of drench and read the other half .
The resulting experiences were full of interest and adventure .
All through the rumblings and grindings and quakings and effervescings accompanying the evolution of the ache into the botts and the cold into the blind staggers I could note the generous struggle for mastery going on between the mash and the drench and the literature ; and often I could tell which was ahead , and could easily distinguish the literature from the others when the others were separate , though not when they were mixed ; for when a bran-mash and an eclectic drench are mixed together they look just like the Apodictical Principle out on a lark , and no one can tell it from that .
The finish was reached at last , the evolutions were complete and a fine success ; but I think that this result could have been achieved with fewer materials .
I believe the mash was necessary to the conversion of the stomach-ache into the boots , but I think one could develop the blind staggers out of the literature by itself ; also , that blind staggers produced in this way would be of a better quality and more lasting than any produced by the artificial processes of a horse-doctor .
The book 's serenities of self-satisfaction do almost seem to smack of a heavenly origin -- they have no blood-kin in the earth .
It is more than human to be so placidly certain about things , and so finely superior , and so airily content with one 's performance .
Without ever presenting anything which may rightfully be called by the strong name of Evidence , and sometimes without even mentioning a reason for a deduction at all , it thunders out the startling words , 'I have Proved ' so and so !
It takes the Pope and all the great guns of his church in battery assembled to authoritatively settle and establish the meaning of a sole and single unclarified passage of Scripture , and this at vast cost of time and study and reflection , but the author of this work is superior to all that : she finds the whole Bible in an unclarified condition , and at small expense of time and no expense of mental effort she clarifies it from lid to lid , reorganises and improves the meanings , then authoritatively settles and establishes them with formulae which you can not tell from 'Let there be light ! '
and 'Here you have it ! '
It is the first time since the dawn-days of Creation that a Voice has gone crashing through space with such placid and complacent confidence and command .
If Mrs. Eddy really wrote or translated the Annex , her original draft was exactly in harmony with the English of her plague-spot or bacilli which were gnawing at the insides of the metropolis and bringing its heart on bended knee , thus exposing to the eye the rest of the skeleton breathing slowly through a barren breast .
And it bore little or no resemblance to the book as we have it now -- now that the salaried polisher has holystoned all of the genuine Eddyties out of it .
Its pleasant suburbs gone , there was little left to admire save the wrecked graveyard with its uncanny exposures .
The Annex contains one sole and solitary humorous remark .
There is a most elaborate and voluminous Index , and it is preceded by this note :
No one doubts -- certainly not I -- that the mind exercises a powerful influence over the body .
From the beginning of time , the sorcerer , the interpreter of dreams , the fortune-teller , the charlatan , the quack , the wild medicine-man , the educated physician , the mesmerist , and the hypnotist have made use of the client 's imagination to help them in their work .
They have all recognised the potency and availability of that force .
Physicians cure many patients with a bread pill ; they know that where the disease is only a fancy , the patient 's confidence in the doctor will make the bread pill effective .
The Christian Scientist was not able to cure my stomach-ache and my cold ; but the horse-doctor did it .
This convinces me that Christian Science claims too much .
In my opinion it ought to let diseases alone and confine itself to surgery .
There it would have everything its own way .
The horse-doctor charged me thirty kreutzers , and I paid him ; in fact I doubled it and gave him a shilling .
Mrs. Fuller brought in an itemised bill for a crate of broken bones mended in two hundred and thirty-four places -- one dollar per fracture .
'Nothing exists but Mind ? '
Under protection of these preliminaries I suppose I may now repeat without offence that the Christian Scientist is insane .
I mean him no discourtesy , and I am not charging -- nor even imagining -- that he is insaner than the rest of the human race .
I think he is more picturesquely insane that some of us .
At the same time , I am quite sure that in one important and splendid particular he is saner than is the vast bulk of the race .
Why is he insane ?
I told you before : it is because his opinions are not ours .
I know of no other reason , and I do not need any other ; it is the only way we have of discovering insanity when it is not violent .
It is merely the picturesqueness of his insanity that makes it more interesting than my kind or yours .
For instance , consider his 'little book ' -- the one described in the previous article ; the 'little book' exposed in the sky eighteen centuries ago by the flaming angel of the Apocalypse and handed down in our day to Mrs. Mary Baker G. Eddy of New Hampshire and translated by her , word for word , into English ( with help of a polisher ) , and now published and distributed in hundreds of editions by her at a clear profit per volume , above cost , of 700 per cent .
-- a profit which distinctly belongs to the angel of the Apocalypse , and let him collect it if he can ; a 'little book ' which the C.S .
very frequently calls by just that name , and always inclosed in quotation-marks to keep its high origin exultantly in mind ; a 'little book ' which 'explains ' and reconstructs and new-paints and decorates the Bible and puts a mansard roof on it and a lightning-rod and all the other modern improvements ; a little book which for the present affects to travel in yoke with the Bible and be friendly to it , and within half a century will hitch it in the rear , and thenceforth travel tandem , itself in the lead , in the coming great march of Christian Scientism through the Protestant dominions of the planet .
'And there appeared a great wonder in heaven -- a woman clothed with the sun and the moon under her feet , ' etc .
Remember its principal great offer : to rid the Race of pain and disease .
Can it do it ?
In large measure , yes .
How much of the pain and disease in the world is created by the imaginations of the sufferers , and then kept alive by those same imaginations ?
Not anything short of that I should think .
Can Christian Science banish that four-fifths ?
Can any other ( organised ) force do it ?
None that I know of .
Would this be a new world when that was accomplished ?
And a pleasanter one -- for us well people , as well as for those fussy and fretting sick ones ?
Would it seem as if there was not as much gloomy weather as there used to be ?
Then he gives us this contrast :
'The average Christian Scientist has put all anxiety and fretting under his feet .
He does have a victory over fear and care that is not achieved by the average orthodox Christian . '
But I am not astonished , for from other sources I know what must have been his method of applying Christian Science .
If I am in the right , he watchfully and diligently diverted his mind from unhealthy channels and compelled it to travel in healthy ones .
Nothing contrivable by human invention could be more formidably effective than that , in banishing imaginary ailments and in closing the entrances against subsequent applicants of their breed .
I think his method was to keep saying , 'I am well !
-- sound and well !
Perfectly sound , perfectly well !
I have no pain ; there 's no such thing as pain !
I have no disease ; there 's no such thing as disease !
Nothing is real but Mind ; all is Mind , All-Good , Good-Good , Life , Soul , Liver , Bones , one of a series , ante and pass the buck ! '
The second witness testifies that the Science banished 'an old organic trouble ' which the doctor and the surgeon had been nursing with drugs and the knife for seven years .
This witness offers testimony for a clergyman seventy years old who had preached forty years in a Christian church , and has not gone over to the new sect .
He was 'almost blind and deaf . '
He was treated by the C.S .
method , and 'when he heard the voice of Truth he saw spiritually . '
It is a little indefinite ; they had better treat him again .
Indefinite testimonies might properly be waste-basketed , since there is evidently no lack of definite ones procurable , but this C.S .
magazine is poorly edited , and so mistakes of this kind must be expected .
There is a page about another good child -- little Gordon .
Little Gordon 'came into the world without the assistance of surgery or anaesthetics . '
He was a 'demonstration . '
A painless one ; therefore his coming evoked 'joy and thankfulness to God and the Discoverer of Christian Science . '
It is a noticeable feature of this literature -- the so frequent linking together of the Two Beings in an equal bond ; also of Their Two Bibles .
When little Gordon was two years old , 'he was playing horse on the bed , where I had left my `` little book . ''
I noticed him stop in his play , take the book carefully in his little hands , kiss it softly , then look about for the highest place of safety his arms could reach , and put it there . '
This pious act filled the mother 'with such a train of thought as I had never experienced before .
I thought of the sweet mother of long ago who kept things in her heart , ' etc .
It is a bold comparison ; however , unconscious profanations are about as common in the mouths of the lay membership of the new Church as are frank and open ones in the mouths of its consecrated chiefs .
There is a plenty of other testimonies in the magazine , but these quoted samples will answer .
They show the kind of trade the Science is driving .
Now we come back to the question ; Does it kill a patient here and there and now and then ?
We must concede it .
Does it compensate for this ?
I am persuaded that it can make a plausible showing in that direction .
For instance : when it lays its hands upon a soldier who has suffered thirty years of helpless torture and makes him whole in body and mind , what is the actual sum of that achievement ?
This , I think : that it has restored to life a subject who had essentially died ten deaths a year for thirty years , and each of them a long and painful one .
But for its interference that man would have essentially died thirty times more , in the three years which have since elapsed .
There are thousand of young people in the land who are now ready to enter upon a life-long death similar to that man 's .
Every time the Science captures one of these and secures to him life-long immunity from imagination-manufactured disease , it may plausibly claim that in his person it has saved 300 lives .
Meantime it will kill a man every now and then ; but no matter , it will still be ahead on the credit side .
The Roman Church has a perfect organisation , and it has an effective centralisation of power -- but not of its cash .
Its multitude of Bishops are rich , but their riches remain in large measure in their own hands .
They collect from 200,000,000 of people , but they keep the bulk of the result at home .
The Boston Pope of by-and-by will draw his dollar-a-head capitation-tax from 300,000,000 of the human race , and the Annex and the rest of his book-shop will fetch in double as much more ; and his Metaphysical Colleges , the annual pilgrimage to Mrs. Eddy 's tomb , from all over the world -- admission , the Christian-Science Dollar ( payable in advance ) -- purchases of consecrated glass beads , candles , memorial spoons , aureoled chromo-portraits and bogus autographs of Mrs. Eddy , cash offerings at her shrine -- no crutches of cured cripples received , and no imitations of miraculously restored broken legs and necks allowed to be hung up except when made out of the Holy Metal and proved by fire-assay ; cash for miracles worked at the tomb : these money-sources , with a thousand to be yet invented and ambushed upon the devotee , will bring the annual increment well up above a billion .
And nobody but the Trust will have the handling of it .
No Bishops appointed unless they agree to hand in 90 per cent .
In that day the Trust will monopolise the manufacture and sale of the Old and New Testaments as well as the Annex , and raise their price to Annex rates , and compel the devotee to buy ( for even to-day a healer has to have the Annex and the Scriptures or he is not allowed to work the game ) , and that will bring several hundred million dollars more .
In those days the Trust will have an income approaching $ 5,000,000 a day , and no expenses to be taken out of it ; no taxes to pay , and no charities to support .
That last detail should not be lightly passed over by the read ; it is well entitled to attention .
I have no reverence for Mrs. Eddy and the rest of the Trust -- if there is a rest -- but I am not lacking in reverence for the sincerities of the lay membership of the new Church .
There is every evidence that the lay members are entirely sincere in their faith , and I think sincerity is always entitled to honour and respect , let the inspiration of the sincerity be what it may .
Zeal and sincerity can carry a new religion further than any other missionary except fire and sword , and I believe that the new religion will conquer the half of Christendom in a hundred years .
I am not intending this as a compliment to the human race , I am merely stating an opinion .
And yet I think that perhaps it is a compliment to the race .
I keep in mind that saying of an orthodox preacher -- quoted further back .
He conceded that this new Christianity frees its possessor 's life from frets , fears , vexations , bitterness , and all sorts of imagination-propagated maladies and pains , and fills his world with sunshine and his heart with gladness .
If Christian Science , with this stupendous equipment -- and final salvation added -- can not win half the Christian globe , I must be badly mistaken in the make-up of the human race .
( 2 ) In the past two years the membership of the Established Church of England have given voluntary contributions amounting to $ 73,000,000 to the Church 's benevolent enterprises .
Churches that give have nothing to hide .
He spent several days here before you came .
He is an old , retired , and very rich silk manufacturer from Lyons , they say , and I guess he is alone in the world , for he always looks sad and dreamy , and does n't talk with anybody .
His name is Theophile Magnan . '
'Now we are properly primed -- I to tell a curious history and you to listen to it .
It has been a secret for many years -- a secret between me and three others ; but I am going to break the seal now .
Are you comfortable ? '
' '' Boys , we 've come to the end .
Do you understand that ?
-- absolutely to the end .
Everybody has struck -- there 's a league formed against us .
I've been all around the village and it 's just as I tell you .
They refuse to credit us for another centime until all the odds and ends are paid up . ''
' '' Why , certainly , we know that , bless your dear heart ; but do n't you be a fool again . ''
' '' No , I have n't . ''
' '' No , bandage his heels ; his brains have been settling for weeks -- I've noticed it . ''
' '' Shut up ! ''
said Millet , with ostensible severity , `` and let the boy have his say .
Now , then -- come out with your project , Carl .
What is it ? ''
' '' I suppose you recognise that ?
Well , he taught me !
I should think I ought to know my trade ! ''
' '' You do n't mean to intimate that you do n't know the cipher of Francois Millet ! ''
Millet would have sold it for a pork chop .
Yes , I got eight hundred francs for that little thing .
I wish I could get it back for eighty thousand .
But that time 's gone by .
I made a very nice picture of that man 's house and I wanted to offer it to him for ten francs , but that would n't answer , seeing I was the pupil of such a master , so I sold it to him for a hundred .
I sent the eight hundred francs straight to Millet from that town and struck out again next day .
'I take credit to myself for our plan of selling the pictures -- it was mine .
I suggested it that last evening when we were laying out our campaign , and all three of us agreed to give it a good fair trial before giving it up for some other .
It succeeded with all of us .
I walked only two days , Claude walked two -- both of afraid to make Millet celebrated too close to home -- but Carl walked only half a day , the bright , conscienceless rascal , and after that he travelled like a duke .
'At the end of six weeks from the start , we three met in Paris and called a halt , and stopped sending back to Millet for additional pictures .
The boom was so high , and everything so ripe , that we saw that it would be a mistake not to strike now , right away , without waiting any longer .
So we wrote Millet to go to bed and begin to waste away pretty fast , for we should like him to die in ten days if he could get ready .
The third mate lifted his head again and made another correction -- with bitterness :
'The `` Portyghee '' et twenty-two of them while he was soldiering there and nobody noticing .
A damned hound . '
The captain and the two passengers kept diaries .
On our voyage to San Francisco we ran into a calm in the middle of the Pacific , and did not move a rod during fourteen days ; this gave me a chance to copy the diaries .
Samuel Ferguson 's is the fullest ; I will draw upon it now .
When the following paragraph was written the doomed ship was about one hundred and twenty days out from port , and all hands were putting in the lazy time about as usual , as no one was forecasting disaster .
Stormy and squally the next morning , with drenching rains .
A heavy and dangerous 'cobbling ' sea .
One marvels how such boats could live in it .
Is it called a feat of desperate daring when one man and a dog cross the Atlantic in a boat the size of a long-boat , and indeed it is ; but this long-boat was overloaded with men and other plunder , and was only three feet deep .
'We naturally thought often of all at home , and were glad to remember that it was Sacrament Sunday , and that prayers would go up from our friends for us , although they know not our peril . '
May 9 the sun gives him a warning : 'Looking with both eyes , the horizon crossed thus + . '
'Henry keeps well , but broods over our troubles more than I wish he did . '
They caught two dolphins ; they tasted well .
'The captain believed the compass out of the way , but the long-invisible north star came out -- a welcome sight -- and endorsed the compass . '
HENRY FERGUSON 'S DIARY TO DATE , GIVEN IN FULL :
From Captain Mitchell 's log for this day : 'Only half a bushel of bread-crumbs left . '
( And a month to wander the seas yet . '
Next day 'nothing particular happened . '
Perhaps some of us would have regarded it differently .
'Passed a spar , but not near enough to see what it was . '
They saw some whales blow ; there were flying-fish skimming the seas , but none came aboard .
Misty weather , with fine rain , very penetrating .
Is n't the situation romantic enough just as it stands ?
Providence added a startling detail : pulling an oar in that boat , for common seaman 's wages , was a banished duke -- Danish .
We hear no more of him ; just that mention , that is all , with the simple remark added that 'he is one of our best men ' -- a high enough compliment for a duke or any other man in those manhood-testing circumstances .
With that little glimpse of him at his oar , and that fine word of praise , he vanishes out of our knowledge for all time .
For all time , unless he should chance upon this note and reveal himself .
He means a penny in thickness as well as in circumference .
Samuel Ferguson 's diary says the ham was shaved 'about as thin as it could be cut . '
-- Captain 's Log .
( Diary entry ) Sunday , June 3 .
Latitude 17 degrees 54 minutes .
Heavy sea all night , and from 4 A.M. very wet , the sea breaking over us in frequent sluices , and soaking everything aft , particularly .
All day the sea has been very high , and it is a wonder that we are not swamped .
Heaven grant that it may go down this evening !
Our suspense and condition are getting terrible .
I managed this morning to crawl , more than step , to the forward end of the boat , and was surprised to find that I was so weak , especially in the legs and knees .
The sun has been out again , and I have dried some things , and hope for a better night .
Men growing dreadfully discontented , and awful grumbling and unpleasant talk is arising .
God save us from all strife of men ; and if we must die now , take us himself , and not embitter our bitter death still more.
-- Henry 's Log .
-- Captain 's Log .
Ate the meat and rind of our ham-bone , and have the bone and the greasy cloth from around the ham left to eat to-morrow .
God send us birds or fish , and let us not perish of hunger , or be brought to the dreadful alternative of feeding on human flesh !
As I feel now , I do not think anything could persuade me ; but you can not tell what you will do when you are reduced by hunger and your mind wandering .
I hope and pray we can make out to reach the islands before we get to this strait ; but we have one or two desperate men aboard , though they are quiet enough now .
IT IS MY FIRM TRUST AND BELIEF THAT WE ARE GOING TO BE SAVED .
God be for ever praised for His infinite mercy !
rapidly neared it and soon were SURE of it ... .
Two noble Kanakas swam out and took the boat ashore .
We were joyfully received by two white men -- Mr. Jones and his steward Charley -- and a crowd of native men , women , and children .
They treated us splendidly -- aided us , and carried us up the bank , and brought us water , poi , bananas , and green coconuts ; but the white men took care of us and prevented those who would have eaten too much from doing so .
Everybody overjoyed to see us , and all sympathy expressed in faces , deeds , and words .
We were then helped up to the house ; and help we needed .
Mr. Jones and Charley are the only white men here .
Gave us first about a teaspoonful of spirits in water , and then to each a cup of warm tea , with a little bread .
Takes EVERY care of us .
Gave us later another cup of tea , and bread the same , and then let us go to rest .
IT IS THE HAPPIEST DAY OF MY LIFE ... .
God in His mercy has heard our prayer ... .
Everybody is so kind .
Words can not tell .
'What did you eat ? '
'Yes ; but do n't mention them -- I ca n't bear it . '
'More , it revolts me . '
The doctor considered awhile , then got out a long menu and ran his eye slowly down it .
'I think , ' said he , 'that what you need to eat is -- but here , choose for yourself . '
I said smiling : 'Well , then , doctor , you will have to permit the departure of the patient .
I am going . '
'I do n't need it .
It is six hours since you lunched .
Will you have supper now -- or later ? '
'I am not hungry , but now is as good a time as any , and I would like to be done with it and have it off my mind .
It is about my usual time , and regularity is commanded by all the authorities .
Yes , I will try to nibble a little now -- I wish a light horsewhipping would answer instead . '
'Smoke and read as much as you please , drink all the water you like .
When you get hungry , ring and give your order , and I will decide whether it shall be filled or not .
Yours is a stubborn , bad case , and I think the first fourteen dishes in the bill are each and all too delicate for its needs .
I ask you as a favour to restrain yourself and not call for them . '
'Oh , this is noble , this is splendid -- but I knew I could do it , the system never fails .
How are the birds ? '
Now came shipwrecks and life in open boats , with the usual paucity of food .
Provisions ran lower and lower .
The appetites improved , then .
When nothing was left but raw ham and the ration of that was down to two ounces a day per person , the appetites were perfect .
At the end of fifteen days the dyspeptics , the invalid , and the most delicate ladies in the party were chewing sailor-boots in ecstasy , and only complaining because the supply of them was limited .
Yet these were the same people who could n't endure the ship 's tedious corned beef and sour kraut and other crudities .
They were rescued by an English vessel .
Within ten days the whole fifteen were in as good condition as they had been when the shipwreck occurred .
'Yes -- I think I do . '
'Nothing of the kind .
It was perfectly natural .
There was no reason why they should suffer damage .
They were undergoing Nature 's Appetite-Cure , the best and wisest in the world . '
'It taught those people a valuable lesson . '
Look at the invalids in our shipwreck .
They lived fifteen days on pinches of raw ham , a suck at sailor-boots , and general starvation .
It weakened them , but it did n't hurt them .
It put them in fine shape to eat heartily of hearty food and build themselves up to a condition of robust health .
But they did not know enough to profit by that ; they lost their opportunity ; they remained invalids ; it served them right .
Do you know the trick that the health-resort doctors play ? '
'Do you see that crowd of women playing football , and boxing , and jumping fences yonder ?
They have been here six or seven weeks .
They were spectral poor weaklings when they came .
They were accustomed to nibbling at dainties and delicacies at set hours four times a day , and they had no appetite for anything .
I questioned them , and then locked them into their rooms -- the frailest ones to starve nine or ten hours , the others twelve or fifteen .
Before long they began to beg ; and indeed they suffered a good deal .
They complained of nausea , headache , and so on .
It was good to see them eat when the time was up .
They could not remember when the devouring of a meal had afforded them such rapture -- that was their word .
Now , then , that ought to have ended their cure , but it did n't .
They were free to go to any meals in the house , and they chose their accustomed four .
Within a day or two I had to interfere .
Their appetites were weakening .
I made them knock out a meal .
That set them up again .
Then they resumed the four .
I begged them to learn to knock out a meal themselves , without waiting for me .
Up to a fortnight ago they could n't ; they really had n't manhood enough ; but they were gaining it , and now I think they are safe .
They drop out a meal every now and then of their own accord .
They are in fine condition now , and they might safely go home , I think , but their confidence is not quite perfect yet , so they are waiting awhile . '
'Other cases are different ? '
'Why did you add a meal ? '
'It was the family 's idea .
They thought I was killing myself . '
'Your present poor condition is due to the extra meal .
You are trying to eat oftener than your stomach demands .
You do n't gain , you lose .
You eat less food now , in a day , on two and a half meals , than you formerly ate on one and a half . '
In the above letter one notes these points :
-- We must grant proposition No .
1 , for several sufficient reasons .
The Jew is not a disturber of the peace of any country .
Even his enemies will concede that .
He is not a loafer , he is not a sot , he is not noisy , he is not a brawler nor a rioter , he is not quarrelsome .
In the statistics of crime his presence is conspicuously rare -- in all countries .
With murder and other crimes of violence he has but little to do : he is a stranger to the hangman .
In the police court 's daily long roll of 'assaults ' and 'drunk and disorderlies ' his name seldom appears .
That the Jewish home is a home in the truest sense is a fact which no one will dispute .
The family is knitted together by the strongest affections ; its members show each other every due respect ; and reverence for the elders is an inviolate law of the house .
The Jew is not a burden on the charities of the state nor of the city ; these could cease from their functions without affecting him .
When he is well enough , he works ; when he is incapacitated , his own people take care of him .
And not in a poor and stingy way , but with a fine and large benevolence .
His race is entitled to be called the most benevolent of all the races of men .
A Jewish beggar is not impossible , perhaps ; such a thing may exist , but there are few men that can say they have seen that spectacle .
The Jew has been staged in many uncomplimentary forms , but , so far as I know , no dramatist has done him the injustice to stage him as a beggar .
Whenever a Jew has real need to beg , his people save him from the necessity of doing it .
The charitable institutions of the Jews are supported by Jewish money , and amply .
The Jews make no noise about it ; it is done quietly ; they do not nag and pester and harass us for contributions ; they give us peace , and set us an example -- an example which he have not found ourselves able to follow ; for by nature we are not free givers , and have to be patiently and persistently hunted down in the interest of the unfortunate .
I suppose that the most picturesque example in history of a trader's trust in his fellow-trader was one where it was not Christian trusting Christian , but Christian trusting Jew .
That Hessian Duke who used to sell his subjects to George III .
to fight George Washington with got rich at it ; and by-and-by , when the wars engendered by the French Revolution made his throne too warm for him , he was obliged to fly the country .
He was in a hurry , and had to leave his earnings behind -- $ 9,000,000 .
He had to risk the money with some one without security .
He did not select a Christian , but a Jew -- a Jew of only modest means , but of high character ; a character so high that it left him lonesome -- Rothschild of Frankfort .
Thirty years later , when Europe had become quiet and safe again , the Duke came back from overseas , and the Jew returned the loan , with interest added .
We have all thoughtfully -- or unthoughtfully -- read the pathetic story of the years of plenty and the years of famine in Egypt , and how Joseph , with that opportunity , made a corner in broken hearts , and the crusts of the poor , and human liberty -- a corner whereby he took a nation 's money all away , to the last penny ; took a nation 's live stock all away , to the last hoof ; took a nation 's land away , to the last acre ; then took the nation itself , buying it for bread , man by man , woman by woman , child by child , till all were slaves ; a corner which took everything , left nothing ; a corner so stupendous that , by comparison with it , the most gigantic corners in subsequent history are but baby things , for it dealt in hundreds of millions of bushels , and its profits were reckonable by hundreds of millions of dollars , and it was a disaster so crushing that its effects have not wholly disappeared from Egypt to-day , more than three thousand years after the event .
-- 'Will the persecution of the Jews ever come to an end ? '
On the score of religion , I think it has already come to an end .
On the score of race prejudice and trade , I have the idea that it will continue .
That is , here and there in spots about the world , where a barbarous ignorance and a sort of mere animal civilisation prevail ; but I do not think that elsewhere the Jew need now stand in any fear of being robbed and raided .
Among the high civilisations he seems to be very comfortably situated indeed , and to have more than his proportionate share of the prosperities going .
It has that look in Vienna .
I suppose the race prejudice can not be removed ; but he can stand that ; it is no particular matter .
By his make and ways he is substantially a foreigner wherever he may be , and even the angels dislike a foreigner .
I am using this world foreigner in the German sense -- stranger .
Nearly all of us have an antipathy to a stranger , even of our own nationality .
We pile grip-sacks in a vacant seat to keep him from getting it ; and a dog goes further , and does as a savage would -- challenges him on the spot .
The German dictionary seems to make no distinction between a stranger and a foreigner ; in its view a stranger is a foreigner -- a sound position , I think .
You will always be by ways and habits and predilections substantially strangers -- foreigners -- wherever you are , and that will probably keep the race prejudice against you alive .
When I published the above article in 'Harper 's Monthly , ' I was ignorant -- like the rest of the Christian world -- of the fact that the Jew had a record as a soldier .
I have since seen the official statistics , and I find that he furnished soldiers and high officers to the Revolution , the War of 1812 , and the Mexican War .
In the Civil War he was represented in the armies and navies of both the North and the South by 10 per cent of his numerical strength -- the same percentage that was furnished by the Christian populations of the two sections .
This large fact means more than it seems to mean ; for it means that the Jew's patriotism was not merely level with the Christian 's , but overpassed it .
When the Christian volunteer arrived in camp he got a welcome and applause , but as a rule the Jew got a snub .
His company was not desired , and he was made to feel it .
That he nevertheless conquered his wounded pride and sacrificed both that and his blood for his flag raises the average and quality of his patriotism above the Christian 's .
His record for capacity , for fidelity , and for gallant soldiership in the field is as good as any one 's .
This is true of the Jewish private soldiers and of the Jewish generals alike .
Major-General O. O. Howard speaks of one of his Jewish staff officers as being 'of the bravest and best ; ' of another -- killed at Chancellorsville -- as being 'a true friend and a brave officer ; ' he highly praises two of his Jewish brigadier-generals ; finally , he uses these strong words : 'Intrinsically there are no more patriotic men to be found in the country than those who claim to be of Hebrew descent , and who served with me in parallel commands or more directly under my instructions . '
In the above article I was neither able to endorse nor repel the common approach that the Jew is willing to feed upon a country but not to fight for it , because I did not know whether it was true or false .
I supposed it to be true , but it is not allowable to endorse wandering maxims upon supposition -- except when one is trying to make out a case .
That slur upon the Jew can not hold up its head in presence of the figures of the War Department .
It has done its work , and done it long and faithfully , and with high approval : it ought to be pensioned off now , and retired from active service .
'Congress has passed a bill to pay $ 379.56 to Moses Pendergrass , of Libertyville , Missouri .
The story of the reason of this liberality is pathetically interesting , and shows the sort of pickle that an honest man may get into who undertakes to do an honest job of work for Uncle Sam .
In 1886 Moses Pendergrass put in a bid for the contract to carry the mail on the route from Knob Lick to Libertyville and Coffman , thirty miles a day , from July 1 , 1887 , for one years .
He got the postmaster at Knob Lick to write the letter for him , and while Moses intended that his bid should be $ 400 , his scribe carelessly made it $ 4 .
Moses got the contract , and did not find out about the mistake until the end of the first quarter , when he got his first pay .
When he found at what rate he was working he was sorely cast down , and opened communication with the Post Office Department .
The department informed his that he must either carry out his contract or throw it up , and that if he threw it up his bondsman would have the pay the Government $ 1,459.85 damages .
So Moses carried out his contract , walked thirty miles every week-day for a year , and carried the mail , and received for his labour $ 4 , or , to be accurate , $ 6.84 ; for , the route being extended after his bid was accepted , his pay was proportionately increased .
Now , after ten years , a bill was finally passed to pay to Moses the difference between what he earned in that unlucky year and what he received . '
Correspondence of the 'London Times ' Chicago , April 1 , 1904 .
'I will , ' and Mr. K. put the coin in his pocket .
By-and-by Szczepanik arrived in Chicago .
Clayton ( now captain ) was serving in that military department at the time .
The two men resumed the Viennese quarrel of 1898 .
On three different occasions they quarrelled , and were separated by witnesses .
Then came an interval of two months , during which time Szczepanik was not seen by any of his friends , and it was at first supposed that he had gone off on a sight seeing tour and would soon be heard from .
But no ; no word came from him .
Then it was supposed that he had returned to Europe .
Still , time drifted on , and he was not heard from .
Nobody was troubled , for he was like most inventors and other kinds of poets , and went and came in a capricious way , and often without notice .
'Now that you have given your word , my last hope is gone , for I know you will never go back from it .
But you have done the best you could for John , and I have no reproaches for you .
You love him , and you love me , and we know that if you could honourable save him , you would do it .
I will go to him now , and be what help I can to him , and get what comfort I may out of the few days that are left to us before the night comes which will have no end for me in life .
You will be with me that day ?
You will not let me bear it alone ? '
'And why ca n't you ? '
'Ambassadors and their families and suites to the right ; unofficial foreigners to the left . '
The sheriff drew down the black cap , and laid his hand upon the lever .
I got my voice .
Three minutes later all were in the parlour again .
The reader will imagine the scene ; I have no need to describe it .
It was a sort of mad orgy of joy .
Correspondence of the 'London Times ' Chicago , April 5 , 1904
The telling soon became general that Clayton ought to be tried again .
Measures were taken accordingly , and the proper representations conveyed to Washington ; for in America under the new paragraph added to the Constitution in 1889 , second trials are not State affairs , but national , and must be tried by the most august body in the land -- the Supreme Court of the United States .
The justices were therefore summoned to sit in Chicago .
The session was held day before yesterday , and was opened with the usual impressive formalities , the nine judges appearing in their black robes , and the new chief justice ( Lemaitre ) presiding .
In opening the case the chief justice said :
'The pardon is not valid , and can not stand , because he was pardoned for killing Szczepanik , a man whom he had not killed .
A man can not be pardoned for a crime which he has not committed ; it would be an absurdity . '
In the end it was found impossible to ignore or get around the French precedent .
There could be but one result : Clayton was delivered over for the execution .
It made an immense excitement ; the State rose as one man and clamored for Clayton 's pardon and retrial .
The governor issued the pardon , but the Supreme Court was in duty bound to annul it , and did so , and poor Clayton was hanged yesterday .
The city is draped in black , and , indeed , the like may be said of the State .
All America is vocal with scorn of 'French justice , ' and of the malignant little soldiers who invented it and inflicted it upon the other Christian lands .
I have just been witnessing a remarkable play , here at the Burg Theatre in Vienna .
I do not know of any play that much resembles it .
In fact , it is such a departure from the common laws of the drama that the name 'play ' does n't seem to fit it quite snugly .
However , whatever else it may be , it is in any case a great and stately metaphysical poem , and deeply fascinating .
'Deeply fascinating ' is the right term : for the audience sat four hours and five minutes without thrice breaking into applause , except at the close of each act ; sat rapt and silent -- fascinated .
This piece is 'The Master of Palmyra . '
It is twenty years old ; yet I doubt if you have ever heard of it .
It is by Wilbrandt , and is his masterpiece and the work which is to make his name permanent in German literature .
It has never been played anywhere except in Berlin and in the great Burg Theatre in Vienna .
Yet whenever it is put on the stage it packs the house , and the free list is suspended .
I know people who have seem it ten times ; they know the most of it by heart ; they do not tire of it ; and they say they shall still be quite willing to go and sit under its spell whenever they get the opportunity .
There is a dash of metempsychosis in it -- and it is the strength of the piece .
The play gave me the sense of the passage of a dimly connected procession of dream-pictures .
The scene of it is Palmyra in Roman times .
It covers a wide stretch of time -- I do n't know how many years -- and in the course of it the chief actress is reincarnated several times : four times she is a more or less young woman , and once she is a lad .
In the first act she is Zoe -- a Christian girl who has wandered across the desert from Damascus to try to Christianise the Zeus-worshipping pagans of Palmyra .
In this character she is wholly spiritual , a religious enthusiast , a devotee who covets martyrdom -- and gets it .
'Oh , if I could but so drift Through this soft twilight into the night of peace , Never to wake again !
In the second act a grand Roman official is not above trying to blast Appelles ' reputation by falsely charging him with misappropriating public moneys .
Appelles , who is too proud to endure even the suspicion of irregularity , strips himself to naked poverty to square the unfair account , and his troubles begin : the blight which is to continue and spread strikes his life ; for the frivolous , pretty creature whom he brought from Rome has no taste for poverty and agrees to elope with a more competent candidate .
Her presence in the house has previously brought down the pride and broken the heart of Appelles ' poor old mother ; and her life is a failure .
Death comes for her , but is willing to trade her for the Roman girl ; so the bargain is struck with Appelles , and the mother is spared for the present .
What has come over us English-speaking people ?
During the first half of this century tragedies and great tragedians were as common with us as farce and comedy ; and it was the same in England .
Now we have not a tragedian , I believe , and London , with her fifty shows and theatres , has but three , I think .
It is an astonishing thing , when you come to consider it .
Vienna remains upon the ancient basis : there has been no change .
She sticks to the former proportions : a number of rollicking comedies , admirably played , every night ; and also every night at the Burg Theatre -- that wonder of the world for grace and beauty and richness and splendour and costliness -- a majestic drama of depth and seriousness , or a standard old tragedy .
It is only within the last dozen years that men have learned to do miracles on the stage in the way of grand and enchanting scenic effects ; and it is at such a time as this that we have reduced our scenery mainly to different breeds of parlours and varying aspects of furniture and rugs .
I think we must have a Burg in New York , and Burg scenery , and a great company like the Burg company .
Then , with a tragedy-tonic once or twice a month , we shall enjoy the comedies all the better .
Comedy keeps the heart sweet ; but we all know that there is wholesome refreshment for both mind and heart in an occasional climb among the solemn pomps of the intellectual snow-summits built by Shakespeare and those others .
Do I seem to be preaching ?
It is out of my life : I only do it because the rest of the clergy seem to be on vacation .
But before the day was done I found that deep down in him somewhere he had a passion , quiet as he was -- a passion for reforming petty public abuses .
He stood for citizenship -- it was his hobby .
His idea was that every citizen of the republic ought to consider himself an unofficial policeman , and keep unsalaried watch and ward over the laws and their execution .
He thought that the only effective way of preserving and protecting public rights was for each citizen to do his share in preventing or punishing such infringements of them as came under his personal notice .
Presently the young fellow who had spoken so pertly a little before reached out and took the telegram , and when he read it he lost colour and began to apologise and explain .
He said he would lose his place if this deadly telegram was sent , and he might never get another .
If he could be let off this time he would give no cause of complaint again .
The compromise was accepted .
He corrected a good many little abuses in the course of the day , and always without friction -- always with a fine and dainty 'diplomacy ' which left no sting behind ; and he got such happiness and such contentment out of these performances that I was obliged to envy him his trade -- and perhaps would have adopted it if I could have managed the necessary deflections from fact as confidently with my mouth as I believe I could with a pen , behind the shelter of print , after a little practice .
'Conductor , you must put these swine out .
I will help you . '
'Now that you mention it , I -- yes , I think perhaps you are right . '
We started to Boston the next afternoon .
The smoking compartment in the parlour-car was full , and he went into the regular smoker .
Across the aisle in the front seat sat a meek , farmer-looking old man with a sickly pallor in his face , and he was holding the door open with his foot to get the air .
Presently a big brakeman came rushing through , and when he got to the door he stopped , gave the farmer an ugly scowl , then wrenched the door to with such energy as to almost snatch the old man 's boot off .
Then on he plunged about his business .
Several passengers laughed , and the old gentleman looked pathetically shamed and grieved .
'You can report him at New Haven if you want to .
What has he been doing ? '
'But not too fine , I think .
I will report this matter at New Haven , and I have an idea that I 'll be thanked for it . '
'You are not really going to bother with that trifle , are you ? '
'I think something ought to be done to him now .
I 'll discharge him . '
'He insulted the old gentleman in presence of all these people .
How would it do to have him come and apologise in their presence ? '
'Apparently it is going to be a matter of who can wield the most influence with the President .
Do you know Mr. Bliss personally ? '
But you do n't stop playing !
I have to require you to stop playing immediately . '
'My dear sir , that is a matter of no consequence to me , and -- '
'All in good time , perhaps .
You say this order must be obeyed .
It is a strong word .
You see yourself how strong it is .
A wise company would not arm you with so drastic an order as this , of course , without appointing a penalty for its infringement .
Otherwise it runs the risk of being a dead letter and a thing to laugh at .
What is the appointed penalty for an infringement of this law ? '
I never heard of any . '
'Do you have him up before a court ? '
The conductor looked puzzled , and was thoughtful a moment ; then he burst out with :
'No , I only sat down here to establish this gentleman 's rights -- he can have his place now .
But before wo n't you tell me what you think the company made this rule for ?
Can you imagine an excuse for it ?
I mean a rational one -- an excuse that is not on its face silly , and the invention of an idiot ? '
'Do you really mean that ? '
'Indeed , I do . '
The conductor looked the Major over wonderingly , and then said :
'That gentleman yonder is eating a broiled chicken . '
But not at present salaries !
No ; if we are to maintain present salaries , let us make no more ambassadors ; and let us unmake those we have already made .
The great position , without the means of respectably maintaining it -- there could be no wisdom in that .
A foreign representative , to be valuable to his country , must be on good terms with the officials of the capital and with the rest of the influential folk .
He must mingle with this society ; he can not sit at home -- it is not business , it butters no commercial parsnips .
He must attend the dinners , banquets , suppers , balls , receptions , and must return these hospitalities .
He should return as good as he gets , too , for the sake of the dignity of his country , and for the sake of Business .
Have we ever had a minister or an ambassador who could do this on his salary ?
No -- not once , from Franklin 's time to ours .
Other countries understand the commercial value of properly lining the pockets of their representatives ; but apparently our Government has not learned it .
England is the most successful trader of the several trading nations ; and she takes good care of the watchmen who keep guard in her commercial towers .
It has been a long time , now , since we needed to blush for our representatives abroad .
It has become custom to send our fittest .
We send men of distinction , cultivation , character -- our ablest , our choicest , our best .
Then we cripple their efficiency through the meagreness of their pay .
Here is a list of salaries for English and American ministers and ambassadors :
Any experienced 'drummer ' will testify that , when you want to do business , there is no economy in ham and lemonade .
The drummer takes his country customer to the theatre , the opera , the circus ; dines him , wines him , entertains him all the day and all the night in luxurious style ; and plays upon his human nature in all seductive ways .
For he knows , by old experience , that this is the best way to get a profitable order out of him .
He has this reward .
All Governments except our own play the same policy , with the same end in view ; and they , also , have their reward .
But ours refuses to do business by business ways , and sticks to ham and lemonade .
This is the most expensive diet known to the diplomatic service of the world .
The battle was awfully hot ; the allies were steadily giving way all over the field .
Our regiment occupied a position that was vital ; a blunder now must be destruction .
At this critical moment , what does this immortal fool do but detach the regiment from its place and order a charge over a neighbouring hill where there was n't a suggestion of an enemy !
'There you go ! '
I said to myself ; 'this is the end at last . '
And away we did go , and were over the shoulder of the hill before the insane movement could be discovered and stopped .
And what did we find ?
An entire and unsuspected Russian army in reserve !
We were eaten up ?
That is necessarily what would have happened in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred .
But no ; those Russians argued that no single regiment would come browsing around there at such a time .
It must be the entire English army , and that the sly Russian game was detected and blocked ; so they turned tail , and away they went , pell-mell , over the hill and down into the field , in wild confusion , and we after them ; they themselves broke the solid Russia centre in the field , and tore through , and in no time there was the most tremendous rout you ever saw , and the defeat of the allies was turned into a sweeping and splendid victory !
Marshal Canrobert looked on , dizzy with astonishment , admiration , and delight ; and sent right off for Scoresby , and hugged him , and decorated him on the field in presence of all the armies !
'Own up , now ; it stumped you .
Well , I do n't wonder .
You had n't any experience in ravelling such things out , and naturally it was too many for you .
Would you like to have me explain that thing to you , and show you how to get at the meat of these matters ? '
'What does Isaac do , now ?
He steps up and says to some friends of his , there , `` Pour four barrels of water on the altar ! ''
Everybody was astonished ; for the other side had prayed at it dry , you know , and got whitewashed .
They poured it on .
Says he , `` Heave on four more barrels . ''
Then he says , `` Heave on four more . ''
Twelve barrels , you see , altogether .
The water ran all over the altar , and all down the sides , and filled up a trench around it that would hold a couple of hogsheads -- '' measures , '' it says : I reckon it means about a hogshead .
Some of the people were going to put on their things and go , for they allowed he was crazy .
They did n't know Isaac .
Isaac knelt down and began to pray : he strung along , and strung along , about the heathen in distant lands , and about the sister churches , and about the state and the country at large , and about those that 's in authority in the government , and all the usual programme , you know , till everybody had got tired and gone to thinking about something else , and then , all of a sudden , when nobody was noticing , he outs with a match and rakes it on the under side of his leg , and pff !
up the whole thing blazes like a house afire !
Twelve barrels of water ?
Petroleum , sir , PETROLEUM !
that 's what it was ! '
'Yes , sir ; the country was full of it .
Isaac knew all about that .
You read the Bible .
Do n't you worry about the tough places .
They ai n't tough when you come to think them out and throw light on them .
There ai n't a thing in the Bible but what is true ; all you want is to go prayerfully to work and cipher out how 't was done . '
THE GOVERNMENT IN THE FRYING-PAN .
If the censor did his work before the morning edition was printed , he would be less of an inconvenience than he is ; but , of course , the papers can not wait many minutes after five o'clock to get his verdict ; they might as well go out of business as do that ; so they print and take their chances .
Then , if they get caught by a suppression , they must strike out the condemned matter and print the edition over again .
That delays the issue several hours , and is expensive besides .
The Government gets the suppressed edition for nothing .
If it bought it , that would be joyful , and would give great satisfaction .
Also , the edition would be larger .
Some of the papers do not replace the condemned paragraphs with other matter ; they merely snatch they out and leave blanks behind -- mourning blanks , marked 'Confiscated ' .
However , Badeni secured his majority .
The German element in Parliament was apparently become helpless .
The Czech deputies were exultant .
And now took place that memorable sitting of the House which broke two records .
It lasted the best part of two days and a night , surpassing by half an hour the longest sitting known to the world 's previous parliamentary history , and breaking the long-speech record with Dr. Lecher 's twelve-hour effort , the longest flow of unbroken talk that ever came out of one mouth since the world began .
In his high place sits the President , Abrahamowicz , object of the Opposition 's limitless hatred .
He is sunk back in the depths of his arm-chair , and has his chin down .
He brings the ends of his spread fingers together , in front of his breast , and reflectively taps them together , with the air of one who would like to begin business , but must wait , and be as patient as he can .
It makes you think of Richelieu .
Now and then he swings his head up to the left or to the right and answers something which some one has bent down to say to him .
Then he taps his fingers again .
He looks tired , and maybe a trifle harassed .
He is a gray-haired , long , slender man , with a colourless long face , which , in repose , suggests a death-mask ; but when not in repose is tossed and rippled by a turbulent smile which washes this way and that , and is not easy to keep up with -- a pious smile , a holy smile , a saintly smile , a deprecating smile , a beseeching and supplicating smile ; and when it is at work the large mouth opens , and the flexible lips crumple , and unfold , and crumple again , and move around in a genial and persuasive and angelic way , and expose large glimpses of the teeth ; and that interrupts the sacredness of the smile and gives it momentarily a mixed worldly and political and satanic cast .
It is a most interesting face to watch .
And then the long hands and the body -- they furnish great and frequent help to the face in the business of adding to the force of the statesman 's words .
Wolf ( banging on his desk with his desk-board ) .
'I demand the floor for my motion !
I wo n't stand this trampling of the Rules under foot -- no , not if I die for it !
I will never yield .
You have got to stop me by force .
Have I the floor ? '
P. 'Representative Wolf , what kind of behaviour is this ?
I call you to order again .
You should have some regard for your dignity . '
P. 'Once more I call Representative Wolf to order !
Do not forget that you are a Representative , sir ! '
P. 'I have no recourse against Representative Wolf .
In the presence of behaviour like this it is to be regretted that such is the case . '
( A shout from the Right , 'Throw him out ! '
Dr. Lecher continues his speech .
Wolf accompanies him with his board-clatter .
'I require an adjournment , because I find myself personally threatened .
( Laughter from the Right . )
Not that I fear for myself ; I am only anxious about what will happen to the man who touches me . '
Nothing came of the efforts of the angel of peace , and he presently melted out of the scene and disappeared .
Wolf went on with his noise and with his demands that he be granted the floor , resting his board at intervals to discharge criticisms and epithets at the Chair .
Once he reminded the Chairman of his violated promise to grant him ( Wolf ) the floor , and said , 'Whence I came , we call promise-breakers rascals ! '
And he advised the Chairman to take his conscience to bed with him and use it as a pillow .
Another time he said that the Chair was making itself ridiculous before all Europe .
In fact , some of Wolf 's language was almost unparliamentary .
By-and-by he struck the idea of beating out a tune with his board .
Later he decided to stop asking for the floor , and to confer it upon himself .
And so he and Dr. Lecher now spoke at the same time , and mingled their speeches with the other noises , and nobody heard either of them .
Wolf rested himself now and then from speech-making by reading , in his clarion voice , from a pamphlet .
'What we require , and shall fight for with all lawful weapons , is a formal , comprehensive , and definitive solution and settlement of these vexed matters .
We desire the restoration of the earlier condition of things ; the cancellation of all this incapable Government 's pernicious trades with Hungary ; and then -- release from the sorry burden of the Badeni ministry !
'I voice the hope -- I know not if it will be fulfilled -- I voice the deep and sincere and patriotic hope that the committee into whose hands this bill will eventually be committed will take its stand upon high ground , and will return the Ausgleich-Provisorium to this House in a form which shall make it the protector and promoter alike of the great interests involved and of the honour of our fatherland . '
After a pause , turning towards the Government benches : 'But in any case , gentlemen of the Majority , make sure of this : henceforth , as before , you find us at our post .
The Germans of Austria will neither surrender nor die ! '
The House , by vote , censured the two improper deputies .
Unto Wolf , who is continuously reading , in a powerful voice , from a newspaper , arrive these personal remarks from the Majority : 'Oh , shut your mouth ! '
'Put him out ! '
'Out with him ! '
Wolf stops reading a moment to shout at Dr. Lueger , who has the floor but can not get a hearing , 'Please , Betrayer of the People , begin ! '
'And these shameless creatures are the leaders of the German People 's Party ! '
Schonerer ( vast and muscular , and endowed with the most powerful voice in the Reichsrath ; comes ploughing down through the standing crowds , red , and choking with anger ; halts before Deputy Wohlmeyer , grabs a rule and smashes it with a blow upon a desk , threatens Wohlmeyer 's face with his fist , and bellows out some personalities , and a promise ) .
'Only you wait -- we 'll teach you ! '
( A whirlwind of offensive retorts assails him from the band of meek and humble Christian Socialists compacted around their leader , that distinguished religious expert , Dr. Lueger , Burgermeister of Vienna .
Our breath comes in excited gasps now , and we are full of hope .
We imagine that we are back fifty years ago in the Arkansas Legislature , and we think we know what is going to happen , and are glad we came , and glad we are up in the gallery , out of the way , where we can see the whole thing and yet not have to supply any of the material for the inquest .
However , as it turns out , our confidence is abused , our hopes are misplaced . )
Prochazka ( in a fury ) .
'No -- not ear boxing , but genuine blows ! '
Strohbach ( to Wolf ) .
Here we have been fighting the Jews for ten years , and now you are helping them to power again .
How much do you get for it ? '
Gregorig ( the shirt-merchant ) .
'This Wolf-Theatre is costing 6,000 florins ! '
At half-past two in the morning the House adjourned .
The victory was with the Opposition .
No ; not quite that .
The effective part of it was snatched away from them by an unlawful exercise of Presidential force -- another contribution toward driving the mistreated Minority out of their minds .
However , there were doubters -- men who were troubled , and believed that a grave mistake had been made .
It might be that the Opposition was crushed , and profitably for the country , too ; but the manner of it -- the manner of it !
That was the serious part .
It could have far-reaching results ; results whose gravity might transcend all guessing .
It might be the initial step toward a return to government by force , a restoration of the irresponsible methods of obsolete times .
That distant door opens again .
And now we see what history will be talking of five centuries hence : a uniformed and helmeted battalion of bronzed and stalwart men marching in double file down the floor of the House -- a free parliament profaned by an invasion of brute force !
It was an odious spectacle -- odious and awful .
For one moment it was an unbelievable thing -- a thing beyond all credibility ; it must be a delusion , a dream , a nightmare .
But no , it was real -- pitifully real , shamefully real , hideously real .
These sixty policemen had been soldiers , and they went at their work with the cold unsentimentality of their trade .
They ascended the steps of the tribune , laid their hands upon the inviolable persons of the representatives of a nation , and dragged and tugged and hauled them down the steps and out at the door ; then ranged themselves in stately military array in front of the ministerial estrade , and so stood .
Some of the results of this wild freak followed instantly .
The Badeni government came down with a crash ; there was a popular outbreak or two in Vienna ; there were three or four days of furious rioting in Prague , followed by the establishing there of martial law ; the Jews and Germans were harried and plundered , and their houses destroyed ; in other Bohemian towns there was rioting -- in some cases the Germans being the rioters , in others the Czechs -- and in all cases the Jew had to roast , no matter which side he was on .
We are well along in December now ; ( 3 ) the next new Minister-President has not been able to patch up a peace among the warring factions of the parliament , therefore there is no use in calling it together again for the present ; public opinion believes that parliamentary government and the Constitution are actually threatened with extinction , and that the permanency of the monarchy itself is a not absolutely certain thing !
( 1 ) That is , revolution .
( 2 ) 'In that gracious bygone time when a mild and good-tempered spirit was the atmosphere of our House , when the manner of our speakers was studiously formal and academic , and the storms and explosions of to-day were wholly unknown , ' etc.
-- Translation of the opening remark of a leading article in this morning 's 'Neue Freie Presse , ' December 11 .
Five or six years ago a lady from Finland asked me to tell her a story in our Negro dialect , so that she could get an idea of what that variety of speech was like .
I told her one of Hopkinson Smith 's Negro stories , and gave her a copy of 'Harper 's Monthly ' containing it .
She translated it for a Swedish newspaper , but by an oversight named me as the author of it instead of Smith .
I was very sorry for that , because I got a good lashing in the Swedish press , which would have fallen to his share but for that mistake ; for it was shown that Boccaccio had told that very story , in his curt and meagre fashion , five hundred years before Smith took hold of it and made a good and tellable thing out of it .
'Do you know how old your `` Jumping Frog '' story is ? '
But the professor was not chaffing : he was in earnest , and could not abate a century .
He offered to get the book and send it to me and the Cambridge text-book containing the English translation also .
I thought I would like the translation best , because Greek makes me tired .
January 30th he sent me the English version , and I will presently insert it in this article .
It is my 'Jumping Frog ' tale in every essential .
It is not strung out as I have strung it out , but it is all there .
An Athenian once fell in with a Boeotian who was sitting by the road-side looking at a frog .
Seeing the other approach , the Boeotian said his was a remarkable frog , and asked if he would agree to start a contest of frogs , on condition that he whose frog jumped farthest should receive a large sum of money .
The Athenian replied that he would if the other would fetch him a frog , for the lake was near .
To this he agreed , and when he was gone the Athenian took the frog , and , opening its mouth , poured some stones into its stomach , so that it did not indeed seem larger than before , but could not jump .
The Boeotian soon returned with the other frog , and the contest began .
The second frog first was pinched , and jumped moderately ; then they pinched the Boeotian frog .
And he gathered himself for a leap , and used the utmost effort , but he could not move his body the least .
So the Athenian departed with the money .
When he was gone the Boeotian , wondering what was the matter with the frog , lifted him up and examined him .
And being turned upside down , he opened his mouth and vomited out the stones .
Well , Smiley kep ' the beast in a little lattice box , and he used to fetch him down-town sometimes and lay for a bet .
One day a feller -- a stranger in the camp , he was -- come acrost him with his box , and says :
'Well , ' Smiley says , easy and careless , 'he 's good enough for one thing , I should judge -- he can outjump any frog in Calaveras County . '
'Now , if you 're ready , set him alongside of Dan'l , with his fore-paws just even with Dan'l 's , and I 'll give the word . '
Then he says , 'One -- two -- three -- git ! '
and him and the feller touched up the frogs from behind , and the new frog hopped off lively ; but Dan'l give a heave , and hysted up his shoulders -- so -- like a Frenchman , but it war n't no use -- he could n't budge ; he was planted as solid as a church , and he could n't no more stir than if he was anchored out .
Smiley was a good deal surprised , and he was disgusted , too , but he did n't have no idea what the matter was , of course .
Yes , the resemblances are curiously exact .
I used to tell the story of the 'Jumping Frog ' in San Francisco , and presently Artemus Ward came along and wanted it to help fill out a little book which he was about to publish ; so I wrote it out and sent it to his publisher , Carleton ; but Carleton thought the book had enough matter in it , so he gave the story to Henry Clapp as a present , and Clapp put it in his 'Saturday Press , ' and it killed that paper with a suddenness that was beyond praise .
At least the paper died with that issue , and none but envious people have ever tried to rob me of the honour and credit of killing it .
The 'Jumping Frog ' was the first piece of writing of mine that spread itself through the newspapers and brought me into public notice .
Consequently , the 'Saturday Press ' was a cocoon and I the worm in it ; also , I was the gay-coloured literary moth which its death set free .
This simile has been used before .
One day an individual stranger at the camp him arrested with his box and him said :
The individual it took , it regarded with care , it turned from one side and from the other , then he said :
The individual retook the box , it examined of new longly , and it rendered to Smiley in saying with an air deliberate :
Him and the individual touched their frogs by behind , and the frog new put to jump smartly , but Daniel himself lifted ponderously , exhalted the shoulders thus , like a Frenchman -- to what good ?
He could not budge , he is planted solid like a church , he not advance no more than if one him had put at the anchor .
He him reversed and the unhappy belched two handfuls of shot ( et le malheureux , etc. )
When Smiley recognised how it was , he was like mad .
He deposited his frog by the earth and ran after that individual , but he not him caught never .
And twice I have answered -- 'No . '
'Do you mean to intimate that the tale is modern , and not borrowed from some ancient Greek book . '
'Then he knew where to find the ancient Greek version if one existed .
Why did n't he look ?
Why did he jump to conclusions ? '
However , I will get back to where I was -- our first afternoon in the sugar-camp .
The sugar-troughs came very handy as horse-troughs , and we had plenty of corn to fill them with .
I ordered Sergeant Bowers to feed my mule ; but he said that if I reckoned he went to war to be dry-nurse to a mule , it would n't take me very long to find out my mistake .
I believed that this was insubordination , but I was full of uncertainties about everything military , and so I let the thing pass , and went and ordered Smith , the blacksmith 's apprentice , to feed the mule ; but he merely gave me a large , cold , sarcastic grin , such as an ostensibly seven-year-old horse gives you when you lift his lip and find he is fourteen , and turned his back on me .
I then went to the captain , and asked if it was not right and proper and military for me to have an orderly .
He said it was , but as there was only one orderly in the corps , it was but right that he himself should have Bowers on his staff .
Bowers said he would n't serve on anybody 's staff ; and if anybody thought he could make him , let him try it .
So , of course , the thing had to be dropped ; there was no other way .
We had some horsemanship drill every forenoon ; then , afternoons , we rode off here and there in squads a few miles , and visited the farmers' girls , and had a youthful good time , and got an honest good dinner or supper , and then home again to camp , happy and content .
In another camp the chief was a fierce and profane old blacksmith of sixty , and he had furnished his twenty recruits with gigantic home-made bowie-knives , to be swung with the two hands , like the machetes of the Isthmus .
It was a grisly spectacle to see that earnest band practising their murderous cuts and slashes under the eye of that remorseless old fanatic .
IN THREE ACTS ( 1 )
MRS. BLUMENTHAL , the Wirthin .
Scene of the play , the parlour of a small private dwelling in a village .
( MARGARET discovered crocheting -- has a pamphlet . )
M. ( Still not seeing her sister . )
Wie geht es Ihrem Herrn Schwiegervater ?
Es freut mich sehr dass Ihre Frau Mutter wieder wohl ist .
Then mouths in silence . )
As sure as guns !
M. ( Spasmodically embracing and kissing her . )
do n't use such language .
O darling , say it again !
M. ( With distress . )
But , Annie dear !
-- we ca n't talk German -- and neither can they !
( After a reflective pause , resolutely . )
Margaret -- we 've got to .
A. I 'll skin this Meisterschaft to the last sentence in it !
M. Annie , when are they coming to see us ?
They 've given themselves till day after to-morrow , half-past 7 P.M. , and then they 'll arrive here loaded .
M. Oh , how lovely , how gorgeous , how beautiful !
Some think this world is made of mud ; I think it 's made of rainbows .
Wenn irgend moglich , so mochte ich noch heute Vormittag dort ankommen , da es mir sehr daran gelegen ist -- Annie , I can learn it just like nothing !
and we 'll lock ourselves into our rooms , and at the end of two days , whosoever may ask us a Meisterschaft question shall get a Meisterschaft answer -- and hot from the bat !
Ach , die armen Madchen , sie hassen die deutsche Sprache , drum ist es ganz und gar unmoglich dass sie sie je lernen konnen .
Es bricht mir ja mein Herz ihre Kummer uber die Studien anzusehen ... .
Warum haben sie den Entchluss gefasst in ihren Zimmern ein Paar Tagezu bleiben ?
... Ja -- gewiss -- das versteht sich ; sie sind entmuthigt -- arme Kinder !
( A knock at the door . )
N-not very well ; I was afraid you would ask me that .
You see , they hate it , they do n't take the least interest in it , and there isn't anything to incite them to an interest , you see .
And so they ca n't talk at all .
But it has n't , so far .
I 've thrown nice company in their way -- I 've done my very best , in every way I could think of -- but it 's no use ; they wo n't go out , and they wo n't receive anybody .
And a body can't blame them ; they 'd be tongue-tied -- could n't do anything with a German conversation .
Now , when I started to learn German -- such poor German as I know -- the case was very different : my intended was a German .
I was to live among Germans the rest of my life ; and so I had to learn .
Why , bless my heart !
I nearly lost the man the first time he asked me -- I thought he was talking about the measles .
They were very prevalent at the time .
Told him I did n't want any in mine .
But I found out the mistake , and I was fixed for him next time ... .
Oh yes , Mr. Stephenson , a sweetheart 's a prime incentive .
she does n't suspect that my plan is a double scheme -- includes a speaking knowledge of German , which I am bound they shall have , and the keeping them away from those two young fellows -- though if I had known that those boys were going off for a year 's foreign travel , I -- however , the girls would never learn that language at home ; they 're here , and I wo n't relent -- they 've got to stick the three months out .
So they are making poor progress ?
Now tell me -- will they learn it -- after a sort of fashion , I mean -- in three months ?
Well , now , I 'll tell you the only chance I see .
Do what I will , they wo n't answer my German with anything but English ; if that goes on , they 'll stand stock-still .
Now I 'm willing to do this : I 'll straighten everything up , get matters in smooth running order , and day after to-morrow I 'll go to bed sick , and stay sick three weeks .
Das weiss ich nicht .
Sie ist schon vor zwei Tagen ins Bett gegangen --
Well -- let me see .
There 's shopping -- and -- all that about the trains , you know -- and going to church -- and -- buying tickets to London , and Berlin , and all around -- and all that subjunctive stuff about the battle in Afghanistan , and where the American was said to be born , and so on -- and -- and ah -- oh , there 's so many things -- I do n't think a body can choose beforehand , because you know the circumstances and the atmosphere always have so much to do in directing a conversation , especially a German conversation , which is only a kind of an insurrection , anyway .
I believe it 's best to just depend on Prov -- ( Glancing at watch , and gasping . )
-- half-past -- seven !
W. Do you think that 'll see us through ?
W. Yes , that 's so ; but it 's so blamed general !
Wo n't it sound foolish ?
W. Look here -- when we 've said all that 's in the book on a topic , and want to change the subject , how can we say so ?
-- how would a German say it ?
A. to W. ( With solemnity . )
Guten Morgen , mein Herr , es freut mich sehr , Sie zu sehen .
A. Nein , mein Herr , ich habe Ihren Herrn Vater in dem Laden Ihres Herrn Bruders nicht gesehen .
M. Ich bin Ihnen sehr verbunden -- meine Schwester auch .
( Still to Margaret . )
Befindet sich Ihre Frau Gemahlin wohl ?
( Raising hands and eyes . )
Frau Gemahlin -- heiliger Gott !
( Is like to betray herself with her smothered laughter , and glides out . )
How sweet is this communion of soul with soul !
Ist meine Reisetasche Ihnen im Wege ?
Und wo ist seine Reisetasche ?
A. Erlauben Sie mir Sie von meiner Reisetasche zu bereien .
A. Haben Sie den Namen jener Station gehort ?
( GRETCHEN looks on stupefied . )
W. ( To GEO . )
Sie wollen schon wieder gehen ?
Sie sind ja eben erst gekommen .
( To W. ) Meine Frau hat keine Ahnung wo ich bin : ich muss wirklich jetzt fort .
( Great hand-clapping from the girls . )
W. ( Takes out some money -- beckons Gretchen to him .
George adds money to the pile . )
Hubsches Madchen ( giving her some of the coins ) , hast Du etwas gesehen ?
W. ( More money . )
Hast Du etwas gehort ?
And she justified , did she ?
S. Go on -- go on -- this is delicious news --
Well , I should think so !
They just dote on that hussy -- can't seem to get enough of her .
Gretchen tells me so herself .
And the care she takes of them !
She tells me that every time there 's a moonlight night she coaxes them out for a walk ; and if a body can believe her , she actually bullies them off to church three times every Sunday !
S. Why , the little dev -- missionary !
Really , she 's a genius !
M. Oh , das Liedchen dass Du mir gewidmet hast -- es ist so schon , so wunderschon .
Wie hatte ich je geahnt dass Du ein Poet warest !
Es ist nur eine Kleinigkeit .
Du wirst mir die alte Geschichte , die immer neu bleibt , noch wieder erzahlen .
W. Zum Beispiel , dass ich Dich liebe !
W. Bist Du denn noch nicht satt ?
S. ( Stepping forward . )
( The girls throw themselves upon his neck with enthusiasm . )
BOTH YOUTHS AT ONCE .
Mir ist als ob ich die HandeAufs Haupt Dir legen sollt ' -- ( They turn and look reproachfully at each other -- the girls contemplate them with injured surprise . )
In this subduing Draught of tender green And kindly Absinth , with its wimpling Sheen Of dusky half-lights , let me drown The haunting Pathos of the Might-Have-Been .
Our Gums forsake the Teeth and tender grow , And fat , like over-riped Figs -- we know The Sign -- the Riggs ' Disease is ours , and we Must list this Sorrow , add another Woe ;
Our Lungs begin to fail and soon we Cough , And chilly Streaks play up our Backs , and off Our fever 'd Foreheads drips an icy Sweat -- We scoffered before , but now we may not scoff .
SANNA , SWEDEN , September 15th .
-- If you do n't know what Riggs 's Disease of the Teeth is , the dentist will tell you .
I 've had it -- and it is more than interesting .
Not so the priests !
Oh , not so The stricken ones that served it day and night , Adoring it , abiding in the healing of its peace : They stand , yet , where erst they stood Speechless in that dim morning long ago ; And still they gaze , as then they gazed , And murmur , 'It will come again ; It knows our pain -- it knows -- it knows -- Ah surely it will come again .
For half an hour there was a commotion downstairs , and shoutings , and rushing footsteps , and then there was quiet again .
Quiet for some minutes , and that was grateful to my spirit , for then my fears began to go down ; and fears are worse than pains -- oh , much worse .
Then came a sound that froze me .
They were calling me -- calling me by name -- hunting for me !
`` The mischief he do n't !
Not even when he goes to bed ? ''
`` What 's the man 's name ? ''
`` Where 'd he come aboard ? ''
`` Anything peculiar about him ?
-- the way he acts or talks ? ''
`` No -- nothing , except he seems so scary , and keeps his doors locked night and day both , and when you knock he wo n't let you in till he opens the door a crack and sees who it is . ''
`` But I aint Jubiter Dunlap .
I 'd just as soon tell you who I am , though , if you 'll swear to keep mum , for I ai n't no Phillips , either . ''
`` The farmers -- and the family . ''
Then he sunk down in a chair all limp and sick like , and wiped the sweat off of his face .
`` Oh , keep still , Huck Finn , ca n't you , you 're only just hendering all you can .
What WAS it he bought , Jake ? ''
`` Well , when I catched that glimpse of that boot heel , the idea that went smashing through my head was , I know where he 's hid the di'monds !
You look at this boot heel , now .
See , it 's bottomed with a steel plate , and the plate is fastened on with little screws .
Now there was n't a screw about that feller anywhere but in his boot heels ; so , if he needed a screwdriver , I reckoned I knowed why . ''
`` We was ready for business now .
I said we better pull our boots off , and his'n too , and not make any noise , then we could pull him and haul him around and ransack him without any trouble .
So we done it .
I set my boots and Bud 's side by side , where they 'd be handy .
Then we stripped him and searched his seams and his pockets and his socks and the inside of his boots , and everything , and searched his bundle .
Never found any di'monds .
We found the screwdriver , and Hal says , 'What do you reckon he wanted with that ? '
I said I did n't know ; but when he was n't looking I hooked it .
At last Hal he looked beat and discouraged , and said we 'd got to give it up .
That was what I was waiting for .
`` He said that 's the ticket , and with him looking straight at me I slid myself into Bud 's boots instead of my own , and he never noticed .
They was just a shade large for me , but that was considerable better than being too small .
I got my bag as I went a-groping through the hall , and in about a minute I was out the back way and stretching up the river road at a five-mile gait .
`` Keep still -- it 's a-coming this way . ''
We could n't stir for a minute or two ; then it was gone .
We talked about it in low voices .
`` No -- seems to me I did , then again it seems to me I did n't . ''
`` I did n't either ; but it had its bag along , I noticed that . ''
I would n't be as ignorant as that if I was you , Huck Finn .
Whatever a ghost has , turns to ghost-stuff .
They 've got to have their things , like anybody else .
You see , yourself , that its clothes was turned to ghost-stuff .
Well , then , what 's to hender its bag from turning , too ?
Of course it done it . ''
I could n't find no fault with it .
Bill Withers and his brother Jack come along by , talking , and Jack says :
`` Oh , I do n't know .
I seen him spading up some ground along about an hour ago , just before sundown -- him and the parson .
Said he guessed he would n't go to-night , but we could have his dog if we wanted him . ''
`` Oh , you bet ! ''
`` So do I .
Now do you know what that means ? ''
`` Means that them thieves DID N'T GET THE DI'MONDS . ''
`` Buy the boots for two dollars ! ''
Well , it 'most took my breath .
`` Well , me and Tom allowed we would come along afoot and take a smell of the woods , and we run across Lem Beebe and Jim Lane , and they asked us to go with them blackberrying to-night , and said they could borrow Jubiter Dunlap 's dog , because he had told them just that minute -- ''
`` Now , Tom Sawyer , what kind of a lie are you fixing YOUR mouth to contribit to this mess of rubbage ?
Speak out -- and I warn you before you begin , that I do n't believe a word of it .
You and Huck 's been up to something you no business to -- I know it perfectly well ; I know you , BOTH of you .
Now you explain that dog , and them blackberries , and the lantern , and the rest of that rot -- and mind you talk as straight as a string -- do you hear ? ''
`` Why , only the mistake of saying blackberries when of course he meant strawberries . ''
`` And yet , all the same , Aunt Sally -- ''
And when the nigger was gone he got up and walked the floor , backwards and forwards , mumbling and muttering to himself and plowing his hands through his hair .
It was real pitiful to see him .
Aunt Sally she whispered to us and told us not to take notice of him , it embarrassed him .
She said he was always thinking and thinking , since these troubles come on , and she allowed he did n't more'n about half know what he was about when the thinking spells was on him ; and she said he walked in his sleep considerable more now than he used to , and sometimes wandered around over the house and even outdoors in his sleep , and if we catched him at it we must let him alone and not disturb him .
She said she reckoned it did n't do him no harm , and may be it done him good .
She said Benny was the only one that was much help to him these days .
Said Benny appeared to know just when to try to soothe him and when to leave him alone .
So he kept on tramping up and down the floor and muttering , till by and by he begun to look pretty tired ; then Benny she went and snuggled up to his side and put one hand in his and one arm around his waist and walked with him ; and he smiled down on her , and reached down and kissed her ; and so , little by little the trouble went out of his face and she persuaded him off to his room .
They had very petting ways together , and it was uncommon pretty to see .
`` Tom , you do n't mean it . ''
At last I give in , and went and took a look myself ; and it was just as Tom said -- there was n't a sign of a corpse .
It was a most lovely day now , and bright and sunshiny ; and the further and further we went over the hills towards the prairie the lovelier and lovelier the trees and flowers got to be and the more it seemed strange and somehow wrong that there had to be trouble in such a world as this .
And then all of a sudden I catched my breath and grabbed Tom 's arm , and all my livers and lungs and things fell down into my legs .
It was setting on a log right in the edge of a little prairie , thinking .
I tried to get Tom to come away , but he would n't , and I das n't budge by myself .
He said we might n't ever get another chance to see one , and he was going to look his fill at this one if he died for it .
So I looked too , though it give me the fan-tods to do it .
Tom he HAD to talk , but he talked low .
`` Well , what of it ? ''
`` I 'm a-listening . ''
`` Mighty good reason .
Had n't ever been any corpse there . ''
`` Me and Huck 's mighty glad to see you again , and you need n't be afeared we 'll tell .
And if you think it 'll be safer for you if we do n't let on to know you when we run across you , say the word and you 'll see you can depend on us , and would ruther cut our hands off than get you into the least little bit of danger . ''
I was so disappointed not to hear Jake tell about the row in the sycamores , and how near he come to getting killed , that I could n't seem to get over it , and Tom he felt the same , but said if we was in Jake's fix we would want to go careful and keep still and not take any chances .
Dummy was at our house some , because old Uncle Silas was so afflicted himself , these days , that anybody else that was afflicted was a comfort to him .
Me and Tom did n't let on that we had knowed him before , and he did n't let on that he had knowed us before .
The family talked their troubles out before him the same as if he was n't there , but we reckoned it was n't any harm for him to hear what they said .
Generly he didn't seem to notice , but sometimes he did .
In two minutes we was tearing up the river road in the dark towards the village .
Old Jeff Hooker had a bloodhound , and Tom was going to borrow him .
`` It do n't make any difference , Huck .
If the body 's hid in the woods anywhere around the hound will find it .
If he 's been murdered and buried , they would n't bury him deep , it ai n't likely , and if the dog goes over the spot he 'll scent him , sure .
Huck , we 're going to be celebrated , sure as you 're born ! ''
`` Poor Jubiter ; it 's his clothes , to the last rag ! ''
`` Oh , my God , you 've found him NOW ! ''
THE ARREST OF UNCLE SILAS
`` Oh , yes , '' he says , `` I done it -- nobody else .
Who else had anything against him ?
Who else COULD have anything against him ? ''
`` By authority of the State of Arkansaw , I arrest you for the murder of Jubiter Dunlap ! ''
shouts the sheriff at the door .
They took him up to the little one-horse jail in the village , and we all went along to tell him good-bye ; and Tom was feeling elegant , and says to me , `` We 'll have a most noble good time and heaps of danger some dark night getting him out of there , Huck , and it 'll be talked about everywheres and we will be celebrated ; '' but the old man busted that scheme up the minute he whispered to him about it .
He said no , it was his duty to stand whatever the law done to him , and he would stick to the jail plumb through to the end , even if there war n't no door to it .
It disappointed Tom and graveled him a good deal , but he had to put up with it .
Tom Sawyer racked the head off of himself all that month trying to plan some way out for Uncle Silas , and many 's the night he kept me up 'most all night with this kind of tiresome work , but he could n't seem to get on the right track no way .
As for me , I reckoned a body might as well give it up , it all looked so blue and I was so downhearted ; but he would n't .
He stuck to the business right along , and went on planning and thinking and ransacking his head .
Tom and our lawyer asked them some questions ; but it war n't no use , they stuck to what they said .
Well , it was awful .
It kind of froze everybody 's blood to hear it , and the house was 'most as still whilst he was telling it as if there warn't nobody in it .
And when he was done , you could hear them gasp and sigh , all over the house , and look at one another the same as to say , `` Ain't it perfectly terrible -- ai n't it awful ! ''
`` Set down ! ''
says the judge , pulling his bowie and laying it on his pulpit .
`` I beg you to respect the Court . ''
BILL WITHERS , sworn , said : `` I was coming along about sundown , Saturday , September 2d , by the prisoner 's field , and my brother Jack was with me and we seen a man toting off something heavy on his back and allowed it was a nigger stealing corn ; we could n't see distinct ; next we made out that it was one man carrying another ; and the way it hung , so kind of limp , we judged it was somebody that was drunk ; and by the man 's walk we said it was Parson Silas , and we judged he had found Sam Cooper drunk in the road , which he was always trying to reform him , and was toting him out of danger . ''
`` NOW , I 've got it ! ''
and waves his hand , oh , ever so fine and starchy , towards the old man , and says :
`` This man here , Brace Dunlap , that 's been sniveling so about his dead brother that YOU know he never cared a straw for , wanted to marry that young girl there , and she would n't have him .
So he told Uncle Silas he would make him sorry .
Uncle Silas knowed how powerful he was , and how little chance he had against such a man , and he was scared and worried , and done everything he could think of to smooth him over and get him to be good to him : he even took his no-account brother Jubiter on the farm and give him wages and stinted his own family to pay them ; and Jubiter done everything his brother could contrive to insult Uncle Silas , and fret and worry him , and try to drive Uncle Silas into doing him a hurt , so as to injure Uncle Silas with the people .
And it done it .
Everybody turned against him and said the meanest kind of things about him , and it graduly broke his heart -- yes , and he was so worried and distressed that often he war n't hardly in his right mind .
`` Now , then , before I go on , I want to ask you if you 've ever noticed this : that people , when they 're thinking deep , or when they 're worried , are most always doing something with their hands , and they do n't know it , and do n't notice what it is their hands are doing , some stroke their chins ; some stroke their noses ; some stroke up UNDER their chin with their hand ; some twirl a chain , some fumble a button , then there 's some that draws a figure or a letter with their finger on their cheek , or under their chin or on their under lip .
That 's MY way .
When I'm restless , or worried , or thinking hard , I draw capital V 's on my cheek or on my under lip or under my chin , and never anything BUT capital V 's -- and half the time I do n't notice it and do n't know I 'm doing it . ''
`` THEN what did they do ?
I will tell you what they done .
They found where the thief had got his disguise out of his carpet-sack to put on ; so one of them strips and puts on that disguise . ''
`` Yes , it was Jubiter Dunlap .
Not dead , you see .
Then they pulled off the dead man 's boots and put Jubiter Dunlap 's old ragged shoes on the corpse and put the corpse 's boots on Jubiter Dunlap .
Then Jubiter Dunlap stayed where he was , and the other man lugged the dead body off in the twilight ; and after midnight he went to Uncle Silas 's house , and took his old green work-robe off of the peg where it always hangs in the passage betwixt the house and the kitchen and put it on , and stole the long-handled shovel and went off down into the tobacker field and buried the murdered man . ''
My land , they all busted out in a howl , and you never see the like of that excitement since the day you was born .
And Tom he made a jump for Jubiter and snaked off his goggles and his false whiskers , and there was the murdered man , sure enough , just as alive as anybody !
And Aunt Sally and Benny they went to hugging and crying and kissing and smothering old Uncle Silas to that degree he was more muddled and confused and mushed up in his mind than he ever was before , and that is saying considerable .
And next , people begun to yell :
`` Well , me and Huck went on hunting for the corpse after the others quit , and we found it .
And was proud , too ; but Uncle Silas he knocked us crazy by telling us HE killed the man .
So we was mighty sorry we found the body , and was bound to save Uncle Silas 's neck if we could ; and it was going to be tough work , too , because he would n't let us break him out of prison the way we done with our old nigger Jim .
`` Well , I believe that is all . ''
`` No , your honor , I did n't see any of them . ''
`` This late dead man here -- Jubiter Dunlap . ''
`` Search him , sheriff . ''
`` Put up your foot on this chair . ''
And he kneeled down and begun to unscrew the heel-plate , everybody watching ; and when he got that big di'mond out of that boot-heel and held it up and let it flash and blaze and squirt sunlight everwhichaway , it just took everybody 's breath ; and Jubiter he looked so sick and sorry you never see the like of it .
And when Tom held up the other di'mond he looked sorrier than ever .
he was thinking how he would 'a ' skipped out and been rich and independent in a foreign land if he 'd only had the luck to guess what the screwdriver was in the carpet-bag for .
`` I 'll keep them and notify the owners ; and when they send for them it will be a real pleasure to me to hand you the two thousand dollars , for you 've earned the money -- yes , and you 've earned the deepest and most sincerest thanks of this community besides , for lifting a wronged and innocent family out of ruin and shame , and saving a good and honorable man from a felon 's death , and for exposing to infamy and the punishment of the law a cruel and odious scoundrel and his miserable creatures ! ''
Then the sheriff he nabbed Brace Dunlap and his crowd , and by and by next month the judge had them up for trial and jailed the whole lot .
And everybody crowded back to Uncle Silas 's little old church , and was ever so loving and kind to him and the family and could n't do enough for them ; and Uncle Silas he preached them the blamedest jumbledest idiotic sermons you ever struck , and would tangle you up so you could n't find your way home in daylight ; but the people never let on but what they thought it was the clearest and brightest and elegantest sermons that ever was ; and they would set there and cry , for love and pity ; but , by George , they give me the jim-jams and the fan-tods and caked up what brains I had , and turned them solid ; but by and by they loved the old man 's intellects back into him again , and he was as sound in his skull as ever he was , which ai n't no flattery , I reckon .
And so the whole family was as happy as birds , and nobody could be gratefuler and lovinger than what they was to Tom Sawyer ; and the same to me , though I had n't done nothing .
And when the two thousand dollars come , Tom give half of it to me , and never told anybody so , which did n't surprise me , because I knowed him .
The years drifted on .
Archy was become a handsome , shapely , athletic youth , courteous , dignified , companionable , pleasant in his ways , and looking perhaps a trifle older than he was , which was sixteen .
One evening his mother said she had something of grave importance to say to him , adding that he was old enough to hear it now , and old enough and possessed of character enough and stability enough to carry out a stern plan which she had been for years contriving and maturing .
Then she told him her bitter story , in all its naked atrociousness .
For a while the boy was paralyzed ; then he said ,
From that time for a week on end he led me a dance .
He travelled here and there and yonder -- always on a general westward trend -- but he was not a woman after the first day .
He was a laborer , like myself , and wore bushy false whiskers .
His outfit was perfect , and he could do the character without thinking about it , for he had served the trade for wages .
His nearest friend could not have recognized him .
At last he located himself here , the obscurest little mountain camp in Montana ; he has a shanty , and goes out prospecting daily ; is gone all day , and avoids society .
I am living at a miner 's boarding-house , and it is an awful place : the bunks , the food , the dirt -- everything .
We have been here four weeks , and in that time I have seen him but once ; but every night I go over his track and post myself .
As soon as he engaged a shanty here I went to a town fifty miles away and telegraphed that Denver hotel to keep my baggage till I should send for it .
I need nothing here but a change of army shirts , and I brought that with me .
I can trust him to remain here until we disturb him .
Since you insist , I will banish him again , but I do not see how he can be unhappier than he already is .
I will go hack to Denver and treat myself to a little season of comfort , and edible food , and endurable beds , and bodily decency ; then I will fetch my things , and notify poor papa Wilson to move on .
God forgive us , mother , we are hunting the wrong man !
I have not slept any all night .
I am now awaiting , at dawn , for the morning train -- and how the minutes drag , how they drag !
Mother , he is gone !
Gone , and left no trace .
The scent was cold when I came .
To-day I am out of bed for the first time since .
I wish I were not a boy ; then I could stand shocks better .
They all think he went west .
I start to-night , in a wagon -- two or three hours of that , then I get a train .
I do n't know where I 'm going , but I must go ; to try to keep still would be torture .
You already know how well I have searched the states from Colorado to the Pacific , and how nearly I came to getting him once .
Well , I have had another close miss .
It was here , yesterday .
I struck his trail , hot , on the street , and followed it on a run to a cheap hotel .
That was a costly mistake ; a dog would have gone the other way .
But I am only part dog , and can get very humanly stupid when excited .
He had been stopping in that house ten days ; I almost know , now , that he stops long nowhere , the past six or eight months , but is restless and has to keep moving .
I understand that feeling !
and I know what it is to feel it .
He still uses the name he had registered when I came so near catching him nine months ago -- '' James Walker '' ; doubtless the same he adopted when he fled from Silver Gulch .
An unpretending man , and has small taste for fancy names .
I recognized the hand easily , through its slight disguise .
A square man , and not good at shams and pretenses .
I told you -- it seems ages ago , now -- how I missed him at Melbourne , and then chased him all over Australasia for months on end .
I chased him home to California , and down to Mexico , and back again to California .
Since then I have been hunting him about the state from the first of last January down to a month ago .
I feel almost sure he is not far from Hope Canyon ; I traced him to a point thirty miles from here , but there I lost the trail ; some one gave him a lift in a wagon , I suppose .
Fetlock had been in this slavery for a month now , and under his meek exterior he was slowly consuming to a cinder with the insults and humiliations which his master had put upon him .
For the meek suffer bitterly from these hurts ; more bitterly , perhaps , than do the manlier sort , who can burst out and get relief with words or blows when the limit of endurance has been reached .
Good-hearted people wanted to help Fetlock out of his trouble , and tried to get him to leave Buckner ; but the boy showed fright at the thought , and said he `` das n't . ''
Pat Riley urged him , and said ,
The people could not understand this .
The boy 's miseries went steadily on , week after week .
It is quite likely that the people would have understood if they had known how he was employing his spare time .
He slept in an out-cabin near Flint 's ; and there , nights , he nursed his bruises and his humiliations , and studied and studied over a single problem -- how he could murder Flint Buckner and not be found out .
It was the only joy he had in life ; these hours were the only ones in the twenty-four which he looked forward to with eagerness and spent in happiness .
`` If you please , sir , I -- ''
`` Damned easy to please ! ''
muttered Buckner , following him with his eye .
`` I wonder if he 'll tell ?
I wish it had killed him . ''
`` Well , he 's a boy .
And that is just about all we know about him .
You can pump him till you are tired ; it ai n't any use ; you wo n't get anything .
At least about his intentions , or line of business , or where he 's from , and such things as that .
And as for getting at the nature and get-up of his main big chief mystery , why , he 'll just change the subject , that 's all .
You can guess till you 're black in the face -- it 's your privilege -- but suppose you do , where do you arrive at ?
Nowhere , as near as I can make out . ''
`` Sight , maybe .
Take your choice -- grownups , twenty-five ; children and servants , half price .
Now I 'll tell you what he can do .
You can start here , and just disappear ; you can go and hide wherever you want to , I do n't care where it is , nor how far -- and he 'll go straight and put his finger on you . ''
`` It 's all the same to him .
He do n't give a damn . ''
`` It 's a fact ! ''
`` Go on , Wells-Fargo . ''
There was a sudden great murmur of sounds outside , the door flew open , and an excited crowd burst in , with the camp 's one white woman in the lead and crying ,
`` Sit down , sit down , Mrs. Hogan , and do n't worry .
He asked for a bed three hours ago , tuckered out tramping the trails the way he 's always doing , and went upstairs .
Ham Sandwich , run up and roust him out ; he's in No .
Several of the company dropped upon their knees and did their best to see .
One or two thought they discerned something like a track ; the others shook their heads and confessed that the smooth hard surface had no marks upon it which their eyes were sharp enough to discover .
One said , `` Maybe a child 's foot could make a mark on it , but I do n't see how . ''
he said presently , in an annoyed tone , `` I do n't understand it . ''
She was here -- that 's certain ; she never walked away from here -- and that 's certain .
It 's a puzzle ; I ca n't make it out . ''
`` Do you mean to insinuate that the child has n't been here ?
I tell you the child has been here !
Now if you want to get yourself into as tidy a little fuss as -- ''
The next afternoon the village was electrified with an immense sensation .
A grave and dignified foreigner of distinguished bearing and appearance had arrived at the tavern , and entered this formidable name upon the register :
`` You bet ! ''
said the blacksmith , with deep reverence .
`` Look at his nose !
look at his eyes !
Just a battery of it ! ''
There -- he 's got his thumb on the bump on the near corner of his forehead , and his forefinger on the off one .
His think-works is just a-grinding now , you bet your other shirt . ''
`` Now he has rose up standing , and is putting his clues together on his left fingers with his right finger .
he touches the forefinger -- now middle finger -- now ring-finger -- ''
`` 'Um -- female .
Very good , very good .
`` 'Turned six , your Honor . '
`` 'Um -- young , weak -- two miles .
Weariness will overtake it then .
It will sink down and sleep .
We shall find it two miles away , or less .
Ferguson was profoundly pleased with his success , and grateful .
He sat silently enjoying his happiness a little while , then he murmured , with a deep awe in his voice ,
`` I wonder if God made him ? ''
`` Not all at one time , I reckon . ''
The crowd poured down the canyon -- Holmes , Fetlock , Archy Stillman , everybody .
They made the mile in a few minutes .
By the light of a lantern they found the smooth and solid dirt floor of Flint Buckner's cabin ; of the cabin itself not a vestige remained , not a rag nor a splinter .
Nor any sign of Flint .
Search-parties sought here and there and yonder , and presently a cry went up .
Then the impatient jury rejoined the main crowd , for the storm-centre of interest was there -- Sherlock Holmes .
The miners stood silent and reverent in a half-circle , inclosing a large vacant space which included the front exposure of the site of the late premises .
In this considerable space the Extraordinary Man was moving about , attended by his nephew with a lantern .
With a tape he took measurements of the cabin site ; of the distance from the wall of chaparral to the road ; of the height of the chaparral bushes ; also various other measurements .
He gathered a rag here , a splinter there , and a pinch of earth yonder , inspected them profoundly , and preserved them .
He took the `` lay '' of the place with a pocket-compass , allowing two seconds for magnetic variation .
He took the time ( Pacific ) by his watch , correcting it for local time .
He paced off the distance from the cabin site to the corpse , and corrected that for tidal differentiation .
He took the altitude with a pocket-aneroid , and the temperature with a pocket-thermometer .
Finally he said , with a stately bow :
`` I know it , '' said Pat .
`` He was there in the billiard-room with us when it happened . ''
The tavern dining-room had been cleared of all its furniture save one six-foot pine table and a chair .
This table was against one end of the room ; the chair was on it ; Sherlock Holmes , stately , imposing , impressive , sat in the chair .
The room was full .
The tobacco-smoke was dense , the stillness profound .
`` The lad Jones 's somewhat distant connection with the case '' ( laughter ) `` having been disposed of , let us now call the eye-witnesses of the tragedy , and listen to what they have to say . ''
He got out his fragmentary clues and arranged them on a sheet of cardboard on his knee .
The house held its breath and watched .
`` Here we have an empty linen shot-bag .
What is its message ?
This : that robbery was the motive , not revenge .
What is its further message ?
This : that the assassin was of inferior intelligence -- shall we say light-witted , or perhaps approaching that ?
How do we know this ?
Because a person of sound intelligence would not have proposed to rob the man Buckner , who never had much money with him .
But the assassin might have been a stranger ?
Let the bag speak again .
I take from it this article .
It is a bit of silver-bearing quartz .
Examine it , please -- you -- and you -- and you .
Now pass it back , please .
There is but one lode on this coast which produces just that character and color of quartz ; and that is a lode which crops out for nearly two miles on a stretch , and in my opinion is destined , at no distant day , to confer upon its locality a globe-girdling celebrity , and upon its two hundred owners riches beyond the dreams of avarice .
Name that lode , please . ''
`` There stands the assassin ! ''
The constable moved reluctantly forward -- hesitated -- stopped .
Hillyer broke out with another appeal .
`` Oh , Archy , do n't let them do it ; it would kill mother !
You know how I got the hurt .
Tell them , and save me , Archy ; save me ! ''
A comfortable laugh rippled over the house ; friend nodded to friend , as much as to say , `` That 's the word , with the bark on it .
Good lad , good boy .
He ai n't lowering his flag any ! ''
`` While we were out yonder an hour or two ago , the owner of the gimlet and the trial-candle took them from a place where he had concealed them -- it was not a good place -- and carried them to what he probably thought was a better one , two hundred yards up in the pine woods , and hid them there , covering them over with pine needles .
It was there that I found them .
The gimlet exactly fits the hole in the barrel .
This is interesting -- this is very interesting .
Perhaps you encountered the assassin ? ''
`` We are waiting for your decision . ''
`` Did he give you the matches , sure enough ? ''
`` James Walker '' drew a deep sigh -- evidently a sigh of relief -- and said nothing ; but his eyes lost something of their wildness , his countenance cleared visibly , and its drawn look relaxed a little .
We all went to our cabin , and the boys cooked him the best dinner the camp could furnish the materials for , and while they were about it Hillyer and I outfitted him from hat to shoe-leather with new clothes of ours , and made a comely and presentable old gentleman of him .
`` Old '' is the right word , and a pity , too ; old by the droop of him , and the frost upon his hair , and the marks which sorrow and distress have left upon his face ; though he is only in his prime in the matter of years .
While he ate , we smoked and chatted ; and when he was finishing he found his voice at last , and of his own accord broke out with his personal history .
I can not furnish his exact words , but I will come as near it as I can .
It happened like this : I was in Denver .
I had been there many years ; sometimes I remember how many , sometimes I do n't -- but it is n't any matter .
All of a sudden I got a notice to leave , or I would be exposed for a horrible crime committed long before -- years and years before -- in the East .
I knew about that crime , but I was not the criminal ; it was a cousin of mine of the same name .
What should I better do ?
My head was all disordered by fear , and I did n't know .
I was allowed very little time -- only one day , I think it was .
I would be ruined if I was published , and the people would lynch me , and not believe what I said .
It is always the way with lynchings : when they find out it is a mistake they are sorry , but it is too late -- the same as it was with Mr. Holmes , you see .
So I said I would sell out and get money to live on , and run away until it blew over and I could come back with my proofs .
Then I escaped in the night and went a long way off in the mountains somewhere , and lived disguised and had a false name .
I got more and more troubled and worried , and my troubles made me see spirits and hear voices , and I could not think straight and clear on any subject , but got confused and involved and had to give it up , because my head hurt so .
It got to be worse and worse ; more spirits and more voices .
They were about me all the time ; at first only in the night , then in the day too .
They were always whispering around my bed and plotting against me , and it broke my sleep and kept me fagged out , because I got no good rest .
And then came the worst .
One night the whispers said , `` We 'll never manage , because we ca n't see him , and so ca n't point him out to the people . ''
They sighed ; then one said : `` We must bring Sherlock Holmes .
He can be here in twelve days . ''
The spirits went away to fetch him , and I got up at once in the middle of the night and fled away , carrying nothing but the hand-bag that had my money in it -- thirty thousand dollars ; two-thirds of it are in the bag there yet .
It was forty days before that man caught up on my track .
From habit he had written his real name on a tavern register , but had scratched it out and written `` Dagget Barclay '' in the place of it .
But fear gives you a watchful eye and keen , and I read the true name through the scratches , and fled like a deer .
He has hunted me all over this world for three years and a half -- the Pacific states , Australasia , India -- everywhere you can think of ; then back to Mexico and up to California again , giving me hardly any rest ; but that name on the registers always saved me , and what is left of me is alive yet .
And I am so tired !
A cruel time he has given me , yet I give you my honor I have never harmed him nor any man .
shouted one of his comrades .
`` He 'll be alive again in a week ; burning 's the only permanency for him . ''
And straightway he came tearing into the midst , stood his horse almost on his hind feet , and said ,
It was wonderful , the impression which the sound of that name made on the sheriff , notwithstanding he must have come posted .
He spoke up with feeling , and said it was a blot on the country that a man whose marvelous exploits had filled the world with their fame and their ingenuity , and whose histories of them had won every reader 's heart by the brilliancy and charm of their literary setting , should be visited under the Stars and Stripes by an outrage like this .
He apologized in the name of the whole nation , and made Holmes a most handsome bow , and told Constable Harris to see him to his quarters , and hold himself personally responsible if he was molested again .
Then he turned to the mob and said ,
That certain lot or parcel of LAND situate in city of Dunkirk , County of Chautauqua , And likewise furthermore in York State
Bounded and described , to-wit , As follows , herein , namely BEGINNING at the distance of A hundred two-and-forty feet ,
And running thence due northerly On Brannigan street 200 feet , Thence at right angles westerly , North-west-by-west-and-west-half-west ,
West-and-by-north , north-west-by-west , About --
For if he were sitting under the glory of the Throne , and the keeper of the keys admitted a Benjamin Franklin or other labouring man , that `` friend , '' with his fine natural powers infinitely augmented by emancipation from hampering flesh , would detect him with a single sniff , and immediately take his hat and ask to be excused .
Now , can it be possible that in a handful of centuries the Christian character has fallen away from an imposing heroism that scorned even the stake , the cross , and the axe , to a poor little effeminacy that withers and wilts under an unsavoury smell ?
We are not prepared to believe so , the reverend Doctor and his friend to the contrary notwithstanding .
Now , for next exhibition , let us have a fine representation of one of those chivalrous wholesale butcheries and burnings of Jewish women and children , which the crusading heroes of romance used to indulge in in their European homes , just before starting to the Holy Land , to seize and take to their protection the Sepulchre and defend it from `` pollution . ''
`` Boys , that Arab 's been swallowing something dead ! ''
I should have to stipulate that the Spanish people wash more and endeavour to get along with less quarantine .
Do you know , Spain keeps her ports fast locked against foreign traffic three-fourths of each year , because one day she is scared about the cholera , and the next about the plague , and next the measles , next the hooping cough , the hives , and the rash ?
but she does not mind leonine leprosy and elephantiasis any more than a great and enlightened civilisation minds freckles .
Soap would soon remove her anxious distress about foreign distempers .
The reason arable land is so scarce in Spain is because the people squander so much of it on their persons , and then when they die it is improvidently buried with them .
`` Sights and Sounds of the Great Novelist . ''
By John Gray , who waited on his table all the time he was at the Grand Hotel , New York , and still has in his possession and will exhibit to the audience a fragment of the Last Piece of Bread which the lamented author tasted in this country .
Five months and two weeks ago McFarland asked John Morgan the time of day , and turned and walked rapidly away without waiting for an answer .
Almost indubitable evidence of insanity .
It is remarkable that exactly one week after this circumstance , the prisoner , Daniel McFarland , confronted Albert D. Richardson suddenly and without warning , and shot him dead .
This is manifest insanity .
Everything we know of the prisoner goes to show that if he had been sane at the time , he would have shot his victim from behind .
The destruction was awful .
It is said that within the space of eight minutes McFarland killed and crippled some six score persons and tore down a large portion of the City Hall building , carrying away and casting into Broadway six or seven marble columns fifty-four feet long and weighing nearly two tons each .
But he was finally captured and sent in chains to the lunatic asylum for life .
May 11 -- I do not expect anybody to believe so astounding a thing , and yet it is the solemn truth that instead of instantly sending the dangerous lunatic to the insane asylum ( which I naturally supposed they would do , and so I prematurely said they had ) the court has actually SET HIM AT LIBERTY .
First Day THE EUROPEAN WAR !
It is rumoured that Austria is arming -- what with , is not known .
There is news to the effect that Russia espouses the cause of Prussia and will bring 4,000,000 men to the field .
RUSSIA SIDES WITH FRANCE .
THE EMPEROR TO TAKE COMMAND .
... ... ... ... ... ... ...
THE TROOPS GROWING OLD !
BUT BITTER STRIFE IMMINENT !
THE INVASIONS SUCCESSFULLY ACCOMPLISHED AND THE INVADERS SAFE !
RUSSIA SIDES WITH BOTH SIDES ENGLAND WILL FIGHT BOTH !
No battle has been fought thus far , but a million impetuous soldiers are gritting their teeth at each other across the border , and the most serious fears entertained that if they do not die of old age first , there will be bloodshed in this war yet .
The prodigious patriotic excitement goes on .
In Prussia , per Prussian telegrams , though contradicted from France .
In France , per French telegrams , though contradicted from Prussia .
THE WILD MAN INTERVIEWED [ From the Buffalo Express , September 18 , 1869 . ]
There has been so much talk about the mysterious `` wild man '' out there in the West for some time , that I finally felt it was my duty to go out and interview him .
There was something peculiarly and touchingly romantic about the creature and his strange actions , according to the newspaper reports .
He was represented as being hairy , long-armed , and of great strength and stature ; ugly and cumbrous ; avoiding men , but appearing suddenly and unexpectedly to women and children ; going armed with a club , but never molesting any creature , except sheep , or other prey ; fond of eating and drinking , and not particular about the quality , quantity , or character of the beverages and edibles ; living in the woods like a wild beast , but never angry ; moaning , and sometimes howling , but never uttering articulate sounds .
Now there was Daniel Webster .
Nobody could tell him anything .
He was not afraid .
He could do something neat when the time came .
And how did it turn out ?
Why , his will had to be fixed over ; and then all the relations came ; and first one thing and then another interfered , till at last he only had a chance to say , `` I still live , '' and up he went .
The public does not wish to be outraged in this way all the time .
Lord Chesterfield had laboured all his life to build up the most shining reputation for affability and elegance of speech and manners the world has ever seen .
And could you suppose he failed to appreciate the efficiency of characteristic `` last words , '' in the matter of seizing the successfully driven nail of such a reputation and clinching on the other side for ever ?
He kept his eye on the clock and his finger on his pulse .
He awaited his chance .
And at last , when he knew his time was come , he pretended to think a new visitor had entered , and so , with the rattle in his throat emphasised for dramatic effect , he said to the servant , `` Shin around , John , and get the gentleman a chair . ''
And so he died , amid thunders of applause .
And there are other instances of sagacious preparation for a felicitous closing remark .
And Red Jacket , the noblest Indian brave that ever wielded a tomahawk in defence of a friendless and persecuted race , expired with these touching words upon his lips ,
There was not a dry eye in the wigwam .
`` I am content to follow my uncle -- still , I do not wish to improve upon his last word .
Put me down for 'Tete d'armee . '
All of which is respectfully submitted , with the most honorable intentions .
At Sea Once More -- The Pilgrims all Well -- Superb Stromboli -- Sicily by Moonlight -- Scylla and Charybdis -- The `` Oracle '' at Fault -- Skirting the Isles of Greece Ancient Athens -- Blockaded by Quarantine and Refused Permission to Enter -- Running the Blockade -- A Bloodless Midnight Adventure -- Turning Robbers from Necessity -- Attempt to Carry the Acropolis by Storm -- We Fail -- Among the Glories of the Past -- A World of Ruined Sculpture -- A Fairy Vision -- Famous Localities -- Retreating in Good Order -- Captured by the Guards -- Travelling in Military State -- Safe on Board Again
Scarcity of Morals and Whiskey -- Slave-Girl Market Report -- Commercial Morality at a Discount -- The Slandered Dogs of Constantinople -- Questionable Delights of Newspaperdom in Turkey -- Ingenious Italian Journalism -- No More Turkish Lunches Desired -- The Turkish Bath Fraud -- The Narghileh Fraud -- Jackplaned by a Native -- The Turkish Coffee Fraud
This book is a record of a pleasure trip .
If it were a record of a solemn scientific expedition , it would have about it that gravity , that profundity , and that impressive incomprehensibility which are so proper to works of that kind , and withal so attractive .
Yet notwithstanding it is only a record of a pic-nic , it has a purpose , which is to suggest to the reader how he would be likely to see Europe and the East if he looked at them with his own eyes instead of the eyes of those who traveled in those countries before him .
I make small pretense of showing anyone how he ought to look at objects of interest beyond the sea -- other books do that , and therefore , even if I were competent to do it , there is no need .
For months the great pleasure excursion to Europe and the Holy Land was chatted about in the newspapers everywhere in America and discussed at countless firesides .
It was a novelty in the way of excursions -- its like had not been thought of before , and it compelled that interest which attractive novelties always command .
It was to be a picnic on a gigantic scale .
The participants in it , instead of freighting an ungainly steam ferry -- boat with youth and beauty and pies and doughnuts , and paddling up some obscure creek to disembark upon a grassy lawn and wear themselves out with a long summer day 's laborious frolicking under the impression that it was fun , were to sail away in a great steamship with flags flying and cannon pealing , and take a royal holiday beyond the broad ocean in many a strange clime and in many a land renowned in history !
They were to sail for months over the breezy Atlantic and the sunny Mediterranean ; they were to scamper about the decks by day , filling the ship with shouts and laughter -- or read novels and poetry in the shade of the smokestacks , or watch for the jelly-fish and the nautilus over the side , and the shark , the whale , and other strange monsters of the deep ; and at night they were to dance in the open air , on the upper deck , in the midst of a ballroom that stretched from horizon to horizon , and was domed by the bending heavens and lighted by no meaner lamps than the stars and the magnificent moon -- dance , and promenade , and smoke , and sing , and make love , and search the skies for constellations that never associate with the `` Big Dipper '' they were so tired of ; and they were to see the ships of twenty navies -- the customs and costumes of twenty curious peoples -- the great cities of half a world -- they were to hob-nob with nobility and hold friendly converse with kings and princes , grand moguls , and the anointed lords of mighty empires !
It was a brave conception ; it was the offspring of a most ingenious brain .
It was well advertised , but it hardly needed it : the bold originality , the extraordinary character , the seductive nature , and the vastness of the enterprise provoked comment everywhere and advertised it in every household in the land .
Who could read the program of the excursion without longing to make one of the party ?
I will insert it here .
It is almost as good as a map .
As a text for this book , nothing could be better :
From Genoa the run to Leghorn will be made along the coast in one night , and time appropriated to this point in which to visit Florence , its palaces and galleries ; Pisa , its cathedral and `` Leaning Tower , '' and Lucca and its baths , and Roman amphitheater ; Florence , the most remote , being distant by rail about sixty miles .
A call will be made at Bermuda , which lies directly in this route homeward , and will be reached in about ten days from Madeira , and after spending a short time with our friends the Bermudians , the final departure will be made for home , which will be reached in about three days .
Applications for passage must be approved by the committee before tickets are issued , and can be made to the undersigned .
The trip can be extended , and the route changed , by unanimous vote of the passengers .
I fell under that titular avalanche a torn and blighted thing .
I said that if that potentate must go over in our ship , why , I supposed he must -- but that to my thinking , when the United States considered it necessary to send a dignitary of that tonnage across the ocean , it would be in better taste , and safer , to take him apart and cart him over in sections in several ships .
`` Not anywhere whatsoever ?
-- not any place on earth but this ? ''
It was an appropriate relief when the gong sounded for prayer meeting .
The first Saturday night of any other pleasure excursion might have been devoted to whist and dancing ; but I submit it to the unprejudiced mind if it would have been in good taste for us to engage in such frivolities , considering what we had gone through and the frame of mind we were in .
We would have shone at a wake , but not at anything more festive .
However , there is always a cheering influence about the sea ; and in my berth that night , rocked by the measured swell of the waves and lulled by the murmur of the distant surf , I soon passed tranquilly out of all consciousness of the dreary experiences of the day and damaging premonitions of the future .
`` Now , say -- my friend -- do n't you know any better than to be whittling the ship all to pieces that way ?
You ought to know better than that . ''
In the course of time I brought up on the starboard side of the pilot-house and found a sextant lying on a bench .
Now , I said , they `` take the sun '' through this thing ; I should think I might see that vessel through it .
I had hardly got it to my eye when someone touched me on the shoulder and said deprecatingly :
`` It 's Captain Jones , sir -- the chief mate . ''
`` Well , sir , I do n't know -- I think likely you 'd fetch the captain of the watch may be , because he 's a-standing right yonder in the way . ''
After prayers the Synagogue shortly took the semblance of a writing school .
The like of that picture was never seen in a ship before .
Behind the long dining tables on either side of the saloon , and scattered from one end to the other of the latter , some twenty or thirty gentlemen and ladies sat them down under the swaying lamps and for two or three hours wrote diligently in their journals .
that journals so voluminously begun should come to so lame and impotent a conclusion as most of them did !
I doubt if there is a single pilgrim of all that host but can show a hundred fair pages of journal concerning the first twenty days ' voyaging in the Quaker City , and I am morally certain that not ten of the party can show twenty pages of journal for the succeeding twenty thousand miles of voyaging !
At certain periods it becomes the dearest ambition of a man to keep a faithful record of his performances in a book ; and he dashes at this work with an enthusiasm that imposes on him the notion that keeping a journal is the veriest pastime in the world , and the pleasantest .
But if he only lives twenty-one days , he will find out that only those rare natures that are made up of pluck , endurance , devotion to duty for duty 's sake , and invincible determination may hope to venture upon so tremendous an enterprise as the keeping of a journal and not sustain a shameful defeat .
`` Oh , everything .
Latitude and longitude , noon every day ; and how many miles we made last twenty-four hours ; and all the domino games I beat and horse billiards ; and whales and sharks and porpoises ; and the text of the sermon Sundays ( because that 'll tell at home , you know ) ; and the ships we saluted and what nation they were ; and which way the wind was , and whether there was a heavy sea , and what sail we carried , though we don't ever carry any , principally , going against a head wind always -- wonder what is the reason of that ?
-- and how many lies Moult has told -- Oh , every thing !
I 've got everything down .
My father told me to keep that journal .
Father would n't take a thousand dollars for it when I get it done . ''
-- well , I should think so .
I would n't finish it for a million . ''
Several times the photographer of the expedition brought out his transparent pictures and gave us a handsome magic-lantern exhibition .
His views were nearly all of foreign scenes , but there were one or two home pictures among them .
He advertised that he would `` open his performance in the after cabin at 'two bells ' ( nine P.M. ) and show the passengers where they shall eventually arrive '' -- which was all very well , but by a funny accident the first picture that flamed out upon the canvas was a view of Greenwood Cemetery !
The acting of charades was tried on several evenings by the young gentlemen and ladies , in the cabins , and proved the most distinguished success of all the amusement experiments .
`` Why , I 'm not trying to improve it -- and I am singing like the others -- just as it is in the notes . ''
There were those among the unregenerated who attributed the unceasing head-winds to our distressing choir-music .
There were those who said openly that it was taking chances enough to have such ghastly music going on , even when it was at its best ; and that to exaggerate the crime by letting George help was simply flying in the face of Providence .
These said that the choir would keep up their lacerating attempts at melody until they would bring down a storm some day that would sink the ship .
But we had to change our purpose about San Miguel , for a storm came up about noon that so tossed and pitched the vessel that common sense dictated a run for shelter .
Therefore we steered for the nearest island of the group -- Fayal ( the people there pronounce it Fy-all , and put the accent on the first syllable ) .
We anchored in the open roadstead of Horta , half a mile from the shore .
The town has eight thousand to ten thousand inhabitants .
Its snow-white houses nestle cosily in a sea of fresh green vegetation , and no village could look prettier or more attractive .
It sits in the lap of an amphitheater of hills which are three hundred to seven hundred feet high , and carefully cultivated clear to their summits -- not a foot of soil left idle .
Every farm and every acre is cut up into little square inclosures by stone walls , whose duty it is to protect the growing products from the destructive gales that blow there .
These hundreds of green squares , marked by their black lava walls , make the hills look like vast checkerboards .
The islands belong to Portugal , and everything in Fayal has Portuguese characteristics about it .
But more of that anon .
A swarm of swarthy , noisy , lying , shoulder-shrugging , gesticulating Portuguese boatmen , with brass rings in their ears and fraud in their hearts , climbed the ship's sides , and various parties of us contracted with them to take us ashore at so much a head , silver coin of any country .
We landed under the walls of a little fort , armed with batteries of twelve-and-thirty-two-pounders , which Horta considered a most formidable institution , but if we were ever to get after it with one of our turreted monitors , they would have to move it out in the country if they wanted it where they could go and find it again when they needed it .
The group on the pier was a rusty one -- men and women , and boys and girls , all ragged and barefoot , uncombed and unclean , and by instinct , education , and profession beggars .
They trooped after us , and never more while we tarried in Fayal did we get rid of them .
We walked up the middle of the principal street , and these vermin surrounded us on all sides and glared upon us ; and every moment excited couples shot ahead of the procession to get a good look back , just as village boys do when they accompany the elephant on his advertising trip from street to street .
It was very flattering to me to be part of the material for such a sensation .
Here and there in the doorways we saw women with fashionable Portuguese hoods on .
This hood is of thick blue cloth , attached to a cloak of the same stuff , and is a marvel of ugliness .
It stands up high and spreads far abroad , and is unfathomably deep .
It fits like a circus tent , and a woman 's head is hidden away in it like the man 's who prompts the singers from his tin shed in the stage of an opera .
There is no particle of trimming about this monstrous capote , as they call it -- it is just a plain , ugly dead-blue mass of sail , and a woman ca n't go within eight points of the wind with one of them on ; she has to go before the wind or not at all .
The general style of the capote is the same in all the islands , and will remain so for the next ten thousand years , but each island shapes its capotes just enough differently from the others to enable an observer to tell at a glance what particular island a lady hails from .
The Portuguese pennies , or reis ( pronounced rays ) , are prodigious .
It takes one thousand reis to make a dollar , and all financial estimates are made in reis .
We did not know this until after we had found it out through Blucher .
Blucher said he was so happy and so grateful to be on solid land once more that he wanted to give a feast -- said he had heard it was a cheap land , and he was bound to have a grand banquet .
He invited nine of us , and we ate an excellent dinner at the principal hotel .
In the midst of the jollity produced by good cigars , good wine , and passable anecdotes , the landlord presented his bill .
Blucher glanced at it and his countenance fell .
He took another look to assure himself that his senses had not deceived him and then read the items aloud , in a faltering voice , while the roses in his cheeks turned to ashes :
`` 'Eleven bottles of wine , at 1,200 reis , 13,200 reis ! '
Be with us all !
`` 'TOTAL , TWENTY-ONE THOUSAND SEVEN HUNDRED REIS ! '
There ai n't money enough in the ship to pay that bill !
Go -- leave me to my misery , boys , I am a ruined community . ''
10 dinners , 6,000 reis , or .
As we came down through the town we encountered a squad of little donkeys ready saddled for use .
The saddles were peculiar , to say the least .
They consisted of a sort of saw-buck with a small mattress on it , and this furniture covered about half the donkey .
There were no stirrups , but really such supports were not needed -- to use such a saddle was the next thing to riding a dinner table -- there was ample support clear out to one 's knee joints .
A pack of ragged Portuguese muleteers crowded around us , offering their beasts at half a dollar an hour -- more rascality to the stranger , for the market price is sixteen cents .
Half a dozen of us mounted the ungainly affairs and submitted to the indignity of making a ridiculous spectacle of ourselves through the principal streets of a town of 10,000 inhabitants .
But the fellow knew no English and did not understand , so he simply said , `` Sekki-yah ! ''
and the donkey was off again like a shot .
He turned a corner suddenly , and Blucher went over his head .
And , to speak truly , every mule stumbled over the two , and the whole cavalcade was piled up in a heap .
A fall from one of those donkeys is of little more consequence than rolling off a sofa .
The donkeys all stood still after the catastrophe and waited for their dismembered saddles to be patched up and put on by the noisy muleteers .
Blucher was pretty angry and wanted to swear , but every time he opened his mouth his animal did so also and let off a series of brays that drowned all other sounds .
We arrived home again finally , after a ten-mile excursion , and the irrepressible muleteers scampered at our heels through the main street , goading the donkeys , shouting the everlasting `` Sekki-yah , '' and singing `` John Brown 's Body '' in ruinous English .
`` Are you going through Spain to Paris ? ''
That question was bandied about the ship day and night from Fayal to Gibraltar , and I thought I never could get so tired of hearing any one combination of words again or more tired of answering , `` I do n't know . ''
At the last moment six or seven had sufficient decision of character to make up their minds to go , and did go , and I felt a sense of relief at once -- it was forever too late now and I could make up my mind at my leisure not to go .
I must have a prodigious quantity of mind ; it takes me as much as a week sometimes to make it up .
On the topmost pinnacle of Gibraltar we halted a good while , and no doubt the mules were tired .
They had a right to be .
The military road was good , but rather steep , and there was a good deal of it .
The view from the narrow ledge was magnificent ; from it vessels seeming like the tiniest little toy boats were turned into noble ships by the telescopes , and other vessels that were fifty miles away and even sixty , they said , and invisible to the naked eye , could be clearly distinguished through those same telescopes .
Below , on one side , we looked down upon an endless mass of batteries and on the other straight down to the sea .
There is an English garrison at Gibraltar of 6,000 or 7,000 men , and so uniforms of flaming red are plenty ; and red and blue , and undress costumes of snowy white , and also the queer uniform of the bare-kneed Highlander ; and one sees soft-eyed Spanish girls from San Roque , and veiled Moorish beauties ( I suppose they are beauties ) from Tarifa , and turbaned , sashed , and trousered Moorish merchants from Fez , and long-robed , bare-legged , ragged Muhammadan vagabonds from Tetuan and Tangier , some brown , some yellow and some as black as virgin ink -- and Jews from all around , in gabardine , skullcap , and slippers , just as they are in pictures and theaters , and just as they were three thousand years ago , no doubt .
You can easily understand that a tribe ( somehow our pilgrims suggest that expression , because they march in a straggling procession through these foreign places with such an Indian-like air of complacency and independence about them ) like ours , made up from fifteen or sixteen states of the Union , found enough to stare at in this shifting panorama of fashion today .
Speaking of our pilgrims reminds me that we have one or two people among us who are sometimes an annoyance .
However , I do not count the Oracle in that list .
I will explain that the Oracle is an innocent old ass who eats for four and looks wiser than the whole Academy of France would have any right to look , and never uses a one-syllable word when he can think of a longer one , and never by any possible chance knows the meaning of any long word he uses or ever gets it in the right place ; yet he will serenely venture an opinion on the most abstruse subject and back it up complacently with quotations from authors who never existed , and finally when cornered will slide to the other side of the question , say he has been there all the time , and come back at you with your own spoken arguments , only with the big words all tangled , and play them in your very teeth as original with himself .
He reads a chapter in the guidebooks , mixes the facts all up , with his bad memory , and then goes off to inflict the whole mess on somebody as wisdom which has been festering in his brain for years and which he gathered in college from erudite authors who are dead now and out of print .
This morning at breakfast he pointed out of the window and said :
`` Well , yes , it is a little remarkable -- singular tunnel altogether -- stands up out of the top of the hill about two hundred feet , and one end of it sticks out of the hill about nine hundred ! ''
Here in Gibraltar he corners these educated British officers and badgers them with braggadocio about America and the wonders she can perform !
He told one of them a couple of our gunboats could come here and knock Gibraltar into the Mediterranean Sea !
`` Some gentlemen do n't know how to put on kid gloves at all , but some do . ''
`` But it is always easy to tell when a gentleman is used to putting on kid gloves . ''
A tribe of stalwart Moors are wading into the sea to carry us ashore on their backs from the small boats .
Joshua drove them out , and they came here .
Not many leagues from here is a tribe of Jews whose ancestors fled thither after an unsuccessful revolt against King David , and these their descendants are still under a ban and keep to themselves .
Tangier has been mentioned in history for three thousand years .
And it was a town , though a queer one , when Hercules , clad in his lion skin , landed here , four thousand years ago .
In these streets he met Anitus , the king of the country , and brained him with his club , which was the fashion among gentlemen in those days .
The people of Tangier ( called Tingis then ) lived in the rudest possible huts and dressed in skins and carried clubs , and were as savage as the wild beasts they were constantly obliged to war with .
But they were a gentlemanly race and did no work .
They lived on the natural products of the land .
Their king 's country residence was at the famous Garden of Hesperides , seventy miles down the coast from here .
The garden , with its golden apples ( oranges ) , is gone now -- no vestige of it remains .
Antiquarians concede that such a personage as Hercules did exist in ancient times and agree that he was an enterprising and energetic man , but decline to believe him a good , bona-fide god , because that would be unconstitutional .
Some years ago the clock in the tower of the mosque got out of order .
The Moors of Tangier have so degenerated that it has been long since there was an artificer among them capable of curing so delicate a patient as a debilitated clock .
The great men of the city met in solemn conclave to consider how the difficulty was to be met .
They discussed the matter thoroughly but arrived at no solution .
Finally , a patriarch arose and said :
But the Jew shuts up shop ; will not touch copper or bronze money at all ; soils his fingers with nothing meaner than silver and gold ; attends the synagogue devoutly ; will not cook or have anything to do with fire ; and religiously refrains from embarking in any enterprise .
`` He 's gone , too .
Well , them fellows have all tackled the old Oracle , as they say , but the old man 's most too many for 'em .
Maybe the Poet Lariat ai n't satisfied with them deductions ? ''
The poet replied with a barbarous rhyme and went below .
`` 'Pears that he ca n't qualify , neither .
Well , I did n't expect nothing out of him .
I never see one of them poets yet that knowed anything .
He 'll go down now and grind out about four reams of the awfullest slush about that old rock and give it to a consul , or a pilot , or a nigger , or anybody he comes across first which he can impose on .
Pity but somebody 'd take that poor old lunatic and dig all that poetry rubbage out of him .
Why ca n't a man put his intellect onto things that 's some value ?
Gibbons , and Hippocratus , and Sarcophagus , and all them old ancient philosophers was down on poets -- ''
We carried out the corpse on three cheers ( that joke was not intentional and I do not endorse it ) , and then the President , throned behind a cable locker with a national flag spread over it , announced the `` Reader , '' who rose up and read that same old Declaration of Independence which we have all listened to so often without paying any attention to what it said ; and after that the President piped the Orator of the Day to quarters and he made that same old speech about our national greatness which we so religiously believe and so fervently applaud .
Now came the choir into court again , with the complaining instruments , and assaulted `` Hail Columbia '' ; and when victory hung wavering in the scale , George returned with his dreadful wild-goose stop turned on and the choir won , of course .
A minister pronounced the benediction , and the patriotic little gathering disbanded .
The Fourth of July was safe , as far as the Mediterranean was concerned .
`` Oh , go to the pier , you old fool -- that 's where we want to go ! ''
`` Avez-vous du vin ? ''
`` What did that pirate say ? ''
`` Why , he told us which way to go to find the Grand Casino . ''
We are getting foreignized rapidly and with facility .
We are getting reconciled to halls and bedchambers with unhomelike stone floors and no carpets -- floors that ring to the tread of one 's heels with a sharpness that is death to sentimental musing .
We are getting used to tidy , noiseless waiters , who glide hither and thither , and hover about your back and your elbows like butterflies , quick to comprehend orders , quick to fill them ; thankful for a gratuity without regard to the amount ; and always polite -- never otherwise than polite .
That is the strangest curiosity yet -- a really polite hotel waiter who is n't an idiot .
We are getting used to driving right into the central court of the hotel , in the midst of a fragrant circle of vines and flowers , and in the midst also of parties of gentlemen sitting quietly reading the paper and smoking .
We are getting used to ice frozen by artificial process in ordinary bottles -- the only kind of ice they have here .
We are getting used to all these things , but we are not getting used to carrying our own soap .
We are sufficiently civilized to carry our own combs and toothbrushes , but this thing of having to ring for soap every time we wash is new to us and not pleasant at all .
We think of it just after we get our heads and faces thoroughly wet or just when we think we have been in the bathtub long enough , and then , of course , an annoying delay follows .
These Marseillaises make Marseillaise hymns and Marseilles vests and Marseilles soap for all the world , but they never sing their hymns or wear their vests or wash with their soap themselves .
We were troubled a little at dinner today by the conduct of an American , who talked very loudly and coarsely and laughed boisterously where all others were so quiet and well behaved .
He ordered wine with a royal flourish and said :
This man carved the walls of his prison house from floor to roof with all manner of figures of men and animals grouped in intricate designs .
He had toiled there year after year , at his self-appointed task , while infants grew to boyhood -- to vigorous youth -- idled through school and college -- acquired a profession -- claimed man 's mature estate -- married and looked back to infancy as to a thing of some vague , ancient time , almost .
But who shall tell how many ages it seemed to this prisoner ?
With the one , time flew sometimes ; with the other , never -- it crawled always .
To the one , nights spent in dancing had seemed made of minutes instead of hours ; to the other , those selfsame nights had been like all other nights of dungeon life and seemed made of slow , dragging weeks instead of hours and minutes .
But the happiest regulation in French railway government is -- thirty minutes to dinner !
No five-minute boltings of flabby rolls , muddy coffee , questionable eggs , gutta-percha beef , and pies whose conception and execution are a dark and bloody mystery to all save the cook that created them !
No , we sat calmly down -- it was in old Dijon , which is so easy to spell and so impossible to pronounce except when you civilize it and call it Demijohn -- and poured out rich Burgundian wines and munched calmly through a long table d'hote bill of fare , snail patties , delicious fruits and all , then paid the trifle it cost and stepped happily aboard the train again , without once cursing the railroad company .
A rare experience and one to be treasured forever .
We secured rooms at the hotel , or rather , we had three beds put into one room , so that we might be together , and then we went out to a restaurant , just after lamplighting , and ate a comfortable , satisfactory , lingering dinner .
It was a pleasure to eat where everything was so tidy , the food so well cooked , the waiters so polite , and the coming and departing company so moustached , so frisky , so affable , so fearfully and wonderfully Frenchy !
All the surroundings were gay and enlivening .
Two hundred people sat at little tables on the sidewalk , sipping wine and coffee ; the streets were thronged with light vehicles and with joyous pleasure-seekers ; there was music in the air , life and action all about us , and a conflagration of gaslight everywhere !
We adjourned to one of those pretty cafes and took supper and tested the wines of the country , as we had been instructed to do , and found them harmless and unexciting .
They might have been exciting , however , if we had chosen to drink a sufficiency of them .
It was pitiful , In a whole city-full , Gas we had none .
That was an `` aside '' from Dan .
The atrocious name grated harshly on my ear , too .
The most of us can learn to forgive , and even to like , a countenance that strikes us unpleasantly at first , but few of us , I fancy , become reconciled to a jarring name so easily .
I was almost sorry we had hired this man , his name was so unbearable .
However , no matter .
We were impatient to start .
Billfinger stepped to the door to call a carriage , and then the doctor said :
Here endeth the first lesson .
It was a mistake .
`` I suppose ze gentleman say he wish to buy some silk . ''
`` Pairdon , Doctor , zis is not ze Louvre -- it is -- ''
And the doctor : `` We need no silks now , Ferguson .
Our hearts yearn for the Louvre .
Let us journey on -- let us journey on . ''
After four breakfasts and a gallon of champagne , to serve us such a scurvy trick .
We got no sight of the countless treasures of art in the Louvre galleries that day , and our only poor little satisfaction was in the reflection that Ferguson sold not a solitary silk dress pattern .
Abdul Aziz , absolute lord of the Ottoman empire -- clad in dark green European clothes , almost without ornament or insignia of rank ; a red Turkish fez on his head ; a short , stout , dark man , black-bearded , black-eyed , stupid , unprepossessing -- a man whose whole appearance somehow suggested that if he only had a cleaver in his hand and a white apron on , one would not be at all surprised to hear him say : `` A mutton roast today , or will you have a nice porterhouse steak ? ''
As for the Sultan , one could set a trap any where and catch a dozen abler men in a night .
The bands struck up , and the brilliant adventurer , Napoleon III.
, the genius of Energy , Persistence , Enterprise ; and the feeble Abdul-Aziz , the genius of Ignorance , Bigotry , and Indolence , prepared for the Forward -- March !
`` Now this do n't afford you any satisfaction -- a party with his head shot off is what you need . ''
`` I thank you more for the evident sincerity of the compliment , sir , than for the extraordinary publicity you have given to it ! ''
This in good , pure English .
But presently the Emperor came along and he outshone them all .
He was preceded by a bodyguard of gentlemen on horseback in showy uniforms , his carriage-horses ( there appeared to be somewhere in the remote neighborhood of a thousand of them , ) were bestridden by gallant-looking fellows , also in stylish uniforms , and after the carriage followed another detachment of bodyguards .
Everybody got out of the way ; everybody bowed to the Emperor and his friend the Sultan ; and they went by on a swinging trot and disappeared .
The great names of Pere la Chaise impress one , too , but differently .
There the suggestion brought constantly to his mind is , that this place is sacred to a nobler royalty -- the royalty of heart and brain .
Every faculty of mind , every noble trait of human nature , every high occupation which men engage in , seems represented by a famous name .
The effect is a curious medley .
Davoust and Massena , who wrought in many a battle tragedy , are here , and so also is Rachel , of equal renown in mimic tragedy on the stage .
The Abbe Sicard sleeps here -- the first great teacher of the deaf and dumb -- a man whose heart went out to every unfortunate , and whose life was given to kindly offices in their service ; and not far off , in repose and peace at last , lies Marshal Ney , whose stormy spirit knew no music like the bugle call to arms .
The man who originated public gas-lighting , and that other benefactor who introduced the cultivation of the potato and thus blessed millions of his starving countrymen , lie with the Prince of Masserano , and with exiled queens and princes of Further India .
Gay-Lussac the chemist , Laplace the astronomer , Larrey the surgeon , de Suze the advocate , are here , and with them are Talma , Bellini , Rubini ; de Balzac , Beaumarchais , Beranger ; Moliere and Lafontaine , and scores of other men whose names and whose worthy labors are as familiar in the remote by-places of civilization as are the historic deeds of the kings and princes that sleep in the marble vaults of St. Denis .
His school was near Fulbert 's house .
He asked Fulbert to allow him to call .
The good old swivel saw here a rare opportunity : his niece , whom he so much loved , would absorb knowledge from this man , and it would not cost him a cent .
Such was Fulbert -- penurious .
`` I can not cease to be astonished at the simplicity of Fulbert ; I was as much surprised as if he had placed a lamb in the power of a hungry wolf .
Heloise and I , under pretext of study , gave ourselves up wholly to love , and the solitude that love seeks our studies procured for us .
Books were open before us , but we spoke oftener of love than philosophy , and kisses came more readily from our lips than words . ''
Heloise entered a convent and gave good-bye to the world and its pleasures for all time .
For twelve years she never heard of Abelard -- never even heard his name mentioned .
She had become prioress of Argenteuil and led a life of complete seclusion .
She happened one day to see a letter written by him , in which he narrated his own history .
She cried over it and wrote him .
He answered , addressing her as his `` sister in Christ . ''
They continued to correspond , she in the unweighed language of unwavering affection , he in the chilly phraseology of the polished rhetorician .
She poured out her heart in passionate , disjointed sentences ; he replied with finished essays , divided deliberately into heads and sub-heads , premises and argument .
She showered upon him the tenderest epithets that love could devise , he addressed her from the North Pole of his frozen heart as the `` Spouse of Christ ! ''
On account of her too easy government of her nuns , some disreputable irregularities were discovered among them , and the Abbot of St. Denis broke up her establishment .
Abelard was the official head of the monastery of St. Gildas de Ruys , at that time , and when he heard of her homeless condition a sentiment of pity was aroused in his breast ( it is a wonder the unfamiliar emotion did not blow his head off , ) and he placed her and her troop in the little oratory of the Paraclete , a religious establishment which he had founded .
She had many privations and sufferings to undergo at first , but her worth and her gentle disposition won influential friends for her , and she built up a wealthy and flourishing nunnery .
She became a great favorite with the heads of the church , and also the people , though she seldom appeared in public .
She rapidly advanced in esteem , in good report , and in usefulness , and Abelard as rapidly lost ground .
The Pope so honored her that he made her the head of her order .
Abelard , a man of splendid talents , and ranking as the first debater of his time , became timid , irresolute , and distrustful of his powers .
He only needed a great misfortune to topple him from the high position he held in the world of intellectual excellence , and it came .
Urged by kings and princes to meet the subtle St. Bernard in debate and crush him , he stood up in the presence of a royal and illustrious assemblage , and when his antagonist had finished he looked about him and stammered a commencement ; but his courage failed him , the cunning of his tongue was gone : with his speech unspoken , he trembled and sat down , a disgraced and vanquished champion .
In Paris we often saw in shop windows the sign `` English Spoken Here , '' just as one sees in the windows at home the sign `` Ici on parle francaise . ''
We always invaded these places at once -- and invariably received the information , framed in faultless French , that the clerk who did the English for the establishment had just gone to dinner and would be back in an hour -- would Monsieur buy something ?
We wondered why those parties happened to take their dinners at such erratic and extraordinary hours , for we never called at a time when an exemplary Christian would be in the least likely to be abroad on such an errand .
The truth was , it was a base fraud -- a snare to trap the unwary -- chaff to catch fledglings with .
They had no English-murdering clerk .
They trusted to the sign to inveigle foreigners into their lairs , and trusted to their own blandishments to keep them there till they bought something .
`` Que voulez les messieurs ? ''
I do not know what `` Que voulez les messieurs ? ''
means , but such was his remark .
`` Well , if you do n't know what that is , give us a champagne cock-tail . ''
And he always said , `` No . ''
It was worth a pilgrimage to see .
Everything is on so gigantic a scale .
Nothing is small -- nothing is cheap .
The statues are all large ; the palace is grand ; the park covers a fair-sized county ; the avenues are interminable .
All the distances and all the dimensions about Versailles are vast .
I used to think the pictures exaggerated these distances and these dimensions beyond all reason , and that they made Versailles more beautiful than it was possible for any place in the world to be .
I know now that the pictures never came up to the subject in any respect , and that no painter could represent Versailles on canvas as beautiful as it is in reality .
I used to abuse Louis XIV for spending two hundred millions of dollars in creating this marvelous park , when bread was so scarce with some of his subjects ; but I have forgiven him now .
He took a tract of land sixty miles in circumference and set to work to make this park and build this palace and a road to it from Paris .
He kept 36,000 men employed daily on it , and the labor was so unhealthy that they used to die and be hauled off by cartloads every night .
The wife of a nobleman of the time speaks of this as an `` inconvenience , '' but naively remarks that `` it does not seem worthy of attention in the happy state of tranquillity we now enjoy . ''
From sumptuous Versailles , with its palaces , its statues , its gardens , and its fountains , we journeyed back to Paris and sought its antipodes -- the Faubourg St. Antoine .
Little , narrow streets ; dirty children blockading them ; greasy , slovenly women capturing and spanking them ; filthy dens on first floors , with rag stores in them ( the heaviest business in the Faubourg is the chiffonier 's ) ; other filthy dens where whole suits of second and third-hand clothing are sold at prices that would ruin any proprietor who did not steal his stock ; still other filthy dens where they sold groceries -- sold them by the half-pennyworth -- five dollars would buy the man out , goodwill and all .
Up these little crooked streets they will murder a man for seven dollars and dump the body in the Seine .
And up some other of these streets -- most of them , I should say -- live lorettes .
The ladies and gentlemen of Genoa have a pleasant fashion of promenading in a large park on the top of a hill in the center of the city , from six till nine in the evening , and then eating ices in a neighboring garden an hour or two longer .
We went to the park on Sunday evening .
Two thousand persons were present , chiefly young ladies and gentlemen .
The gentlemen were dressed in the very latest Paris fashions , and the robes of the ladies glinted among the trees like so many snowflakes .
The multitude moved round and round the park in a great procession .
The bands played , and so did the fountains ; the moon and the gas lamps lit up the scene , and altogether it was a brilliant and an animated picture .
I scanned every female face that passed , and it seemed to me that all were handsome .
I never saw such a freshet of loveliness before .
I did not see how a man of only ordinary decision of character could marry here , because before he could get his mind made up he would fall in love with somebody else .
Never smoke any Italian tobacco .
Never do it on any account .
It makes me shudder to think what it must be made of .
You can not throw an old cigar `` stub '' down anywhere , but some vagabond will pounce upon it on the instant .
I like to smoke a good deal , but it wounds my sensibilities to see one of these stub-hunters watching me out of the corners of his hungry eyes and calculating how long my cigar will be likely to last .
It reminded me too painfully of that San Francisco undertaker who used to go to sick-beds with his watch in his hand and time the corpse .
One of these stub-hunters followed us all over the park last night , and we never had a smoke that was worth anything .
We were always moved to appease him with the stub before the cigar was half gone , because he looked so viciously anxious .
He regarded us as his own legitimate prey , by right of discovery , I think , because he drove off several other professionals who wanted to take stock in us .
They also showed us a portrait of the Madonna which was painted by St. Luke , and it did not look half as old and smoky as some of the pictures by Rubens .
We could not help admiring the Apostle 's modesty in never once mentioning in his writings that he could paint .
The republics of Genoa and Pisa were very powerful in the Middle Ages .
Their ships filled the Mediterranean , and they carried on an extensive commerce with Constantinople and Syria .
Their warehouses were the great distributing depots from whence the costly merchandise of the East was sent abroad over Europe .
They were warlike little nations and defied , in those days , governments that overshadow them now as mountains overshadow molehills .
The Saracens captured and pillaged Genoa nine hundred years ago , but during the following century Genoa and Pisa entered into an offensive and defensive alliance and besieged the Saracen colonies in Sardinia and the Balearic Isles with an obstinacy that maintained its pristine vigor and held to its purpose for forty long years .
They were victorious at last and divided their conquests equably among their great patrician families .
Descendants of some of those proud families still inhabit the palaces of Genoa , and trace in their own features a resemblance to the grim knights whose portraits hang in their stately halls , and to pictured beauties with pouting lips and merry eyes whose originals have been dust and ashes for many a dead and forgotten century .
From the eaves to the comb of the roof stretched in endless succession great curved marble beams , like the fore-and-aft braces of a steamboat , and along each beam from end to end stood up a row of richly carved flowers and fruits -- each separate and distinct in kind , and over 15,000 species represented .
At a little distance these rows seem to close together like the ties of a railroad track , and then the mingling together of the buds and blossoms of this marble garden forms a picture that is very charming to the eye .
It is hard to forget repulsive things .
I remember yet how I ran off from school once , when I was a boy , and then , pretty late at night , concluded to climb into the window of my father 's office and sleep on a lounge , because I had a delicacy about going home and getting thrashed .
As I lay on the lounge and my eyes grew accustomed to the darkness , I fancied I could see a long , dusky , shapeless thing stretched upon the floor .
A cold shiver went through me .
I turned my face to the wall .
That did not answer .
I was afraid that that thing would creep over and seize me in the dark .
I turned back and stared at it for minutes and minutes -- they seemed hours .
It appeared to me that the lagging moonlight never , never would get to it .
I turned to the wall and counted twenty , to pass the feverish time away .
I looked -- the pale square was nearer .
I turned again and counted fifty -- it was almost touching it .
With desperate will I turned again and counted one hundred , and faced about , all in a tremble .
A white human hand lay in the moonlight !
Such an awful sinking at the heart -- such a sudden gasp for breath !
I felt -- I can not tell what I felt .
When I recovered strength enough , I faced the wall again .
But no boy could have remained so with that mysterious hand behind him .
I counted again and looked -- the most of a naked arm was exposed .
I put my hands over my eyes and counted till I could stand it no longer , and then -- the pallid face of a man was there , with the corners of the mouth drawn down , and the eyes fixed and glassy in death !
I raised to a sitting posture and glowered on that corpse till the light crept down the bare breastline by line -- inch by inch -- past the nipple -- and then it disclosed a ghastly stab !
As we came out upon the floor of the church again , another priest volunteered to show us the treasures of the church .
The priests showed us two of St. Paul 's fingers , and one of St. Peter 's ; a bone of Judas Iscariot , ( it was black , ) and also bones of all the other disciples ; a handkerchief in which the Saviour had left the impression of his face .
Among the most precious of the relics were a stone from the Holy Sepulchre , part of the crown of thorns , ( they have a whole one at Notre Dame , ) a fragment of the purple robe worn by the Saviour , a nail from the Cross , and a picture of the Virgin and Child painted by the veritable hand of St. Luke .
This is the second of St. Luke 's Virgins we have seen .
Once a year all these holy relics are carried in procession through the streets of Milan .
The building looks best by moonlight , because the older portions of it , being stained with age , contrast unpleasantly with the newer and whiter portions .
It seems somewhat too broad for its height , but may be familiarity with it might dissipate this impression .
In another building they showed us a fresco representing some lions and other beasts drawing chariots ; and they seemed to project so far from the wall that we took them to be sculptures .
The artist had shrewdly heightened the delusion by painting dust on the creatures ' backs , as if it had fallen there naturally and properly .
Smart fellow -- if it be smart to deceive strangers .
`` Dan , how often have we told you that these foreigners can not understand English ?
Why will you not depend upon us ?
Why will you not tell us what you want , and let us ask for it in the language of the country ?
It would save us a great deal of the humiliation your reprehensible ignorance causes us .
I will address this person in his mother tongue : 'Here , cospetto !
-- Soap , you son of a gun ! '
Dan , if you would let us talk for you , you would never expose your ignorant vulgarity . ''
Even this fluent discharge of Italian did not bring the soap at once , but there was a good reason for it .
There was not such an article about the establishment .
It is my belief that there never had been .
They had to send far up town , and to several different places before they finally got it , so they said .
We had to wait twenty or thirty minutes .
The same thing had occurred the evening before , at the hotel .
I think I have divined the reason for this state of things at last .
The English know how to travel comfortably , and they carry soap with them ; other foreigners do not use the article .
`` Such grace of attitude ! ''
`` Such matchless coloring ! ''
`` Now , '' he said , `` observe my face -- what does it express ? ''
`` Oh , the Virgin 's face is full of the ecstasy of a joy that is complete -- that leaves nothing more to be desired on earth ! ''
The reader can see the picture in any drawing-room ; it can be easily recognized : the Virgin ( the only young and really beautiful Virgin that was ever painted by one of the old masters , some of us think , ) stands in the crescent of the new moon , with a multitude of cherubs hovering about her , and more coming ; her hands are crossed upon her breast , and upon her uplifted countenance falls a glory out of the heavens .
The reader may amuse himself , if he chooses , in trying to determine which of these gentlemen read the Virgin 's `` expression '' aright , or if either of them did it .
We arrived at a tumble-down old rookery called the Palazzo Simonetti -- a massive hewn-stone affair occupied by a family of ragged Italians .
A good-looking young girl conducted us to a window on the second floor which looked out on a court walled on three sides by tall buildings .
She put her head out at the window and shouted .
The echo answered more times than we could count .
She took a speaking trumpet and through it she shouted , sharp and quick , a single `` Ha ! ''
and finally went off into a rollicking convulsion of the jolliest laughter that could be imagined .
It was so joyful -- so long continued -- so perfectly cordial and hearty , that every body was forced to join in .
There was no resisting it .
I set down fifty-two distinct repetitions , and then the echo got the advantage of me .
The doctor set down sixty-four , and thenceforth the echo moved too fast for him , also .
After the separate concussions could no longer be noted , the reverberations dwindled to a wild , long-sustained clatter of sounds such as a watchman 's rattle produces .
It is likely that this is the most remarkable echo in the world .
As I go back in spirit and recall that noble sea , reposing among the snow-peaks six thousand feet above the ocean , the conviction comes strong upon me again that Como would only seem a bedizened little courtier in that august presence .
But I am growing unreliable .
I will return to my comparison of the lakes .
Como is a little deeper than Tahoe , if people here tell the truth .
They say it is eighteen hundred feet deep at this point , but it does not look a dead enough blue for that .
Tahoe is one thousand five hundred and twenty-five feet deep in the centre , by the state geologist's measurement .
They say the great peak opposite this town is five thousand feet high : but I feel sure that three thousand feet of that statement is a good honest lie .
The lake is a mile wide , here , and maintains about that width from this point to its northern extremity -- which is distant sixteen miles : from here to its southern extremity -- say fifteen miles -- it is not over half a mile wide in any place , I should think .
Its snow-clad mountains one hears so much about are only seen occasionally , and then in the distance , the Alps .
Tahoe is from ten to eighteen miles wide , and its mountains shut it in like a wall .
Their summits are never free from snow the year round .
One thing about it is very strange : it never has even a skim of ice upon its surface , although lakes in the same range of mountains , lying in a lower and warmer temperature , freeze over in winter .
We voyaged by steamer down the Lago di Lecco , through wild mountain scenery , and by hamlets and villas , and disembarked at the town of Lecco .
They said it was two hours , by carriage to the ancient city of Bergamo , and that we would arrive there in good season for the railway train .
We got an open barouche and a wild , boisterous driver , and set out .
We had a fast team and a perfectly smooth road .
There were towering cliffs on our left , and the pretty Lago di Lecco on our right , and every now and then it rained on us .
Just before starting , the driver picked up , in the street , a stump of a cigar an inch long , and put it in his mouth .
When he had carried it thus about an hour , I thought it would be only Christian charity to give him a light .
I handed him my cigar , which I had just lit , and he put it in his mouth and returned his stump to his pocket !
I never saw a more sociable man .
At least I never saw a man who was more sociable on a short acquaintance .
Here and there , on the fronts of roadside inns , we found huge , coarse frescoes of suffering martyrs like those in the shrines .
It could not have diminished their sufferings any to be so uncouthly represented .
We were in the heart and home of priest craft -- of a happy , cheerful , contented ignorance , superstition , degradation , poverty , indolence , and everlasting unaspiring worthlessness .
And we said fervently : it suits these people precisely ; let them enjoy it , along with the other animals , and Heaven forbid that they be molested .
We feel no malice toward these fumigators .
`` Do you see that great iron hook that projects from the wall just under the highest window in the ruined tower ? ''
Forty-two years waxed and waned ; the good fight was won ; Godfrey reigned in Jerusalem -- the Christian hosts reared the banner of the cross above the Holy Sepulchre !
`` 'T is well .
Dispose of them in the customary manner .
I have need of them .
Let them come hither .
Later , cast them from the battlements -- or -- how many priests have ye on hand ? ''
`` The day 's results are meagre , good my lord .
An abbot and a dozen beggarly friars is all we have . ''
The robed and close-cowled harlequins entered .
The grim Leonardo sate in state at the head of his council board .
Ranged up and down the hall on either hand stood near a hundred men-at-arms .
`` Good my lord , in acrobatic feats , in practice with the dumb-bells , in balancing and ground and lofty tumbling are we versed -- and sith your highness asketh me , I venture here to publish that in the truly marvelous and entertaining Zampillaerostation -- ''
am I a dog that I am to be assailed with polysyllabled blasphemy like to this ?
Lucretia , Isabel , stand forth !
Sirrah , behold this dame , this weeping wench .
The first I marry , within the hour ; the other shall dry her tears or feed the vultures .
Thou and thy vagabonds shall crown the wedding with thy merry-makings .
Fetch hither the priest ! ''
`` A Luigi to the rescue !
'tare an ouns ! '
And sure enough , afloat on the placid sea a league away , lay a great city , with its towers and domes and steeples drowsing in a golden mist of sunset .
`` There is a glorious city in the sea ; The sea is in the broad , the narrow streets , Ebbing and flowing ; and the salt-sea weed Clings to the marble of her palaces .
No track of men , no footsteps to and fro , Lead to her gates !
The path lies o'er the sea , Invisible : and from the land we went , As to a floating city -- steering in , And gliding up her streets , as in a dream , So smoothly , silently -- by many a dome , Mosque-like , and many a stately portico , The statues ranged along an azure sky ; By many a pile , in more than Eastern pride , Of old the residence of merchant kings ; The fronts of some , tho ' time had shatter 'd them , Still glowing with the richest hues of art , As tho ' the wealth within them had run o'er . ''
The table around which they had sat was there still , and likewise the stations where the masked inquisitors and executioners formerly stood , frozen , upright and silent , till they received a bloody order , and then , without a word , moved off like the inexorable machines they were , to carry it out .
The frescoes on the walls were startlingly suited to the place .
In all the other saloons , the halls , the great state chambers of the palace , the walls and ceilings were bright with gilding , rich with elaborate carving , and resplendent with gallant pictures of Venetian victories in war , and Venetian display in foreign courts , and hallowed with portraits of the Virgin , the Saviour of men , and the holy saints that preached the Gospel of Peace upon earth -- but here , in dismal contrast , were none but pictures of death and dreadful suffering !
-- not a living figure but was writhing in torture , not a dead one but was smeared with blood , gashed with wounds , and distorted with the agonies that had taken away its life !
They used to show to visitors the implements of torture wherewith the Three were wont to worm secrets out of the accused -- villainous machines for crushing thumbs ; the stocks where a prisoner sat immovable while water fell drop by drop upon his head till the torture was more than humanity could bear ; and a devilish contrivance of steel , which inclosed a prisoner 's head like a shell , and crushed it slowly by means of a screw .
It bore the stains of blood that had trickled through its joints long ago , and on one side it had a projection whereon the torturer rested his elbow comfortably and bent down his ear to catch the moanings of the sufferer perishing within .
But it seems queer -- ever so queer -- to see a boat doing duty as a private carriage .
We see business men come to the front door , step into a gondola , instead of a street car , and go off down town to the counting-room .
We see the ladies go out shopping , in the most natural way , and flit from street to street and from store to store , just in the good old fashion , except that they leave the gondola , instead of a private carriage , waiting at the curbstone a couple of hours for them , -- waiting while they make the nice young clerks pull down tons and tons of silks and velvets and moire antiques and those things ; and then they buy a paper of pins and go paddling away to confer the rest of their disastrous patronage on some other firm .
And they always have their purchases sent home just in the good old way .
Human nature is very much the same all over the world ; and it is so like my dear native home to see a Venetian lady go into a store and buy ten cents ' worth of blue ribbon and have it sent home in a scow .
Ah , it is these little touches of nature that move one to tears in these far-off foreign lands .
`` George P. Morton et fils , d'Amerique .
Yes , I think we have seen all of Venice .
We have seen , in these old churches , a profusion of costly and elaborate sepulchre ornamentation such as we never dreampt of before .
We have stood in the dim religious light of these hoary sanctuaries , in the midst of long ranks of dusty monuments and effigies of the great dead of Venice , until we seemed drifting back , back , back , into the solemn past , and looking upon the scenes and mingling with the peoples of a remote antiquity .
We have been in a half-waking sort of dream all the time .
I do not know how else to describe the feeling .
A part of our being has remained still in the nineteenth century , while another part of it has seemed in some unaccountable way walking among the phantoms of the tenth .
If I did not so delight in the grand pictures that are spread before me every day of my life by that monarch of all the old masters , Nature , I should come to believe , sometimes , that I had in me no appreciation of the beautiful , whatsoever .
He said again , presently :
Now , where is the use of allowing all those riches to lie idle , while half of that community hardly know , from day to day , how they are going to keep body and soul together ?
And , where is the wisdom in permitting hundreds upon hundreds of millions of francs to be locked up in the useless trumpery of churches all over Italy , and the people ground to death with taxation to uphold a perishing Government ?
As far as I can see , Italy , for fifteen hundred years , has turned all her energies , all her finances , and all her industry to the building up of a vast array of wonderful church edifices , and starving half her citizens to accomplish it .
She is to-day one vast museum of magnificence and misery .
All the churches in an ordinary American city put together could hardly buy the jeweled frippery in one of her hundred cathedrals .
And for every beggar in America , Italy can show a hundred -- and rags and vermin to match .
It is the wretchedest , princeliest land on earth .
But somehow , I can not keep that Medici mausoleum out of my memory .
It is as large as a church ; its pavement is rich enough for the pavement of a King 's palace ; its great dome is gorgeous with frescoes ; its walls are made of -- what ?
Red porphyry -- verde antique -- jasper -- oriental agate -- alabaster -- mother-of-pearl -- chalcedony -- red coral -- lapis lazuli !
All the vast walls are made wholly of these precious stones , worked in , and in and in together in elaborate pattern s and figures , and polished till they glow like great mirrors with the pictured splendors reflected from the dome overhead .
And before a statue of one of those dead Medicis reposes a crown that blazes with diamonds and emeralds enough to buy a ship-of-the-line , almost .
These are the things the Government has its evil eye upon , and a happy thing it will be for Italy when they melt away in the public treasury .
`` I saw common men , there -- men who were neither priests nor princes -- who yet absolutely owned the land they tilled .
It was not rented from the church , nor from the nobles .
I am ready to take my oath of this .
In that country you might fall from a third story window three several times , and not mash either a soldier or a priest.
-- The scarcity of such people is astonishing .
In the cities you will see a dozen civilians for every soldier , and as many for every priest or preacher .
Jews , there , are treated just like human beings , instead of dogs .
They can work at any business they please ; they can sell brand new goods if they want to ; they can keep drug-stores ; they can practice medicine among Christians ; they can even shake hands with Christians if they choose ; they can associate with them , just the same as one human being does with another human being ; they do n't have to stay shut up in one corner of the towns ; they can live in any part of a town they like best ; it is said they even have the privilege of buying land and houses , and owning them themselves , though I doubt that , myself ; they never have had to run races naked through the public streets , against jackasses , to please the people in carnival time ; there they never have been driven by the soldiers into a church every Sunday for hundreds of years to hear themselves and their religion especially and particularly cursed ; at this very day , in that curious country , a Jew is allowed to vote , hold office , yea , get up on a rostrum in the public street and express his opinion of the government if the government do n't suit him !
Ah , it is wonderful .
The common people there know a great deal ; they even have the effrontery to complain if they are not properly governed , and to take hold and help conduct the government themselves ; if they had laws like ours , which give one dollar of every three a crop produces to the government for taxes , they would have that law altered : instead of paying thirty-three dollars in taxes , out of every one hundred they receive , they complain if they have to pay seven .
They are curious people .
They do not know when they are well off .
Mendicant priests do not prowl among them with baskets begging for the church and eating up their substance .
One hardly ever sees a minister of the gospel going around there in his bare feet , with a basket , begging for subsistence .
In that country the preachers are not like our mendicant orders of friars -- they have two or three suits of clothing , and they wash sometimes .
In that land are mountains far higher than the Alban mountains ; the vast Roman Campagna , a hundred miles long and full forty broad , is really small compared to the United States of America ; the Tiber , that celebrated river of ours , which stretches its mighty course almost two hundred miles , and which a lad can scarcely throw a stone across at Rome , is not so long , nor yet so wide , as the American Mississippi -- nor yet the Ohio , nor even the Hudson .
In America the people are absolutely wiser and know much more than their grandfathers did .
They do not plow with a sharpened stick , nor yet with a three-cornered block of wood that merely scratches the top of the ground .
We do that because our fathers did , three thousand years ago , I suppose .
But those people have no holy reverence for their ancestors .
They plow with a plow that is a sharp , curved blade of iron , and it cuts into the earth full five inches .
And this is not all .
They cut their grain with a horrid machine that mows down whole fields in a day .
If I dared , I would say that sometimes they use a blasphemous plow that works by fire and vapor and tears up an acre of ground in a single hour -- but -- but -- I see by your looks that you do not believe the things I am telling you .
Alas , my character is ruined , and I am a branded speaker of untruths ! ''
Every body knows the picture of the Coliseum ; every body recognizes at once that `` looped and windowed '' band-box with a side bitten out .
Being rather isolated , it shows to better advantage than any other of the monuments of ancient Rome .
Even the beautiful Pantheon , whose pagan altars uphold the cross , now , and whose Venus , tricked out in consecrated gimcracks , does reluctant duty as a Virgin Mary to-day , is built about with shabby houses and its stateliness sadly marred .
But the monarch of all European ruins , the Coliseum , maintains that reserve and that royal seclusion which is proper to majesty .
Weeds and flowers spring from its massy arches and its circling seats , and vines hang their fringes from its lofty walls .
An impressive silence broods over the monstrous structure where such multitudes of men and women were wont to assemble in other days .
The butterflies have taken the places of the queens of fashion and beauty of eighteen centuries ago , and the lizards sun themselves in the sacred seat of the Emperor .
More vividly than all the written histories , the Coliseum tells the story of Rome 's grandeur and Rome 's decay .
It is the worthiest type of both that exists .
Moving about the Rome of to-day , we might find it hard to believe in her old magnificence and her millions of population ; but with this stubborn evidence before us that she was obliged to have a theatre with sitting room for eighty thousand persons and standing room for twenty thousand more , to accommodate such of her citizens as required amusement , we find belief less difficult .
The Coliseum is over one thousand six hundred feet long , seven hundred and fifty wide , and one hundred and sixty-five high .
Its shape is oval .
`` He a star !
handles his sword like an apprentice brigand !
he 'll do for the country , may be , but he do n't answer for the metropolis ! ''
between two young and promising amateurs and a celebrated Parthian gladiator who has just arrived a prisoner from the Camp of Verus .
It was as singular as it was gratifying that I was also so fortunate as to find among the rubbish of the arena , a stained and mutilated copy of the Roman Daily Battle-Ax , containing a critique upon this very performance .
It comes to hand too late by many centuries to rank as news , and therefore I translate and publish it simply to show how very little the general style and phraseology of dramatic criticism has altered in the ages that have dragged their slow length along since the carriers laid this one damp and fresh before their Roman patrons :
`` The opening scene last night -- the broadsword combat between two young amateurs and a famous Parthian gladiator who was sent here a prisoner -- was very fine .
The elder of the two young gentlemen handled his weapon with a grace that marked the possession of extraordinary talent .
His feint of thrusting , followed instantly by a happily delivered blow which unhelmeted the Parthian , was received with hearty applause .
He was not thoroughly up in the backhanded stroke , but it was very gratifying to his numerous friends to know that , in time , practice would have overcome this defect .
However , he was killed .
His sisters , who were present , expressed considerable regret .
His mother left the Coliseum .
The other youth maintained the contest with such spirit as to call forth enthusiastic bursts of applause .
When at last he fell a corpse , his aged mother ran screaming , with hair disheveled and tears streaming from her eyes , and swooned away just as her hands were clutching at the railings of the arena .
She was promptly removed by the police .
Under the circumstances the woman 's conduct was pardonable , perhaps , but we suggest that such exhibitions interfere with the decorum which should be preserved during the performances , and are highly improper in the presence of the Emperor .
The Parthian prisoner fought bravely and well ; and well he might , for he was fighting for both life and liberty .
His wife and children were there to nerve his arm with their love , and to remind him of the old home he should see again if he conquered .
When his second assailant fell , the woman clasped her children to her breast and wept for joy .
But it was only a transient happiness .
The captive staggered toward her and she saw that the liberty he had earned was earned too late .
He was wounded unto death .
Thus the first act closed in a manner which was entirely satisfactory .
The manager was called before the curtain and returned his thanks for the honor done him , in a speech which was replete with wit and humor , and closed by hoping that his humble efforts to afford cheerful and instructive entertainment would continue to meet with the approbation of the Roman public
I have been a dramatic critic myself , in my time , and I was often surprised to notice how much more I knew about Hamlet than Forrest did ; and it gratifies me to observe , now , how much better my brethren of ancient times knew how a broad sword battle ought to be fought than the gladiators .
But we have taken it out of this guide .
He has marched us through miles of pictures and sculpture in the vast corridors of the Vatican ; and through miles of pictures and sculpture in twenty other palaces ; he has shown us the great picture in the Sistine Chapel , and frescoes enough to frescoe the heavens -- pretty much all done by Michael Angelo .
So with him we have played that game which has vanquished so many guides for us -- imbecility and idiotic questions .
These creatures never suspect -- they have no idea of a sarcasm .
He grows so tired of that unceasing question sometimes , that he dreads to show us any thing at all .
The wretch has tried all the ways he can think of to make us comprehend that Michael Angelo is only responsible for the creation of a part of the world , but somehow he has not succeeded yet .
Relief for overtasked eyes and brain from study and sightseeing is necessary , or we shall become idiotic sure enough .
Therefore this guide must continue to suffer .
If he does not enjoy it , so much the worse for him .
The guides in Genoa are delighted to secure an American party , because Americans so much wonder , and deal so much in sentiment and emotion before any relic of Columbus .
Our guide there fidgeted about as if he had swallowed a spring mattress .
He was full of animation -- full of impatience .
He took us to the municipal palace .
After much impressive fumbling of keys and opening of locks , the stained and aged document was spread before us .
The guide 's eyes sparkled .
He danced about us and tapped the parchment with his finger :
ze great Christopher Colombo ! ''
`` Why , I have seen boys in America only fourteen years old that could write better than that . ''
-- ze great Christopher Colombo ! ''
-- discover America , Oh , ze devil ! ''
`` See , genteelmen !
-- not Frenchman , not Roman !
-- born in Egypta ! ''
`` Who were these people ? ''
He put his finger on a skull .
`` This was Brother Anselmo -- dead three hundred years -- a good man . ''
`` Glory to God in the highest , peace on earth TO MEN OF GOOD WILL ! ''
It is not good scripture , but it is sound Catholic and human nature .
I may be wrong in this -- my judgment errs often , just as is the case with other men 's -- but it is my judgment , be it good or bad .
I shall remember our trip to Vesuvius for many a day -- partly because of its sight-seeing experiences , but chiefly on account of the fatigue of the journey .
Two or three of us had been resting ourselves among the tranquil and beautiful scenery of the island of Ischia , eighteen miles out in the harbor , for two days ; we called it `` resting , '' but I do not remember now what the resting consisted of , for when we got back to Naples we had not slept for forty-eight hours .
We were just about to go to bed early in the evening , and catch up on some of the sleep we had lost , when we heard of this Vesuvius expedition .
There was to be eight of us in the party , and we were to leave Naples at midnight .
We laid in some provisions for the trip , engaged carriages to take us to Annunciation , and then moved about the city , to keep awake , till twelve .
We got away punctually , and in the course of an hour and a half arrived at the town of Annunciation .
Annunciation is the very last place under the sun .
In other towns in Italy the people lie around quietly and wait for you to ask them a question or do some overt act that can be charged for -- but in Annunciation they have lost even that fragment of delicacy ; they seize a lady 's shawl from a chair and hand it to her and charge a penny ; they open a carriage door , and charge for it -- shut it when you get out , and charge for it ; they help you to take off a duster -- two cents ; brush your clothes and make them worse than they were before -- two cents ; smile upon you -- two cents ; bow , with a lick-spittle smirk , hat in hand -- two cents ; they volunteer all information , such as that the mules will arrive presently -- two cents -- warm day , sir -- two cents -- take you four hours to make the ascent -- two cents .
And so they go .
They crowd you -- infest you -- swarm about you , and sweat and smell offensively , and look sneaking and mean , and obsequious .
There is no office too degrading for them to perform , for money .
I have had no opportunity to find out any thing about the upper classes by my own observation , but from what I hear said about them I judge that what they lack in one or two of the bad traits the canaille have , they make up in one or two others that are worse .
How the people beg !
-- many of them very well dressed , too .
I said I knew nothing against the upper classes by personal observation .
I must recall it !
What I saw their bravest and their fairest do last night , the lowest multitude that could be scraped up out of the purlieus of Christendom would blush to do , I think .
They assembled by hundreds , and even thousands , in the great Theatre of San Carlo , to do -- what ?
Why , simply , to make fun of an old woman -- to deride , to hiss , to jeer at an actress they once worshipped , but whose beauty is faded now and whose voice has lost its former richness .
Every body spoke of the rare sport there was to be .
They said the theatre would be crammed , because Frezzolini was going to sing .
It was said she could not sing well , now , but then the people liked to see her , anyhow .
And so we went .
And every time the woman sang they hissed and laughed -- the whole magnificent house -- and as soon as she left the stage they called her on again with applause .
Once or twice she was encored five and six times in succession , and received with hisses when she appeared , and discharged with hisses and laughter when she had finished -- then instantly encored and insulted again !
And how the high-born knaves enjoyed it !
White-kidded gentlemen and ladies laughed till the tears came , and clapped their hands in very ecstacy when that unhappy old woman would come meekly out for the sixth time , with uncomplaining patience , to meet a storm of hisses !
It was the cruelest exhibition -- the most wanton , the most unfeeling .
The singer would have conquered an audience of American rowdies by her brave , unflinching tranquillity ( for she answered encore after encore , and smiled and bowed pleasantly , and sang the best she possibly could , and went bowing off , through all the jeers and hisses , without ever losing countenance or temper : ) and surely in any other land than Italy her sex and her helplessness must have been an ample protection to her -- she could have needed no other .
Think what a multitude of small souls were crowded into that theatre last night .
If the manager could have filled his theatre with Neapolitan souls alone , without the bodies , he could not have cleared less than ninety millions of dollars .
What traits of character must a man have to enable him to help three thousand miscreants to hiss , and jeer , and laugh at one friendless old woman , and shamefully humiliate her ?
He must have all the vile , mean traits there are .
My observation persuades me ( I do not like to venture beyond my own personal observation , ) that the upper classes of Naples possess those traits of character .
Otherwise they may be very good people ; I can not say .
ASCENT OF MOUNT VESUVIUS -- CONTINUED .
Nero 's Baths , the ruins of Baiae , the Temple of Serapis ; Cumae , where the Cumaen Sybil interpreted the oracles , the Lake Agnano , with its ancient submerged city still visible far down in its depths -- these and a hundred other points of interest we examined with critical imbecility , but the Grotto of the Dog claimed our chief attention , because we had heard and read so much about it .
Every body has written about the Grotto del Cane and its poisonous vapors , from Pliny down to Smith , and every tourist has held a dog over its floor by the legs to test the capabilities of the place .
The dog dies in a minute and a half -- a chicken instantly .
As a general thing , strangers who crawl in there to sleep do not get up until they are called .
And then they do n't either .
The stranger that ventures to sleep there takes a permanent contract .
I longed to see this grotto .
I resolved to take a dog and hold him myself ; suffocate him a little , and time him ; suffocate him some more and then finish him .
We reached the grotto at about three in the afternoon , and proceeded at once to make the experiments .
But now , an important difficulty presented itself .
We had no dog .
The walls of the ditch were brilliant with yellow banks of sulphur and with lava and pumice-stone of many colors .
No fire was visible any where , but gusts of sulphurous steam issued silently and invisibly from a thousand little cracks and fissures in the crater , and were wafted to our noses with every breeze .
But so long as we kept our nostrils buried in our handkerchiefs , there was small danger of suffocation .
They had a great public bulletin board in Pompeii -- a place where announcements for gladiatorial combats , elections , and such things , were posted -- not on perishable paper , but carved in enduring stone .
One lady , who , I take it , was rich and well brought up , advertised a dwelling or so to rent , with baths and all the modern improvements , and several hundred shops , stipulating that the dwellings should not be put to immoral purposes .
You can find out who lived in many a house in Pompeii by the carved stone door-plates affixed to them : and in the same way you can tell who they were that occupy the tombs .
Every where around are things that reveal to you something of the customs and history of this forgotten people .
But what would a volcano leave of an American city , if it once rained its cinders on it ?
Hardly a sign or a symbol to tell its story .
There are not half a dozen flights of stairs in Pompeii , and no other evidences that the houses were more than one story high .
The people did not live in the clouds , as do the Venetians , the Genoese and Neapolitans of to-day .
* * * * * * * *
At seven in the evening , with the western horizon all golden from the sunken sun , and specked with distant ships , the full moon sailing high over head , the dark blue of the sea under foot , and a strange sort of twilight affected by all these different lights and colors around us and about us , we sighted superb Stromboli .
With what majesty the monarch held his lonely state above the level sea !
Distance clothed him in a purple gloom , and added a veil of shimmering mist that so softened his rugged features that we seemed to see him through a web of silver gauze .
His torch was out ; his fires were smoldering ; a tall column of smoke that rose up and lost itself in the growing moonlight was all the sign he gave that he was a living Autocrat of the Sea and not the spectre of a dead one .
`` Stuff -- this place is n't mentioned in the Bible . ''
`` Scylla and Cha -- confound it , I thought it was Sodom and Gomorrah ! ''
We had one fine sunset -- a rich carmine flush that suffused the western sky and cast a ruddy glow far over the sea.
-- Fine sunsets seem to be rare in this part of the world -- or at least , striking ones .
They are soft , sensuous , lovely -- they are exquisite refined , effeminate , but we have seen no sunsets here yet like the gorgeous conflagrations that flame in the track of the sinking sun in our high northern latitudes .
But bad news came .
The commandant of the Piraeus came in his boat , and said we must either depart or else get outside the harbor and remain imprisoned in our ship , under rigid quarantine , for eleven days !
So we took up the anchor and moved outside , to lie a dozen hours or so , taking in supplies , and then sail for Constantinople .
It was the bitterest disappointment we had yet experienced .
To lie a whole day in sight of the Acropolis , and yet be obliged to go away without visiting Athens !
Disappointment was hardly a strong enough word to describe the circumstances .
Seeing no road , we took a tall hill to the left of the distant Acropolis for a mark , and steered straight for it over all obstructions , and over a little rougher piece of country than exists any where else outside of the State of Nevada , perhaps .
Part of the way it was covered with small , loose stones -- we trod on six at a time , and they all rolled .
Another part of it was dry , loose , newly-ploughed ground .
Still another part of it was a long stretch of low grape-vines , which were tanglesome and troublesome , and which we took to be brambles .
The Attic Plain , barring the grape-vines , was a barren , desolate , unpoetical waste -- I wonder what it was in Greece 's Age of Glory , five hundred years before Christ ?
We left the Parthenon to keep its watch over old Athens , as it had kept it for twenty-three hundred years , and went and stood outside the walls of the citadel .
In the distance was the ancient , but still almost perfect Temple of Theseus , and close by , looking to the west , was the Bema , from whence Demosthenes thundered his philippics and fired the wavering patriotism of his countrymen .
To the right was Mars Hill , where the Areopagus sat in ancient times and where St. Paul defined his position , and below was the market-place where he `` disputed daily '' with the gossip-loving Athenians .
We climbed the stone steps St. Paul ascended , and stood in the square-cut place he stood in , and tried to recollect the Bible account of the matter -- but for certain reasons , I could not recall the words .
I have found them since :
Now I had grapes enough for a dozen , but then Jackson was all swollen up with courage , too , and he was obliged to enter a vineyard presently .
The first bunch he seized brought trouble .
A frowsy , bearded brigand sprang into the road with a shout , and flourished a musket in the light of the moon !
We sidled toward the Piraeus -- not running you understand , but only advancing with celerity .
The brigand shouted again , but still we advanced .
It was getting late , and we had no time to fool away on every ass that wanted to drivel Greek platitudes to us .
We would just as soon have talked with him as not if we had not been in a hurry .
Presently Denny said , `` Those fellows are following us ! ''
Four more of our passengers were anxious to visit Athens , and started half an hour after we returned ; but they had not been ashore five minutes till the police discovered and chased them so hotly that they barely escaped to their boat again , and that was all .
They pursued the enterprise no further .
From Athens all through the islands of the Grecian Archipelago , we saw little but forbidding sea-walls and barren hills , sometimes surmounted by three or four graceful columns of some ancient temple , lonely and deserted -- a fitting symbol of the desolation that has come upon all Greece in these latter ages .
We saw no ploughed fields , very few villages , no trees or grass or vegetation of any kind , scarcely , and hardly ever an isolated house .
Greece is a bleak , unsmiling desert , without agriculture , manufactures or commerce , apparently .
What supports its poverty-stricken people or its Government , is a mystery .
We dropped anchor in the mouth of the Golden Horn at daylight in the morning .
Only three or four of us were up to see the great Ottoman capital .
The passengers do not turn out at unseasonable hours , as they used to , to get the earliest possible glimpse of strange foreign cities .
They are well over that .
If we were lying in sight of the Pyramids of Egypt , they would not come on deck until after breakfast , now-a-days .
The shops here are mere coops , mere boxes , bath-rooms , closets -- any thing you please to call them -- on the first floor .
The Turks sit cross-legged in them , and work and trade and smoke long pipes , and smell like -- like Turks .
That covers the ground .
Crowding the narrow streets in front of them are beggars , who beg forever , yet never collect any thing ; and wonderful cripples , distorted out of all semblance of humanity , almost ; vagabonds driving laden asses ; porters carrying dry-goods boxes as large as cottages on their backs ; peddlers of grapes , hot corn , pumpkin seeds , and a hundred other things , yelling like fiends ; and sleeping happily , comfortably , serenely , among the hurrying feet , are the famed dogs of Constantinople ; drifting noiselessly about are squads of Turkish women , draped from chin to feet in flowing robes , and with snowy veils bound about their heads , that disclose only the eyes and a vague , shadowy notion of their features .
Seen moving about , far away in the dim , arched aisles of the Great Bazaar , they look as the shrouded dead must have looked when they walked forth from their graves amid the storms and thunders and earthquakes that burst upon Calvary that awful night of the Crucifixion .
A street in Constantinople is a picture which one ought to see once -- not oftener .
St. Sophia is a colossal church , thirteen or fourteen hundred years old , and unsightly enough to be very , very much older .
Its immense dome is said to be more wonderful than St. Peter 's , but its dirt is much more wonderful than its dome , though they never mention it .
The church has a hundred and seventy pillars in it , each a single piece , and all of costly marbles of various kinds , but they came from ancient temples at Baalbec , Heliopolis , Athens and Ephesus , and are battered , ugly and repulsive .
They were a thousand years old when this church was new , and then the contrast must have been ghastly -- if Justinian 's architects did not trim them any .
The inside of the dome is figured all over with a monstrous inscription in Turkish characters , wrought in gold mosaic , that looks as glaring as a circus bill ; the pavements and the marble balustrades are all battered and dirty ; the perspective is marred every where by a web of ropes that depend from the dizzy height of the dome , and suspend countless dingy , coarse oil lamps , and ostrich-eggs , six or seven feet above the floor .
Squatting and sitting in groups , here and there and far and near , were ragged Turks reading books , hearing sermons , or receiving lessons like children .
And in fifty places were more of the same sort bowing and straightening up , bowing again and getting down to kiss the earth , muttering prayers the while , and keeping up their gymnastics till they ought to have been tired , if they were not .
We visited the Thousand and One Columns .
I do not know what it was originally intended for , but they said it was built for a reservoir .
It is situated in the centre of Constantinople .
You go down a flight of stone steps in the middle of a barren place , and there you are .
You are forty feet under ground , and in the midst of a perfect wilderness of tall , slender , granite columns , of Byzantine architecture .
Stand where you would , or change your position as often as you pleased , you were always a centre from which radiated a dozen long archways and colonnades that lost themselves in distance and the sombre twilight of the place .
This old dried-up reservoir is occupied by a few ghostly silk-spinners now , and one of them showed me a cross cut high up in one of the pillars .
I suppose he meant me to understand that the institution was there before the Turkish occupation , and I thought he made a remark to that effect ; but he must have had an impediment in his speech , for I did not understand him .
Commercial morals , especially , are bad .
There is no gainsaying that .
Greek , Turkish and Armenian morals consist only in attending church regularly on the appointed Sabbaths , and in breaking the ten commandments all the balance of the week .
It comes natural to them to lie and cheat in the first place , and then they go on and improve on nature until they arrive at perfection .
In recommending his son to a merchant as a valuable salesman , a father does not say he is a nice , moral , upright boy , and goes to Sunday School and is honest , but he says , `` This boy is worth his weight in broad pieces of a hundred -- for behold , he will cheat whomsoever hath dealings with him , and from the Euxine to the waters of Marmora there abideth not so gifted a liar ! ''
How is that for a recommendation ?
The Missionaries tell me that they hear encomiums like that passed upon people every day .
They say of a person they admire , `` Ah , he is a charming swindler , and a most exquisite liar ! ''
Every body lies and cheats -- every body who is in business , at any rate .
Even foreigners soon have to come down to the custom of the country , and they do not buy and sell long in Constantinople till they lie and cheat like a Greek .
I say like a Greek , because the Greeks are called the worst transgressors in this line .
Several Americans long resident in Constantinople contend that most Turks are pretty trustworthy , but few claim that the Greeks have any virtues that a man can discover -- at least without a fire assay .
There is one paper published here in the English language -- The Levant Herald -- and there are generally a number of Greek and a few French papers rising and falling , struggling up and falling again .
Newspapers are not popular with the Sultan 's Government .
They do not understand journalism .
The proverb says , `` The unknown is always great . ''
To the court , the newspaper is a mysterious and rascally institution .
They know what a pestilence is , because they have one occasionally that thins the people out at the rate of two thousand a day , and they regard a newspaper as a mild form of pestilence .
When it goes astray , they suppress it -- pounce upon it without warning , and throttle it .
When it do n't go astray for a long time , they get suspicious and throttle it anyhow , because they think it is hatching deviltry .
Imagine the Grand Vizier in solemn council with the magnates of the realm , spelling his way through the hated newspaper , and finally delivering his profound decision : `` This thing means mischief -- it is too darkly , too suspiciously inoffensive -- suppress it !
Warn the publisher that we can not have this sort of thing : put the editor in prison ! ''
That was the picture , just as I got it from incendiary books of travel .
It was a poor , miserable imposture .
The reality is no more like it than the Five Points are like the Garden of Eden .
They received me in a great court , paved with marble slabs ; around it were broad galleries , one above another , carpeted with seedy matting , railed with unpainted balustrades , and furnished with huge rickety chairs , cushioned with rusty old mattresses , indented with impressions left by the forms of nine successive generations of men who had reposed upon them .
The place was vast , naked , dreary ; its court a barn , its galleries stalls for human horses .
The cadaverous , half nude varlets that served in the establishment had nothing of poetry in their appearance , nothing of romance , nothing of Oriental splendor .
They shed no entrancing odors -- just the contrary .
Their hungry eyes and their lank forms continually suggested one glaring , unsentimental fact -- they wanted what they term in California `` a square meal . ''
There was nothing else to do , and so every body went to hunting relics .
They have stocked the ship with them .
They brought them from the Malakoff , from the Redan , Inkerman , Balaklava -- every where .
They have brought cannon balls , broken ramrods , fragments of shell -- iron enough to freight a sloop .
Some have even brought bones -- brought them laboriously from great distances , and were grieved to hear the surgeon pronounce them only bones of mules and oxen .
I knew Blucher would not lose an opportunity like this .
He brought a sack full on board and was going for another .
I prevailed upon him not to go .
He has already turned his state-room into a museum of worthless trumpery , which he has gathered up in his travels .
He is labeling his trophies , now .
I picked up one a while ago , and found it marked `` Fragment of a Russian General . ''
I carried it out to get a better light upon it -- it was nothing but a couple of teeth and part of the jaw-bone of a horse .
I said with some asperity :
The people of Odessa have warmly recommended us to go and call on the Emperor , as did the Sebastopolians .
They have telegraphed his Majesty , and he has signified his willingness to grant us an audience .
So we are getting up the anchors and preparing to sail to his watering-place .
What a scratching around there will be , now !
what a holding of important meetings and appointing of solemn committees !
-- and what a furbishing up of claw-hammer coats and white silk neck-ties !
As this fearful ordeal we are about to pass through pictures itself to my fancy in all its dread sublimity , I begin to feel my fierce desire to converse with a genuine Emperor cooling down and passing away .
What am I to do with my hands ?
What am I to do with my feet ?
What in the world am I to do with myself ?
All took off their hats , and the Consul inflicted the address on him .
He bore it with unflinching fortitude ; then took the rusty-looking document and handed it to some great officer or other , to be filed away among the archives of Russia -- in the stove .
He thanked us for the address , and said he was very much pleased to see us , especially as such friendly relations existed between Russia and the United States .
The Empress said the Americans were favorites in Russia , and she hoped the Russians were similarly regarded in America .
These were all the speeches that were made , and I recommend them to parties who present policemen with gold watches , as models of brevity and point .
After this the Empress went and talked sociably ( for an Empress ) with various ladies around the circle ; several gentlemen entered into a disjointed general conversation with the Emperor ; the Dukes and Princes , Admirals and Maids of Honor dropped into free-and-easy chat with first one and then another of our party , and whoever chose stepped forward and spoke with the modest little Grand Duchess Marie , the Czar 's daughter .
She is fourteen years old , light-haired , blue-eyed , unassuming and pretty .
Every body talks English .
The Grand Duke and his Duchess came out , and the presentation ceremonies were as simple as they had been at the Emperor 's .
In a few minutes , conversation was under way , as before .
The Empress appeared in the verandah , and the little Grand Duchess came out into the crowd .
They had beaten us there .
In a few minutes , the Emperor came himself on horseback .
It was very pleasant .
You can appreciate it if you have ever visited royalty and felt occasionally that possibly you might be wearing out your welcome -- though as a general thing , I believe , royalty is not scrupulous about discharging you when it is done with you .
`` Save us and sanctify us , and finally , then , See good provisions we enjoy while we journey to Jerusalem .
For so man proposes , which it is most true And time will wait for none , nor for us too . ''
Baron Ungern-Sternberg , a boisterous , whole-souled old nobleman , came with the rest .
He is a man of progress and enterprise -- a representative man of the age .
He is the Chief Director of the railway system of Russia -- a sort of railroad king .
In his line he is making things move along in this country He has traveled extensively in America .
He says he has tried convict labor on his railroads , and with perfect success .
He says the convicts work well , and are quiet and peaceable .
He observed that he employs nearly ten thousand of them now .
This appeared to be another call on my resources .
I was equal to the emergency .
I said we had eighty thousand convicts employed on the railways in America -- all of them under sentence of death for murder in the first degree .
That closed him out .
`` Remember , therefore , from whence thou art fallen , and repent , and do the first works ; or else I will come unto thee quickly , and will remove thy candlestick out of his place , except thou repent . ''
Such things have a bad influence .
They provoke worldly men into using light conversation concerning sacred subjects .
Thick-headed commentators upon the Bible , and stupid preachers and teachers , work more damage to religion than sensible , cool-brained clergymen can fight away again , toil as they may .
It is not good judgment to fit a crown of life upon a city which has been destroyed six times .
That other class of wiseacres who twist prophecy in such a manner as to make it promise the destruction and desolation of the same city , use judgment just as bad , since the city is in a very flourishing condition now , unhappily for them .
These things put arguments into the mouth of infidelity .
The `` Seven Churches '' -- thus they abbreviate it -- came next on the list .
We rode there -- about a mile and a half in the sweltering sun -- and visited a little Greek church which they said was built upon the ancient site ; and we paid a small fee , and the holy attendant gave each of us a little wax candle as a remembrancer of the place , and I put mine in my hat and the sun melted it and the grease all ran down the back of my neck ; and so now I have not any thing left but the wick , and it is a sorry and a wilted-looking wick at that .
They were such perfectly natural-looking leads that I could hardly keep from `` taking them up . ''
Among the oyster-shells were mixed many fragments of ancient , broken crockery ware .
Now how did those masses of oyster-shells get there ?
I can not determine .
Broken crockery and oyster-shells are suggestive of restaurants -- but then they could have had no such places away up there on that mountain side in our time , because nobody has lived up there .
A restaurant would not pay in such a stony , forbidding , desolate place .
And besides , there were no champagne corks among the shells .
If there ever was a restaurant there , it must have been in Smyrna 's palmy days , when the hills were covered with palaces .
I could believe in one restaurant , on those terms ; but then how about the three ?
Did they have restaurants there at three different periods of the world ?
-- because there are two or three feet of solid earth between the oyster leads .
Evidently , the restaurant solution will not answer .
A railway here in Asia -- in the dreamy realm of the Orient -- in the fabled land of the Arabian Nights -- is a strange thing to think of .
And yet they have one already , and are building another .
The present one is well built and well conducted , by an English Company , but is not doing an immense amount of business .
The first year it carried a good many passengers , but its freight list only comprised eight hundred pounds of figs !
The little donkeys had saddles upon them which were made very high in order that the rider 's feet might not drag the ground .
The preventative did not work well in the cases of our tallest pilgrims , however .
There were no bridles -- nothing but a single rope , tied to the bit .
It was purely ornamental , for the donkey cared nothing for it .
If he were drifting to starboard , you might put your helm down hard the other way , if it were any satisfaction to you to do it , but he would continue to drift to starboard all the same .
There was only one process which could be depended on , and it was to get down and lift his rear around until his head pointed in the right direction , or take him under your arm and carry him to a part of the road which he could not get out of without climbing .
The sun flamed down as hot as a furnace , and neck-scarfs , veils and umbrellas seemed hardly any protection ; they served only to make the long procession look more than ever fantastic -- for be it known the ladies were all riding astride because they could not stay on the shapeless saddles sidewise , the men were perspiring and out of temper , their feet were banging against the rocks , the donkeys were capering in every direction but the right one and being belabored with clubs for it , and every now and then a broad umbrella would suddenly go down out of the cavalcade , announcing to all that one more pilgrim had bitten the dust .
It was a wilder picture than those solitudes had seen for many a day .
No donkeys ever existed that were as hard to navigate as these , I think , or that had so many vile , exasperating instincts .
Occasionally we grew so tired and breathless with fighting them that we had to desist , -- and immediately the donkey would come down to a deliberate walk .
This , with the fatigue , and the sun , would put a man asleep ; and soon as the man was asleep , the donkey would lie down .
My donkey shall never see his boyhood 's home again .
He has lain down once too often .
When they awoke , one of them , Johannes -- surnamed Smithianus -- said , We are naked .
And it was so .
Their raiment was all gone , and the money which they had gotten from a stranger whom they had proceeded through as they approached the city , was lying upon the ground , corroded and rusted and defaced .
Likewise the dog Ketmehr was gone , and nothing save the brass that was upon his collar remained .
They wondered much at these things .
But they took the money , and they wrapped about their bodies some leaves , and came up to the top of the hill .
Then were they perplexed .
The wonderful temple of Diana was gone ; many grand edifices they had never seen before stood in the city ; men in strange garbs moved about the streets , and every thing was changed .
Then the scales fell from the eyes of the Seven , and one said , Alas , that we drank of the curious liquors .
They have made us weary , and in dreamless sleep these two long centuries have we lain .
Our homes are desolate , our friends are dead .
Behold , the jig is up -- let us die .
And that same day went they forth and laid them down and died .
And in that self-same day , likewise , the Seven-up did cease in Ephesus , for that the Seven that were up were down again , and departed and dead withal .
And the names that be upon their tombs , even unto this time , are Johannes Smithianus , Trumps , Gift , High , and Low , Jack , and The Game .
And with the sleepers lie also the bottles wherein were once the curious liquors : and upon them is writ , in ancient letters , such words as these -- Dames of heathen gods of olden time , perchance : Rumpunch , Jinsling , Egnog .
Such is the story of the Seven Sleepers , ( with slight variations , ) and I know it is true , because I have seen the cave myself .
At the appointed time our business committee reported , and said all things were in readdress -- that we were to start to-day , with horses , pack animals , and tents , and go to Baalbec , Damascus , the Sea of Tiberias , and thence southward by the way of the scene of Jacob 's Dream and other notable Bible localities to Jerusalem -- from thence probably to the Dead Sea , but possibly not -- and then strike for the ocean and rejoin the ship three or four weeks hence at Joppa ; terms , five dollars a day apiece , in gold , and every thing to be furnished by the dragoman .
They said we would lie as well as at a hotel .
I had read something like that before , and did not shame my judgment by believing a word of it .
I said nothing , however , but packed up a blanket and a shawl to sleep in , pipes and tobacco , two or three woollen shirts , a portfolio , a guide-book , and a Bible .
I also took along a towel and a cake of soap , to inspire respect in the Arabs , who would take me for a king in disguise .
It grew dark , and they put candles on the tables -- candles set in bright , new , brazen candlesticks .
And soon the bell -- a genuine , simon-pure bell -- rang , and we were invited to `` the saloon . ''
I had thought before that we had a tent or so too many , but now here was one , at least , provided for ; it was to be used for nothing but an eating-saloon .
Like the others , it was high enough for a family of giraffes to live in , and was very handsome and clean and bright-colored within .
It was a gem of a place .
A table for eight , and eight canvas chairs ; a table-cloth and napkins whose whiteness and whose fineness laughed to scorn the things we were used to in the great excursion steamer ; knives and forks , soup-plates , dinner-plates -- every thing , in the handsomest kind of style .
And they call this camping out .
Those stately fellows in baggy trowsers and turbaned fezzes brought in a dinner which consisted of roast mutton , roast chicken , roast goose , potatoes , bread , tea , pudding , apples , and delicious grapes ; the viands were better cooked than any we had eaten for weeks , and the table made a finer appearance , with its large German silver candlesticks and other finery , than any table we had sat down to for a good while , and yet that polite dragoman , Abraham , came bowing in and apologizing for the whole affair , on account of the unavoidable confusion of getting under way for a very long trip , and promising to do a great deal better in future !
`` The night shall be filled with music , And the cares that infest the day Shall fold their tents like the Arabs , And as silently steal away . ''
This fashion of camping out bewilders me .
We have boot-jacks and a bath-tub , now , and yet all the mysteries the pack-mules carry are not revealed .
We had a fine race , of a mile , with an Arab perched on a camel .
Some of the horses were fast , and made very good time , but the camel scampered by them without any very great effort .
The yelling and shouting , and whipping and galloping , of all parties interested , made it an exhilarating , exciting , and particularly boisterous race .
`` Broke camp at 7 A.M. , and made a ghastly trip through the Zeb Dana valley and the rough mountains -- horses limping and that Arab screech-owl that does most of the singing and carries the water-skins , always a thousand miles ahead , of course , and no water to drink -- will he never die ?
Beautiful stream in a chasm , lined thick with pomegranate , fig , olive and quince orchards , and nooned an hour at the celebrated Baalam 's Ass Fountain of Figia , second in size in Syria , and the coldest water out of Siberia -- guide-books do not say Baalam 's ass ever drank there -- somebody been imposing on the pilgrims , may be .
Bathed in it -- Jack and I .
Only a second -- ice-water .
It is the principal source of the Abana river -- only one-half mile down to where it joins .
Beautiful place -- giant trees all around -- so shady and cool , if one could keep awake -- vast stream gushes straight out from under the mountain in a torrent .
Over it is a very ancient ruin , with no known history -- supposed to have been for the worship of the deity of the fountain or Baalam 's ass or somebody .
Wretched nest of human vermin about the fountain -- rags , dirt , sunken cheeks , pallor of sickness , sores , projecting bones , dull , aching misery in their eyes and ravenous hunger speaking from every eloquent fibre and muscle from head to foot .
How they sprang upon a bone , how they crunched the bread we gave them !
Such as these to swarm about one and watch every bite he takes , with greedy looks , and swallow unconsciously every time he swallows , as if they half fancied the precious morsel went down their own throats -- hurry up the caravan !
-- I never shall enjoy a meal in this distressful country .
To think of eating three times every day under such circumstances for three weeks yet -- it is worse punishment than riding all day in the sun .
There are sixteen starving babies from one to six years old in the party , and their legs are no larger than broom handles .
Left the fountain at 1 P.M. ( the fountain took us at least two hours out of our way , ) and reached Mahomet 's lookout perch , over Damascus , in time to get a good long look before it was necessary to move on .
Ask of the winds that far away with fragments strewed the sea . ''
Damascus is beautiful from the mountain .
It is beautiful even to foreigners accustomed to luxuriant vegetation , and I can easily understand how unspeakably beautiful it must be to eyes that are only used to the God-forsaken barrenness and desolation of Syria .
I should think a Syrian would go wild with ecstacy when such a picture bursts upon him for the first time .
`` And as he journeyed , he came near Damascus , and suddenly there shined round about him a light from heaven :
`` And he fell to the earth and heard a voice saying unto him , 'Saul , Saul , why persecutest thou me ? '
There came a voice to a citizen of Damascus , named Ananias , saying , `` Arise , and go into the street which is called Straight , and inquire at the house of Judas , for one called Saul , of Tarsus ; for behold , he prayeth . ''
The last twenty-four hours we staid in Damascus I lay prostrate with a violent attack of cholera , or cholera morbus , and therefore had a good chance and a good excuse to lie there on that wide divan and take an honest rest .
I had nothing to do but listen to the pattering of the fountains and take medicine and throw it up again .
It was dangerous recreation , but it was pleasanter than traveling in Syria .
I had plenty of snow from Mount Hermon , and as it would not stay on my stomach , there was nothing to interfere with my eating it -- there was always room for more .
I enjoyed myself very well .
Syrian travel has its interesting features , like travel in any other part of the world , and yet to break your leg or have the cholera adds a welcome variety to it .
It seems curious enough to us to be standing on ground that was once actually pressed by the feet of the Saviour .
The situation is suggestive of a reality and a tangibility that seem at variance with the vagueness and mystery and ghostliness that one naturally attaches to the character of a god .
I can not comprehend yet that I am sitting where a god has stood , and looking upon the brook and the mountains which that god looked upon , and am surrounded by dusky men and women whose ancestors saw him , and even talked with him , face to face , and carelessly , just as they would have done with any other stranger .
I can not comprehend this ; the gods of my understanding have been always hidden in clouds and very far away .
The little children were in a pitiable condition -- they all had sore eyes , and were otherwise afflicted in various ways .
They say that hardly a native child in all the East is free from sore eyes , and that thousands of them go blind of one eye or both every year .
I think this must be so , for I see plenty of blind people every day , and I do not remember seeing any children that had n't sore eyes .
And , would you suppose that an American mother could sit for an hour , with her child in her arms , and let a hundred flies roost upon its eyes all that time undisturbed ?
I see that every day .
It makes my flesh creep .
Yesterday we met a woman riding on a little jackass , and she had a little child in her arms -- honestly , I thought the child had goggles on as we approached , and I wondered how its mother could afford so much style .
But when we drew near , we saw that the goggles were nothing but a camp meeting of flies assembled around each of the child 's eyes , and at the same time there was a detachment prospecting its nose .
The flies were happy , the child was contented , and so the mother did not interfere .
As soon as the tribe found out that we had a doctor in our party , they began to flock in from all quarters .
Dr. B. , in the charity of his nature , had taken a child from a woman who sat near by , and put some sort of a wash upon its diseased eyes .
That woman went off and started the whole nation , and it was a sight to see them swarm !
The lame , the halt , the blind , the leprous -- all the distempers that are bred of indolence , dirt , and iniquity -- were represented in the Congress in ten minutes , and still they came !
Every woman that had a sick baby brought it along , and every woman that had n't , borrowed one .
What reverent and what worshiping looks they bent upon that dread , mysterious power , the Doctor !
They watched him take his phials out ; they watched him measure the particles of white powder ; they watched him add drops of one precious liquid , and drops of another ; they lost not the slightest movement ; their eyes were riveted upon him with a fascination that nothing could distract .
I believe they thought he was gifted like a god .
When each individual got his portion of medicine , his eyes were radiant with joy -- notwithstanding by nature they are a thankless and impassive race -- and upon his face was written the unquestioning faith that nothing on earth could prevent the patient from getting well now .
Well , as I was saying , the doctor distributed medicine as long as he had any to distribute , and his reputation is mighty in Galilee this day .
Among his patients was the child of the Shiek 's daughter -- for even this poor , ragged handful of sores and sin has its royal Shiek -- a poor old mummy that looked as if he would be more at home in a poor-house than in the Chief Magistracy of this tribe of hopeless , shirtless savages .
The princess -- I mean the Shiek 's daughter -- was only thirteen or fourteen years old , and had a very sweet face and a pretty one .
She was the only Syrian female we have seen yet who was not so sinfully ugly that she could n't smile after ten o'clock Saturday night without breaking the Sabbath .
Her child was a hard specimen , though -- there was n't enough of it to make a pie , and the poor little thing looked so pleadingly up at all who came near it ( as if it had an idea that now was its chance or never , ) that we were filled with compassion which was genuine and not put on .
Some forty centuries ago the city of Sodom was pillaged by the Arab princes of Mesopotamia , and among other prisoners they seized upon the patriarch Lot and brought him here on their way to their own possessions .
They brought him to Dan , and father Abraham , who was pursuing them , crept softly in at dead of night , among the whispering oleanders and under the shadows of the stately oaks , and fell upon the slumbering victors and startled them from their dreams with the clash of steel .
He recaptured Lot and all the other plunder .
We had been painfully clambering over interminable hills and rocks for days together , and when we suddenly came upon this astonishing piece of rockless plain , every man drove the spurs into his horse and sped away with a velocity he could surely enjoy to the utmost , but could never hope to comprehend in Syria .
But really , here the man rides and carries the child , as a general thing , and the woman walks .
The customs have not changed since Joseph 's time .
We would not have in our houses a picture representing Joseph riding and Mary walking ; we would see profanation in it , but a Syrian Christian would not .
I know that hereafter the picture I first spoke of will look odd to me .
`` For he was fast asleep and weary .
So he died . ''
Such is the touching language of the Bible .
`` The Song of Deborah and Barak '' praises Jael for the memorable service she had rendered , in an exultant strain :
To this region one of the prophecies is applied :
We traversed some miles of desolate country whose soil is rich enough , but is given over wholly to weeds -- a silent , mournful expanse , wherein we saw only three persons -- Arabs , with nothing on but a long coarse shirt like the `` tow-linen '' shirts which used to form the only summer garment of little negro boys on Southern plantations .
Shepherds they were , and they charmed their flocks with the traditional shepherd 's pipe -- a reed instrument that made music as exquisitely infernal as these same Arabs create when they sing .
In their pipes lingered no echo of the wonderful music the shepherd forefathers heard in the Plains of Bethlehem what time the angels sang `` Peace on earth , good will to men . ''
About ten in the morning we halted at Joseph 's Pit .
This is a ruined Khan of the Middle Ages , in one of whose side courts is a great walled and arched pit with water in it , and this pit , one tradition says , is the one Joseph 's brethren cast him into .
A more authentic tradition , aided by the geography of the country , places the pit in Dothan , some two days' journey from here .
However , since there are many who believe in this present pit as the true one , it has its interest .
-- ask him how much , Ferguson !
-- how much to take us all -- eight of us , and you -- to Bethsaida , yonder , and to the mouth of Jordan , and to the place where the swine ran down into the sea -- quick !
-- and we want to coast around every where -- every where !
-- all day long !
-- I could sail a year in these waters !
-- and tell him we 'll stop at Magdala and finish at Tiberias !
-- ask him how much ?
-- any thing -- any thing whatever !
-- tell him we do n't care what the expense is ! ''
[ I said to myself , I knew how it would be . ]
Instantly there was wailing and gnashing of teeth in the camp .
The two Napoleons were offered -- more if necessary -- and pilgrims and dragoman shouted themselves hoarse with pleadings to the retreating boatmen to come back .
But they sailed serenely away and paid no further heed to pilgrims who had dreamed all their lives of some day skimming over the sacred waters of Galilee and listening to its hallowed story in the whisperings of its waves , and had journeyed countless leagues to do it , and -- and then concluded that the fare was too high .
Impertinent Mohammedan Arabs , to think such things of gentlemen of another faith !
Magdala is not a beautiful place .
It is thoroughly Syrian , and that is to say that it is thoroughly ugly , and cramped , squalid , uncomfortable , and filthy -- just the style of cities that have adorned the country since Adam 's time , as all writers have labored hard to prove , and have succeeded .
The streets of Magdala are any where from three to six feet wide , and reeking with uncleanliness .
The houses are from five to seven feet high , and all built upon one arbitrary plan -- the ungraceful form of a dry-goods box .
The sides are daubed with a smooth white plaster , and tastefully frescoed aloft and alow with disks of camel-dung placed there to dry .
This gives the edifice the romantic appearance of having been riddled with cannon-balls , and imparts to it a very warlike aspect .
When the artist has arranged his materials with an eye to just proportion -- the small and the large flakes in alternate rows , and separated by carefully-considered intervals -- I know of nothing more cheerful to look upon than a spirited Syrian fresco .
The flat , plastered roof is garnished by picturesque stacks of fresco materials , which , having become thoroughly dried and cured , are placed there where it will be convenient .
It is used for fuel .
There is no timber of any consequence in Palestine -- none at all to waste upon fires -- and neither are there any mines of coal .
If my description has been intelligible , you will perceive , now , that a square , flat-roofed hovel , neatly frescoed , with its wall-tops gallantly bastioned and turreted with dried camel-refuse , gives to a landscape a feature that is exceedingly festive and picturesque , especially if one is careful to remember to stick in a cat wherever , about the premises , there is room for a cat to sit .
There are no windows to a Syrian hut , and no chimneys .
When I used to read that they let a bed-ridden man down through the roof of a house in Capernaum to get him into the presence of the Saviour , I generally had a three-story brick in my mind , and marveled that they did not break his neck with the strange experiment .
I perceive now , however , that they might have taken him by the heels and thrown him clear over the house without discommoding him very much .
Palestine is not changed any since those days , in manners , customs , architecture , or people .
We are camped in this place , now , just within the city walls of Tiberias .
We went into the town before nightfall and looked at its people -- we cared nothing about its houses .
Its people are best examined at a distance .
They are particularly uncomely Jews , Arabs , and negroes .
Squalor and poverty are the pride of Tiberias .
The young women wear their dower strung upon a strong wire that curves downward from the top of the head to the jaw -- Turkish silver coins which they have raked together or inherited .
Most of these maidens were not wealthy , but some few had been very kindly dealt with by fortune .
I saw heiresses there worth , in their own right -- worth , well , I suppose I might venture to say , as much as nine dollars and a half .
But such cases are rare .
When you come across one of these , she naturally puts on airs .
She will not ask for bucksheesh .
She will not even permit of undue familiarity .
She assumes a crushing dignity and goes on serenely practicing with her fine-tooth comb and quoting poetry just the same as if you were not present at all .
Some people can not stand prosperity .
In the starlight , Galilee has no boundaries but the broad compass of the heavens , and is a theatre meet for great events ; meet for the birth of a religion able to save a world ; and meet for the stately Figure appointed to stand upon its stage and proclaim its high decrees .
But in the sunlight , one says : Is it for the deeds which were done and the words which were spoken in this little acre of rocks and sand eighteen centuries gone , that the bells are ringing to-day in the remote islands of the sea and far and wide over continents that clasp the circumference of the huge globe ?
We did not go to the ancient warm baths two miles below Tiberias .
I had no desire in the world to go there .
This seemed a little strange , and prompted me to try to discover what the cause of this unreasonable indifference was .
It turned out to be simply because Pliny mentions them .
I have conceived a sort of unwarrantable unfriendliness toward Pliny and St. Paul , because it seems as if I can never ferret out a place that I can have to myself .
It always and eternally transpires that St. Paul has been to that place , and Pliny has `` mentioned '' it .
`` Then hire a regiment !
Would you send us out among these desperate hordes , with no salvation in our utmost need but this old turret ? ''
We jogged along peacefully over the great caravan route from Damascus to Jerusalem and Egypt , past Lubia and other Syrian hamlets , perched , in the unvarying style , upon the summit of steep mounds and hills , and fenced round about with giant cactuses , ( the sign of worthless land , ) with prickly pears upon them like hams , and came at last to the battle-field of Hattin .
We reached Tabor safely , and considerably in advance of that old iron-clad swindle of a guard .
We never saw a human being on the whole route , much less lawless hordes of Bedouins .
Tabor stands solitary and alone , a giant sentinel above the Plain of Esdraelon .
It rises some fourteen hundred feet above the surrounding level , a green , wooden cone , symmetrical and full of grace -- a prominent landmark , and one that is exceedingly pleasant to eyes surfeited with the repulsive monotony of desert Syria .
We climbed the steep path to its summit , through breezy glades of thorn and oak .
The view presented from its highest peak was almost beautiful .
Below , was the broad , level plain of Esdraelon , checkered with fields like a chess-board , and full as smooth and level , seemingly ; dotted about its borders with white , compact villages , and faintly penciled , far and near , with the curving lines of roads and trails .
When it is robed in the fresh verdure of spring , it must form a charming picture , even by itself .
Skirting its southern border rises `` Little Hermon , '' over whose summit a glimpse of Gilboa is caught .
Nain , famous for the raising of the widow 's son , and Endor , as famous for the performances of her witch are in view .
To the eastward lies the Valley of the Jordan and beyond it the mountains of Gilead .
Westward is Mount Carmel .
Hermon in the north -- the table-lands of Bashan -- Safed , the holy city , gleaming white upon a tall spur of the mountains of Lebanon -- a steel-blue corner of the Sea of Galilee -- saddle-peaked Hattin , traditional `` Mount of Beatitudes '' and mute witness brave fights of the Crusading host for Holy Cross -- these fill up the picture .
Nazareth is wonderfully interesting because the town has an air about it of being precisely as Jesus left it , and one finds himself saying , all the time , `` The boy Jesus has stood in this doorway -- has played in that street -- has touched these stones with his hands -- has rambled over these chalky hills . ''
Whoever shall write the boyhood of Jesus ingeniously will make a book which will possess a vivid interest for young and old alike .
I judge so from the greater interest we found in Nazareth than any of our speculations upon Capernaum and the Sea of Galilee gave rise to .
It was not possible , standing by the Sea of Galilee , to frame more than a vague , far-away idea of the majestic Personage who walked upon the crested waves as if they had been solid earth , and who touched the dead and they rose up and spoke .
I read among my notes , now , with a new interest , some sentences from an edition of 1621 of the Apocryphal New Testament .
`` A young man who had been bewitched and turned into a mule , miraculously cured by the infant Savior being put on his back , and is married to the girl who had been cured of leprosy .
Whereupon the bystanders praise God .
Jesus , charged with throwing a boy from the roof of a house , miraculously causes the dead boy to speak and acquit him ; fetches water for his mother , breaks the pitcher and miraculously gathers the water in his mantle and brings it home .
They imposed another pirate upon us at Nazareth -- another invincible Arab guard .
We took our last look at the city , clinging like a whitewashed wasp 's nest to the hill-side , and at eight o'clock in the morning departed .
We dismounted and drove the horses down a bridle-path which I think was fully as crooked as a corkscrew , which I know to be as steep as the downward sweep of a rainbow , and which I believe to be the worst piece of road in the geography , except one in the Sandwich Islands , which I remember painfully , and possibly one or two mountain trails in the Sierra Nevadas .
Often , in this narrow path the horse had to poise himself nicely on a rude stone step and then drop his fore-feet over the edge and down something more than half his own height .
This brought his nose near the ground , while his tail pointed up toward the sky somewhere , and gave him the appearance of preparing to stand on his head .
A horse can not look dignified in this position .
We accomplished the long descent at last , and trotted across the great Plain of Esdraelon .
A spring trickles out of the rock in the gloomy recesses of the cavern , and we were thirsty .
The citizens of Endor objected to our going in there .
They do not mind dirt ; they do not mind rags ; they do not mind vermin ; they do not mind barbarous ignorance and savagery ; they do not mind a reasonable degree of starvation , but they do like to be pure and holy before their god , whoever he may be , and therefore they shudder and grow almost pale at the idea of Christian lips polluting a spring whose waters must descend into their sanctified gullets .
We had no wanton desire to wound even their feelings or trample upon their prejudices , but we were out of water , thus early in the day , and were burning up with thirst .
It was at this time , and under these circumstances , that I framed an aphorism which has already become celebrated .
I said : `` Necessity knows no law . ''
We went in and drank .
A little mosque stands upon the spot which tradition says was occupied by the widow 's dwelling .
Two or three aged Arabs sat about its door .
We entered , and the pilgrims broke specimens from the foundation walls , though they had to touch , and even step , upon the `` praying carpets '' to do it .
It was almost the same as breaking pieces from the hearts of those old Arabs .
To step rudely upon the sacred praying mats , with booted feet -- a thing not done by any Arab -- was to inflict pain upon men who had not offended us in any way .
Suppose a party of armed foreigners were to enter a village church in America and break ornaments from the altar railings for curiosities , and climb up and walk upon the Bible and the pulpit cushions ?
However , the cases are different .
One is the profanation of a temple of our faith -- the other only the profanation of a pagan one .
Presently we came to a ruinous old town on a hill , the same being the ancient Jezreel .
Ahab , King of Samaria , ( this was a very vast kingdom , for those days , and was very nearly half as large as Rhode Island ) dwelt in the city of Jezreel , which was his capital .
Near him lived a man by the name of Naboth , who had a vineyard .
The King asked him for it , and when he would not give it , offered to buy it .
But Naboth refused to sell it .
In those days it was considered a sort of crime to part with one 's inheritance at any price -- and even if a man did part with it , it reverted to himself or his heirs again at the next jubilee year .
So this spoiled child of a King went and lay down on the bed with his face to the wall , and grieved sorely .
The Queen , a notorious character in those days , and whose name is a by-word and a reproach even in these , came in and asked him wherefore he sorrowed , and he told her .
Jezebel said she could secure the vineyard ; and she went forth and forged letters to the nobles and wise men , in the King 's name , and ordered them to proclaim a fast and set Naboth on high before the people , and suborn two witnesses to swear that he had blasphemed .
They did it , and the people stoned the accused by the city wall , and he died .
Then Jezebel came and told the King , and said , Behold , Naboth is no more -- rise up and seize the vineyard .
So Ahab seized the vineyard , and went into it to possess it .
But the Prophet Elijah came to him there and read his fate to him , and the fate of Jezebel ; and said that in the place where dogs licked the blood of Naboth , dogs should also lick his blood -- and he said , likewise , the dogs should eat Jezebel by the wall of Jezreel .
In the course of time , the King was killed in battle , and when his chariot wheels were washed in the pool of Samaria , the dogs licked the blood .
In after years , Jehu , who was King of Israel , marched down against Jezreel , by order of one of the Prophets , and administered one of those convincing rebukes so common among the people of those days : he killed many kings and their subjects , and as he came along he saw Jezebel , painted and finely dressed , looking out of a window , and ordered that she be thrown down to him .
A servant did it , and Jehu 's horse trampled her under foot .
Then Jehu went in and sat down to dinner ; and presently he said , Go and bury this cursed woman , for she is a King 's daughter .
The spirit of charity came upon him too late , however , for the prophecy had already been fulfilled -- the dogs had eaten her , and they `` found no more of her than the skull , and the feet , and the palms of her hands . ''
There was nothing for us to do in Samaria but buy handfuls of old Roman coins at a franc a dozen , and look at a dilapidated church of the Crusaders and a vault in it which once contained the body of John the Baptist .
This relic was long ago carried away to Genoa .
Samaria stood a disastrous siege , once , in the days of Elisha , at the hands of the King of Syria .
Provisions reached such a figure that `` an ass ' head was sold for eighty pieces of silver and the fourth part of a cab of dove 's dung for five pieces of silver . ''
We were glad to leave this hot and dusty old village and hurry on .
At two o'clock we stopped to lunch and rest at ancient Shechem , between the historic Mounts of Gerizim and Ebal , where in the old times the books of the law , the curses and the blessings , were read from the heights to the Jewish multitudes below .
Carefully preserved among the sacred archives of this curious community is a MSS .
copy of the ancient Jewish law , which is said to be the oldest document on earth .
It is written on vellum , and is some four or five thousand years old .
Nothing but bucksheesh can purchase a sight .
Its fame is somewhat dimmed in these latter days , because of the doubts so many authors of Palestine travels have felt themselves privileged to cast upon it .
Speaking of this MSS .
reminds me that I procured from the high-priest of this ancient Samaritan community , at great expense , a secret document of still higher antiquity and far more extraordinary interest , which I propose to publish as soon as I have finished translating it .
We left Jacob 's Well and traveled till eight in the evening , but rather slowly , for we had been in the saddle nineteen hours , and the horses were cruelly tired .
We got so far ahead of the tents that we had to camp in an Arab village , and sleep on the ground .
We could have slept in the largest of the houses ; but there were some little drawbacks : it was populous with vermin , it had a dirt floor , it was in no respect cleanly , and there was a family of goats in the only bedroom , and two donkeys in the parlor .
Outside there were no inconveniences , except that the dusky , ragged , earnest-eyed villagers of both sexes and all ages grouped themselves on their haunches all around us , and discussed us and criticised us with noisy tongues till midnight .
We did not mind the noise , being tired , but , doubtless , the reader is aware that it is almost an impossible thing to go to sleep when you know that people are looking at you .
We went to bed at ten , and got up again at two and started once more .
Thus are people persecuted by dragomen , whose sole ambition in life is to get ahead of each other .
Perched on its eternal hills , white and domed and solid , massed together and hooped with high gray walls , the venerable city gleamed in the sun .
Why , it was no larger than an American village of four thousand inhabitants , and no larger than an ordinary Syrian city of thirty thousand .
Jerusalem numbers only fourteen thousand people .
The streets are roughly and badly paved with stone , and are tolerably crooked -- enough so to make each street appear to close together constantly and come to an end about a hundred yards ahead of a pilgrim as long as he chooses to walk in it .
Projecting from the top of the lower story of many of the houses is a very narrow porch-roof or shed , without supports from below ; and I have several times seen cats jump across the street from one shed to the other when they were out calling .
The cats could have jumped double the distance without extraordinary exertion .
I mention these things to give an idea of how narrow the streets are .
Since a cat can jump across them without the least inconvenience , it is hardly necessary to state that such streets are too narrow for carriages .
These vehicles can not navigate the Holy City .
We were shown the place where our Lord appeared to His mother after the Resurrection .
Here , also , a marble slab marks the place where St. Helena , the mother of the Emperor Constantine , found the crosses about three hundred years after the Crucifixion .
According to the legend , this great discovery elicited extravagant demonstrations of joy .
But they were of short duration .
The question intruded itself : `` Which bore the blessed Saviour , and which the thieves ? ''
To be in doubt , in so mighty a matter as this -- to be uncertain which one to adore -- was a grievous misfortune .
It turned the public joy to sorrow .
But when lived there a holy priest who could not set so simple a trouble as this at rest ?
One of these soon hit upon a plan that would be a certain test .
A noble lady lay very ill in Jerusalem .
The wise priests ordered that the three crosses be taken to her bedside one at a time .
When her eyes fell upon the first one , she uttered a scream that was heard beyond the Damascus Gate , and even upon the Mount of Olives , it was said , and then fell back in a deadly swoon .
They recovered her and brought the second cross .
Instantly she went into fearful convulsions , and it was with the greatest difficulty that six strong men could hold her .
They were afraid , now , to bring in the third cross .
They began to fear that possibly they had fallen upon the wrong crosses , and that the true cross was not with this number at all .
However , as the woman seemed likely to die with the convulsions that were tearing her , they concluded that the third could do no more than put her out of her misery with a happy dispatch .
So they brought it , and behold , a miracle !
The woman sprang from her bed , smiling and joyful , and perfectly restored to health .
When we listen to evidence like this , we can not but believe .
We would be ashamed to doubt , and properly , too .
Even the very part of Jerusalem where this all occurred is there yet .
So there is really no room for doubt .
Not far from here was a niche where they used to preserve a piece of the True Cross , but it is gone , now .
This piece of the cross was discovered in the sixteenth century .
The Latin priests say it was stolen away , long ago , by priests of another sect .
That seems like a hard statement to make , but we know very well that it was stolen , because we have seen it ourselves in several of the cathedrals of Italy and France .
It is a singular circumstance that right under the roof of this same great church , and not far away from that illustrious column , Adam himself , the father of the human race , lies buried .
There is no question that he is actually buried in the grave which is pointed out as his -- there can be none -- because it has never yet been proven that that grave is not the grave in which he is buried .
The tomb of Adam !
How touching it was , here in a land of strangers , far away from home , and friends , and all who cared for me , thus to discover the grave of a blood relation .
True , a distant one , but still a relation .
The unerring instinct of nature thrilled its recognition .
The fountain of my filial affection was stirred to its profoundest depths , and I gave way to tumultuous emotion .
I leaned upon a pillar and burst into tears .
I deem it no shame to have wept over the grave of my poor dead relative .
Let him who would sneer at my emotion close this volume here , for he will find little to his taste in my journeyings through Holy Land .
Noble old man -- he did not live to see me -- he did not live to see his child .
And I -- I -- alas , I did not live to see him .
Weighed down by sorrow and disappointment , he died before I was born -- six thousand brief summers before I was born .
But let us try to bear it with fortitude .
Let us trust that he is better off where he is .
Let us take comfort in the thought that his loss is our eternal gain .
We passed along a few steps and saw the altar built over the very spot where the good Catholic priests say the soldiers divided the raiment of the Saviour .
Then we went down into a cavern which cavilers say was once a cistern .
It is a chapel , now , however -- the Chapel of St. Helena .
It is fifty-one feet long by forty-three wide .
In it is a marble chair which Helena used to sit in while she superintended her workmen when they were digging and delving for the True Cross .
In this place is an altar dedicated to St. Dimas , the penitent thief .
A new bronze statue is here -- a statue of St. Helena .
It reminded us of poor Maximilian , so lately shot .
He presented it to this chapel when he was about to leave for his throne in Mexico .
We passed on , and halted before the tomb of Melchisedek !
You will remember Melchisedek , no doubt ; he was the King who came out and levied a tribute on Abraham the time that he pursued Lot 's captors to Dan , and took all their property from them .
That was about four thousand years ago , and Melchisedek died shortly afterward .
However , his tomb is in a good state of preservation .
There is one thing he can not avoid ; go where he will about the world , he must never fail to report in Jerusalem every fiftieth year .
Only a year or two ago he was here for the thirty-seventh time since Jesus was crucified on Calvary .
They say that many old people , who are here now , saw him then , and had seen him before .
He looks always the same -- old , and withered , and hollow-eyed , and listless , save that there is about him something which seems to suggest that he is looking for some one , expecting some one -- the friends of his youth , perhaps .
But the most of them are dead , now .
He always pokes about the old streets looking lonesome , making his mark on a wall here and there , and eyeing the oldest buildings with a sort of friendly half interest ; and he sheds a few tears at the threshold of his ancient dwelling , and bitter , bitter tears they are .
Then he collects his rent and leaves again .
He has been seen standing near the Church of the Holy Sepulchre on many a starlight night , for he has cherished an idea for many centuries that if he could only enter there , he could rest .
But when he approaches , the doors slam to with a crash , the earth trembles , and all the lights in Jerusalem burn a ghastly blue !
He does this every fifty years , just the same .
It is hopeless , but then it is hard to break habits one has been eighteen hundred years accustomed to .
The old tourist is far away on his wanderings , now .
How he must smile to see a pack of blockheads like us , galloping about the world , and looking wise , and imagining we are finding out a good deal about it !
He must have a consuming contempt for the ignorant , complacent asses that go skurrying about the world in these railroading days and call it traveling .
We descended to the canon again , and then the guide began to give name and history to every bank and boulder we came to : `` This was the Field of Blood ; these cuttings in the rocks were shrines and temples of Moloch ; here they sacrificed children ; yonder is the Zion Gate ; the Tyropean Valley , the Hill of Ophel ; here is the junction of the Valley of Jehoshaphat -- on your right is the Well of Job . ''
We turned up Jehoshaphat .
The recital went on .
`` This is the Mount of Olives ; this is the Hill of Offense ; the nest of huts is the Village of Siloam ; here , yonder , every where , is the King 's Garden ; under this great tree Zacharias , the high priest , was murdered ; yonder is Mount Moriah and the Temple wall ; the tomb of Absalom ; the tomb of St. James ; the tomb of Zacharias ; beyond , are the Garden of Gethsemane and the tomb of the Virgin Mary ; here is the Pool of Siloam , and -- -- ''
We went away from there and stopped at the Fountain of the Virgin .
But the water was not good , and there was no comfort or peace any where , on account of the regiment of boys and girls and beggars that persecuted us all the time for bucksheesh .
The guide wanted us to give them some money , and we did it ; but when he went on to say that they were starving to death we could not but feel that we had done a great sin in throwing obstacles in the way of such a desirable consummation , and so we tried to collect it back , but it could not be done .
At two in the morning they routed us out of bed -- another piece of unwarranted cruelty -- another stupid effort of our dragoman to get ahead of a rival .
It was not two hours to the Jordan .
However , we were dressed and under way before any one thought of looking to see what time it was , and so we drowsed on through the chill night air and dreamed of camp fires , warm beds , and other comfortable things .
With the first suspicion of dawn , every pilgrim took off his clothes and waded into the dark torrent , singing :
But they did not sing long .
The water was so fearfully cold that they were obliged to stop singing and scamper out again .
Then they stood on the bank shivering , and so chagrined and so grieved , that they merited holiest compassion .
Because another dream , another cherished hope , had failed .
They had promised themselves all along that they would cross the Jordan where the Israelites crossed it when they entered Canaan from their long pilgrimage in the desert .
They would cross where the twelve stones were placed in memory of that great event .
While they did it they would picture to themselves that vast army of pilgrims marching through the cloven waters , bearing the hallowed ark of the covenant and shouting hosannahs , and singing songs of thanksgiving and praise .
Each had promised himself that he would be the first to cross .
They were at the goal of their hopes at last , but the current was too swift , the water was too cold !
Daylight came , soon after we got under way , and in the course of an hour or two we reached the Dead Sea .
Nothing grows in the flat , burning desert around it but weeds and the Dead Sea apple the poets say is beautiful to the eye , but crumbles to ashes and dust when you break it .
Such as we found were not handsome , but they were bitter to the taste .
They yielded no dust .
It was because they were not ripe , perhaps .
Travel and experience mar the grandest pictures and rob us of the most cherished traditions of our boyhood .
Well , let them go .
I have already seen the Empire of King Solomon diminish to the size of the State of Pennsylvania ; I suppose I can bear the reduction of the seas and the river .
We looked every where , as we passed along , but never saw grain or crystal of Lot 's wife .
It was a great disappointment .
For many and many a year we had known her sad story , and taken that interest in her which misfortune always inspires .
But she was gone .
Her picturesque form no longer looms above the desert of the Dead Sea to remind the tourist of the doom that fell upon the lost cities .
We staid all night with the good monks at the convent of Ramleh , and in the morning got up and galloped the horses a good part of the distance from there to Jaffa , or Joppa , for the plain was as level as a floor and free from stones , and besides this was our last march in Holy Land .
These two or three hours finished , we and the tired horses could have rest and sleep as long as we wanted it .
This was the plain of which Joshua spoke when he said , `` Sun , stand thou still on Gibeon , and thou moon in the valley of Ajalon . ''
As we drew near to Jaffa , the boys spurred up the horses and indulged in the excitement of an actual race -- an experience we had hardly had since we raced on donkeys in the Azores islands .
Palestine sits in sackcloth and ashes .
Over it broods the spell of a curse that has withered its fields and fettered its energies .
Where Sodom and Gomorrah reared their domes and towers , that solemn sea now floods the plain , in whose bitter waters no living thing exists -- over whose waveless surface the blistering air hangs motionless and dead -- about whose borders nothing grows but weeds , and scattering tufts of cane , and that treacherous fruit that promises refreshment to parching lips , but turns to ashes at the touch .
Nazareth is forlorn ; about that ford of Jordan where the hosts of Israel entered the Promised Land with songs of rejoicing , one finds only a squalid camp of fantastic Bedouins of the desert ; Jericho the accursed , lies a moldering ruin , to-day , even as Joshua 's miracle left it more than three thousand years ago ; Bethlehem and Bethany , in their poverty and their humiliation , have nothing about them now to remind one that they once knew the high honor of the Saviour 's presence ; the hallowed spot where the shepherds watched their flocks by night , and where the angels sang Peace on earth , good will to men , is untenanted by any living creature , and unblessed by any feature that is pleasant to the eye .
Renowned Jerusalem itself , the stateliest name in history , has lost all its ancient grandeur , and is become a pauper village ; the riches of Solomon are no longer there to compel the admiration of visiting Oriental queens ; the wonderful temple which was the pride and the glory of Israel , is gone , and the Ottoman crescent is lifted above the spot where , on that most memorable day in the annals of the world , they reared the Holy Cross .
The noted Sea of Galilee , where Roman fleets once rode at anchor and the disciples of the Saviour sailed in their ships , was long ago deserted by the devotees of war and commerce , and its borders are a silent wilderness ; Capernaum is a shapeless ruin ; Magdala is the home of beggared Arabs ; Bethsaida and Chorazin have vanished from the earth , and the `` desert places '' round about them where thousands of men once listened to the Saviour 's voice and ate the miraculous bread , sleep in the hush of a solitude that is inhabited only by birds of prey and skulking foxes .
It was worth a kingdom to be at sea again .
It was a relief to drop all anxiety whatsoever -- all questions as to where we should go ; how long we should stay ; whether it were worth while to go or not ; all anxieties about the condition of the horses ; all such questions as `` Shall we ever get to water ? ''
`` Shall we ever lunch ? ''
`` Ferguson , how many more million miles have we got to creep under this awful sun before we camp ? ''
It was a relief to cast all these torturing little anxieties far away -- ropes of steel they were , and every one with a separate and distinct strain on it -- and feel the temporary contentment that is born of the banishment of all care and responsibility .
We did not look at the compass : we did not care , now , where the ship went to , so that she went out of sight of land as quickly as possible .
When I travel again , I wish to go in a pleasure ship .
No amount of money could have purchased for us , in a strange vessel and among unfamiliar faces , the perfect satisfaction and the sense of being at home again which we experienced when we stepped on board the `` Quaker City , '' -- our own ship -- after this wearisome pilgrimage .
It is a something we have felt always when we returned to her , and a something we had no desire to sell .
In the morning the lost tribes of America came ashore and infested the hotels and took possession of all the donkeys and other open barouches that offered .
They went in picturesque procession to the American Consul 's ; to the great gardens ; to Cleopatra 's Needles ; to Pompey's Pillar ; to the palace of the Viceroy of Egypt ; to the Nile ; to the superb groves of date-palms .
One of our most inveterate relic-hunters had his hammer with him , and tried to break a fragment off the upright Needle and could not do it ; he tried the prostrate one and failed ; he borrowed a heavy sledge hammer from a mason and tried again .
He tried Pompey's Pillar , and this baffled him .
Scattered all about the mighty monolith were sphinxes of noble countenance , carved out of Egyptian granite as hard as blue steel , and whose shapely features the wear of five thousand years had failed to mark or mar .
The relic-hunter battered at these persistently , and sweated profusely over his work .
He might as well have attempted to deface the moon .
They regarded him serenely with the stately smile they had worn so long , and which seemed to say , `` Peck away , poor insect ; we were not made to fear such as you ; in ten-score dragging ages we have seen more of your kind than there are sands at your feet : have they left a blemish upon us ? ''
`` But he says he 's mor'ly bound to have 'em ; he says he 'll just go a-rairin ' and a-chargin ' through this house and raise more -- well , there 's no tellin ' what he wo n't do if he do n't get 'em ; because he 's drunk and crazy and desperate , and nothing 'll soothe him down but them cussed books . ''
[ I had not made any threats , and was not in the condition ascribed to me by the porter . ]
Somewhere along this route we had a few startling exhibitions of Oriental simplicity .
A girl apparently thirteen years of age came along the great thoroughfare dressed like Eve before the fall .
We would have called her thirteen at home ; but here girls who look thirteen are often not more than nine , in reality .
Occasionally we saw stark-naked men of superb build , bathing , and making no attempt at concealment .
However , an hour's acquaintance with this cheerful custom reconciled the pilgrims to it , and then it ceased to occasion remark .
Thus easily do even the most startling novelties grow tame and spiritless to these sight-surfeited wanderers .
At the distance of a few miles the Pyramids rising above the palms , looked very clean-cut , very grand and imposing , and very soft and filmy , as well .
They swam in a rich haze that took from them all suggestions of unfeeling stone , and made them seem only the airy nothings of a dream -- structures which might blossom into tiers of vague arches , or ornate colonnades , may be , and change and change again , into all graceful forms of architecture , while we looked , and then melt deliciously away and blend with the tremulous atmosphere .
On the one hand , a mighty sea of yellow sand stretched away toward the ends of the earth , solemn , silent , shorn of vegetation , its solitude uncheered by any forms of creature life ; on the other , the Eden of Egypt was spread below us -- a broad green floor , cloven by the sinuous river , dotted with villages , its vast distances measured and marked by the diminishing stature of receding clusters of palms .
It lay asleep in an enchanted atmosphere .
There was no sound , no motion .
Above the date-plumes in the middle distance , swelled a domed and pinnacled mass , glimmering through a tinted , exquisite mist ; away toward the horizon a dozen shapely pyramids watched over ruined Memphis : and at our feet the bland impassible Sphynx looked out upon the picture from her throne in the sands as placidly and pensively as she had looked upon its like full fifty lagging centuries ago .
We descended , hot and out of humor .
The dragoman lit candles , and we all entered a hole near the base of the pyramid , attended by a crazy rabble of Arabs who thrust their services upon us uninvited .
They dragged us up a long inclined chute , and dripped candle-grease all over us .
This chute was not more than twice as wide and high as a Saratoga trunk , and was walled , roofed and floored with solid blocks of Egyptian granite as wide as a wardrobe , twice as thick and three times as long .
We kept on climbing , through the oppressive gloom , till I thought we ought to be nearing the top of the pyramid again , and then came to the `` Queen's Chamber , '' and shortly to the Chamber of the King .
These large apartments were tombs .
The walls were built of monstrous masses of smoothed granite , neatly joined together .
Some of them were nearly as large square as an ordinary parlor .
A great stone sarcophagus like a bath-tub stood in the centre of the King 's Chamber .
Around it were gathered a picturesque group of Arab savages and soiled and tattered pilgrims , who held their candles aloft in the gloom while they chattered , and the winking blurs of light shed a dim glory down upon one of the irrepressible memento-seekers who was pecking at the venerable sarcophagus with his sacrilegious hammer .
The Sphynx : a hundred and twenty-five feet long , sixty feet high , and a hundred and two feet around the head , if I remember rightly -- carved out of one solid block of stone harder than any iron .
The block must have been as large as the Fifth Avenue Hotel before the usual waste ( by the necessities of sculpture ) of a fourth or a half of the original mass was begun .
I only set down these figures and these remarks to suggest the prodigious labor the carving of it so elegantly , so symmetrically , so faultlessly , must have cost .
This species of stone is so hard that figures cut in it remain sharp and unmarred after exposure to the weather for two or three thousand years .
Now did it take a hundred years of patient toil to carve the Sphynx ?
We were glad to have seen the land which was the mother of civilization -- which taught Greece her letters , and through Greece Rome , and through Rome the world ; the land which could have humanized and civilized the hapless children of Israel , but allowed them to depart out of her borders little better than savages .
We were glad to have seen that land which had an enlightened religion with future eternal rewards and punishment in it , while even Israel 's religion contained no promise of a hereafter .
We were glad to have seen that land which had glass three thousand years before England had it , and could paint upon it as none of us can paint now ; that land which knew , three thousand years ago , well nigh all of medicine and surgery which science has discovered lately ; which had all those curious surgical instruments which science has invented recently ; which had in high excellence a thousand luxuries and necessities of an advanced civilization which we have gradually contrived and accumulated in modern times and claimed as things that were new under the sun ; that had paper untold centuries before we dreampt of it -- and waterfalls before our women thought of them ; that had a perfect system of common schools so long before we boasted of our achievements in that direction that it seems forever and forever ago ; that so embalmed the dead that flesh was made almost immortal -- which we can not do ; that built temples which mock at destroying time and smile grimly upon our lauded little prodigies of architecture ; that old land that knew all which we know now , perchance , and more ; that walked in the broad highway of civilization in the gray dawn of creation , ages and ages before we were born ; that left the impress of exalted , cultivated Mind upon the eternal front of the Sphynx to confound all scoffers who , when all her other proofs had passed away , might seek to persuade the world that imperial Egypt , in the days of her high renown , had groped in darkness .
We were at sea now , for a very long voyage -- we were to pass through the entire length of the Levant ; through the entire length of the Mediterranean proper , also , and then cross the full width of the Atlantic -- a voyage of several weeks .
We naturally settled down into a very slow , stay-at-home manner of life , and resolved to be quiet , exemplary people , and roam no more for twenty or thirty days .
No more , at least , than from stem to stern of the ship .
It was a very comfortable prospect , though , for we were tired and needed a long rest .
`` Sunday -- Services , as usual , at four bells .
Services at night , also .
`` Thursday -- Anchored off Algiers , Africa .
Beautiful city , beautiful green hilly landscape behind it .
Staid half a day and left .
Not permitted to land , though we showed a clean bill of health .
They were afraid of Egyptian plague and cholera .
`` Monday -- Morning , dominoes .
Evening , promenading the decks .
Afterward , charades and a lecture from Dr. C. Dominoes .
`` No date -- Anchored off the picturesque city of Cagliari , Sardinia .
Staid till midnight , but not permitted to land by these infamous foreigners .
They smell inodorously -- they do not wash -- they dare not risk cholera .
He smelt it -- tasted it -- smiled benignantly -- then said :
`` It is inferior -- for coffee -- but it is pretty fair tea . ''
The humbled mutineer smelt it , tasted it , and returned to his seat .
He had made an egregious ass of himself before the whole ship .
He did it no more .
After that he took things as they came .
The old-fashioned ship-life had returned , now that we were no longer in sight of land .
For days and days it continued just the same , one day being exactly like another , and , to me , every one of them pleasant .
At last we anchored in the open roadstead of Funchal , in the beautiful islands we call the Madeiras .
RETURN OF THE HOLY LAND EXCURSIONISTS -- THE STORY OF THE CRUISE .
TO THE EDITOR OF THE HERALD :
Wherever we went , in Europe , Asia , or Africa , we made a sensation , and , I suppose I may add , created a famine .
None of us had ever been any where before ; we all hailed from the interior ; travel was a wild novelty to us , and we conducted ourselves in accordance with the natural instincts that were in us , and trammeled ourselves with no ceremonies , no conventionalities .
We always took care to make it understood that we were Americans -- Americans !
When we found that a good many foreigners had hardly ever heard of America , and that a good many more knew it only as a barbarous province away off somewhere , that had lately been at war with somebody , we pitied the ignorance of the Old World , but abated no jot of our importance .
Many and many a simple community in the Eastern hemisphere will remember for years the incursion of the strange horde in the year of our Lord 1867 , that called themselves Americans , and seemed to imagine in some unaccountable way that they had a right to be proud of it .
We generally created a famine , partly because the coffee on the Quaker City was unendurable , and sometimes the more substantial fare was not strictly first class ; and partly because one naturally tires of sitting long at the same board and eating from the same dishes .
The people of those foreign countries are very , very ignorant .
They looked curiously at the costumes we had brought from the wilds of America .
They observed that we talked loudly at table sometimes .
They noticed that we looked out for expenses , and got what we conveniently could out of a franc , and wondered where in the mischief we came from .
In Paris they just simply opened their eyes and stared when we spoke to them in French !
We never did succeed in making those idiots understand their own language .
One of our passengers said to a shopkeeper , in reference to a proposed return to buy a pair of gloves , `` Allong restay trankeel -- may be ve coom Moonday ; '' and would you believe it , that shopkeeper , a born Frenchman , had to ask what it was that had been said .
Sometimes it seems to me , somehow , that there must be a difference between Parisian French and Quaker City French .
It was the judge that spoke .
The interpreter whispered to me that I must keep perfectly still .
He said that no statement would be received from me -- I must only talk through my lawyer .
But woe is me , Ching Foo , the man was right .
He was right , after all .
There were my witnesses , but I could not use them .
But now came a new hope .
I saw my white friend come in , and I felt that he had come there purposely to help me .
I may almost say I knew it .
So I grew easier .
He passed near enough to me to say under his breath , `` Do n't be afraid , '' and then I had no more fear .
But presently the rowdies recognised him and began to scowl at him in no friendly way , and to make threatening signs at him .
The two officers that arrested me fixed their eyes steadily on his ; he bore it well , but gave in presently , and dropped his eyes .
They still gazed at his eyebrows , and every time he raised his eyes he encountered their winkless stare -- until after a minute or two he ceased to lift his head at all .
The judge had been giving some instructions privately to some one for a little while , but now he was ready to resume business .
Then the trial so unspeakably important to me , and freighted with such prodigious consequence to my wife and children , began , progressed , ended , was recorded in the books , noted down by the newspaper reporters , and forgotten by everybody but me -- all in the little space of two minutes !
OFFICER -- '' He was making a disturbance in Kearny street . ''
Webb said I had some reputation in the Atlantic States , but I knew quite well that it must be of a very attenuated sort .
What there was of it rested upon the story of `` The Jumping Frog . ''
When Artemus Ward passed through California on a lecturing tour , in 1865 or '66 , I told him the `` Jumping Frog '' story , in San Francisco , and he asked me to write it out and send it to his publisher , Carleton , in New York , to be used in padding out a small book which Artemus had prepared for the press and which needed some more stuffing to make it big enough for the price which was to be charged for it .
Twenty-one years elapsed before I saw Carleton again .
I was then sojourning with my family at the Schweitzerhof , in Luzerne .
He called on me , shook hands cordially , and said at once , without any preliminaries ,
In June I sailed in the _Quaker City_ Excursion .
I returned in November , and in Washington found a letter from Elisha Bliss , of the American Publishing Company of Hartford , offering me five per cent .
royalty on a book which should recount the adventures of the Excursion .
In lieu of the royalty , I was offered the alternative of ten thousand dollars cash upon delivery of the manuscript .
I consulted A. D. Richardson and he said `` take the royalty . ''
I followed his advice and closed with Bliss .
By my contract I was to deliver the manuscript in July of 1868 .
I wrote the book in San Francisco and delivered the manuscript within contract time .
Bliss provided a multitude of illustrations for the book , and then stopped work on it .
The contract date for the issue went by , and there was no explanation of this .
Time drifted along and still there was no explanation .
I was lecturing all over the country ; and about thirty times a day , on an average , I was trying to answer this conundrum :
We think boys are rude , unsensitive animals , but it is not so in all cases .
Each boy has one or two sensitive spots , and if you can find out where they are located you have only to touch them and you can scorch him as with fire .
I suffered miserably over that episode .
I expected that the facts would be all over the village in the morning , but it was not so .
The secret remained confined to the two girls and Sandy and me .
That was some appeasement of my pain , but it was far from sufficient -- the main trouble remained : I was under four mocking eyes , and it might as well have been a thousand , for I suspected all girls' eyes of being the ones I so dreaded .
During several weeks I could not look any young lady in the face ; I dropped my eyes in confusion when any one of them smiled upon me and gave me greeting ; and I said to myself , `` _That is one of them_ , '' and got quickly away .
Of course I was meeting the right girls everywhere , but if they ever let slip any betraying sign I was not bright enough to catch it .
When I left Hannibal four years later , the secret was still a secret ; I had never guessed those girls out , and was no longer expecting to do it .
Nor wanting to , either .
One of the dearest and prettiest girls in the village at the time of my mishap was one whom I will call Mary Wilson , because that was not her name .
She was twenty years old ; she was dainty and sweet , peach-bloomy and exquisite , gracious and lovely in character , and I stood in awe of her , for she seemed to me to be made out of angel-clay and rightfully unapproachable by an unholy ordinary kind of a boy like me .
I probably never suspected her .
To Calcutta -- forty-seven years later .
It was in 1896 .
I arrived there on my lecturing trip .
As I entered the hotel a divine vision passed out of it , clothed in the glory of the Indian sunshine -- the Mary Wilson of my long-vanished boyhood !
It was a startling thing .
Before I could recover from the bewildering shock and speak to her she was gone .
I thought maybe I had seen an apparition , but it was not so , she was flesh .
She was the granddaughter of the other Mary , the original Mary .
That Mary , now a widow , was up-stairs , and presently sent for me .
She was old and gray-haired , but she looked young and was very handsome .
We sat down and talked .
We steeped our thirsty souls in the reviving wine of the past , the beautiful past , the dear and lamented past ; we uttered the names that had been silent upon our lips for fifty years , and it was as if they were made of music ; with reverent hands we unburied our dead , the mates of our youth , and caressed them with our speech ; we searched the dusty chambers of our memories and dragged forth incident after incident , episode after episode , folly after folly , and laughed such good laughs over them , with the tears running down ; and finally Mary said suddenly , and without any leading up --
But it was on a bench in Washington Square that I saw the most of Louis Stevenson .
It was an outing that lasted an hour or more , and was very pleasant and sociable .
I had come with him from his house , where I had been paying my respects to his family .
His business in the Square was to absorb the sunshine .
He was most scantily furnished with flesh , his clothes seemed to fall into hollows as if there might be nothing inside but the frame for a sculptor 's statue .
His long face and lank hair and dark complexion and musing and melancholy expression seemed to fit these details justly and harmoniously , and the altogether of it seemed especially planned to gather the rays of your observation and focalize them upon Stevenson 's special distinction and commanding feature , his splendid eyes .
They burned with a smouldering rich fire under the penthouse of his brows , and they made him beautiful .
Stevenson , smiling a chuckly smile , `` I hope not . ''
There on that bench we struck out a new phrase -- one or the other of us , I do n't remember which -- '' submerged renown . ''
Variations were discussed : `` submerged fame , '' `` submerged reputation , '' and so on , and a choice was made ; `` submerged renown '' was elected , I believe .
This important matter rose out of an incident which had been happening to Stevenson in Albany .
While in a book-shop or book-stall there he had noticed a long rank of small books , cheaply but neatly gotten up , and bearing such titles as `` Davis 's Selected Speeches , '' `` Davis 's Selected Poetry , '' Davis 's this and Davis 's that and Davis 's the other thing ; compilations , every one of them , each with a brief , compact , intelligent and useful introductory chapter by this same Davis , whose first name I have forgotten .
Stevenson had begun the matter with this question :
I thought I could , but it did not seem to me that it would be modest to speak out , in the circumstances .
So I diffidently said nothing .
Stevenson noticed , and said --
`` Who is this Davis ? ''
`` An author whose books have to have freight-trains to carry them , not baskets .
Apparently you have not heard of him ? ''
At half past ten o'clock that night , Clara and her mother completed their circuit of the globe , and drew up at Elmira by the same train and in the same car which had borne them and me Westward from it one year , one month , and one week before .
And again Susy was there -- not waving her welcome in the glare of the lights , as she had waved her farewell to us thirteen months before , but lying white and fair in her coffin , in the house where she was born .
From Jean 's letter I take this sentence , which needs no comment :
In one of her own books I find some verses which I will copy here .
Apparently , she always put borrowed matter in quotation marks .
These verses lack those marks , and therefore I take them to be her own :
`` Tell me about it , dear . ''
To go back a year -- Susy aged seven .
Several times her mother said to her :
She was thoughtful and considerate of others -- an acquired quality , no doubt .
No one seems to be born with it .
One hot day , at home in Hartford , when she was a little child , her mother borrowed her fan several times ( a Japanese one , value five cents ) , refreshed herself with it a moment or two , then handed it back with a word of thanks .
Susy knew her mother would use the fan all the time if she could do it without putting a deprivation upon its owner .
She also knew that her mother could not be persuaded to do that .
A relief most be devised somehow ; Susy devised it .
She got five cents out of her money-box and carried it to Patrick , and asked him to take it down-town ( a mile and a half ) and buy a Japanese fan and bring it home .
He did it -- and thus thoughtfully and delicately was the exigency met and the mother 's comfort secured .
It is to the child 's credit that she did not save herself expense by bringing down another and more costly kind of fan from up-stairs , but was content to act upon the impression that her mother desired the Japanese kind -- content to accomplish the desire and stop with that , without troubling about the wisdom or unwisdom of it .
It is a pleasure to me to recall various incidents which reveal the delicacies of feeling that were so considerable a part of her budding character .
Such a revelation came once in a way which , while creditable to her heart , was defective in another direction .
She was in her eleventh year then .
Her mother had been making the Christmas purchases , and she allowed Susy to see the presents which were for Patrick's children .
Among these was a handsome sled for Jimmy , on which a stag was painted ; also , in gilt capitals , the word `` Deer . ''
Susy was excited and joyous over everything , until she came to this sled .
Then she became sober and silent -- yet the sled was the choicest of all the gifts .
Her mother was surprised , and also disappointed , and said :
What I have been travelling toward all this time is this : the first critic that ever had occasion to describe my personal appearance littered his description with foolish and inexcusable errors whose aggregate furnished the result that I was distinctly and distressingly unhandsome .
That description floated around the country in the papers , and was in constant use and wear for a quarter of a century .
It seems strange to me that apparently no critic in the country could be found who could look at me and have the courage to take up his pen and destroy that lie .
That lie began its course on the Pacific coast , in 1864 , and it likened me in personal appearance to Petroleum V. Nasby , who had been out there lecturing .
For twenty-five years afterward , no critic could furnish a description of me without fetching in Nasby to help out my portrait .
I knew Nasby well , and he was a good fellow , but in my life I have not felt malignant enough about any more than three persons to charge those persons with resembling Nasby .
It hurts me to the heart .
I was always handsome .
Anybody but a critic could have seen it .
And it had long been a distress to my family -- including Susy -- that the critics should go on making this wearisome mistake , year after year , when there was no foundation for it .
Even when a critic wanted to be particularly friendly and complimentary to me , he did n't dare to go beyond my clothes .
He never ventured beyond that old safe frontier .
When he had finished with my clothes he had said all the kind things , the pleasant things , the complimentary things he could risk .
Then he dropped back on Nasby .
As romancer to the children I had a hard time , even from the beginning .
If they brought me a picture , in a magazine , and required me to build a story to it , they would cover the rest of the page with their pudgy hands to keep me from stealing an idea from it .
The stories had to come hot from the bat , always .
They had to be absolutely original and fresh .
Sometimes the children furnished me simply a character or two , or a dozen , and required me to start out at once on that slim basis and deliver those characters up to a vigorous and entertaining life of crime .
If they heard of a new trade , or an unfamiliar animal , or anything like that , I was pretty sure to have to deal with those things in the next romance .
Once Clara required me to build a sudden tale out of a plumber and a `` bawgunstrictor , '' and I had to do it .
She didn't know what a boa-constrictor was , until he developed in the tale -- then she was better satisfied with it than ever .
I am always obliged to say , `` I _don't_ , Ashcroft .
I wish I could understand it , but I do n't .
Send for the cat . ''
I explained to him that he was an ass , but he stuck to his proposition , and I said ,
`` Yes , '' I said , `` of course it was .
Did you suppose it was a Sunday-school superintendent ? ''
`` No ; I could not be of any assistance .
Let him select for himself ; I do n't know where the things are . ''
I said , `` I think he has got all the vegetables he wants and is coming up for napkin-rings and odds and ends for the wife and children .
They all have families -- burglars have -- and they are always thoughtful of them , always take a few necessaries of life for themselves , and fill out with tokens of remembrance for the family .
In taking them they do not forget us : those very things represent tokens of his remembrance of us , and also of our remembrance of him .
We never get them again ; the memory of the attention remains embalmed in our hearts . ''
She said , with a strong interest perceptible in her tone , `` Suppose he comes up here ! ''
`` Climb out of the window . ''
Papa has a peculiar gait we like , it seems just to sute him , but most people do not ; he always walks up and down the room while thinking and between each coarse at meals .
A lady distantly related to us came to visit us once in those days .
She came to stay a week , but all our efforts to make her happy failed , we could not imagine why , and she got up her anchor and sailed the next morning .
We did much guessing , but could not solve the mystery .
Later we found out what the trouble was .
It was my tramping up and down between the courses .
She conceived the idea that I could not stand her society .
Papa uses very strong language , but I have an idea not nearly so strong as when he first maried mamma .
A lady acquaintance of his is rather apt to interupt what one is saying , and papa told mamma that he thought he should say to the lady 's husband `` I am glad your wife was n't present when the Deity said 'Let there be light . '
Susy 's remark about my strong language troubles me , and I must go back to it .
All through the first ten years of my married life I kept a constant and discreet watch upon my tongue while in the house , and went outside and to a distance when circumstances were too much for me and I was obliged to seek relief .
I prized my wife 's respect and approval above all the rest of the human race 's respect and approval .
I dreaded the day when she should discover that I was but a whited sepulchre partly freighted with suppressed language .
I was so careful , during ten years , that I had not a doubt that my suppressions had been successful .
Therefore I was quite as happy in my guilt as I could have been if I had been innocent .
My mother had a good deal of trouble with me , but I think she enjoyed it .
She had none at all with my brother Henry , who was two years younger than I , and I think that the unbroken monotony of his goodness and truthfulness and obedience would have been a burden to her but for the relief and variety which I furnished in the other direction .
I was a tonic .
I was valuable to her .
I never thought of it before , but now I see it .
I never knew Henry to do a vicious thing toward me , or toward any one else -- but he frequently did righteous ones that cost me as heavily .
It was his duty to report me , when I needed reporting and neglected to do it myself , and he was very faithful in discharging that duty .
He is `` Sid '' in `` Tom Sawyer . ''
But Sid was not Henry .
Henry was a very much finer and better boy than ever Sid was .
It was Henry who called my mother 's attention to the fact that the thread with which she had sewed my collar together to keep me from going in swimming , had changed color .
My mother would not have discovered it but for that , and she was manifestly piqued when she recognized that that prominent bit of circumstantial evidence had escaped her sharp eye .
That detail probably added a detail to my punishment .
We generally visit our shortcomings on somebody else when there is a possible excuse for it -- but no matter , I took it out of Henry .
There is always compensation for such as are unjustly used .
I often took it out of him -- sometimes as an advance payment for something which I had n't yet done .
These were occasions when the opportunity was too strong a temptation , and I had to draw on the future .
I did not need to copy this idea from my mother , and probably did n't .
Still she wrought upon that principle upon occasion .
In those days men and boys wore rather long cloaks in the winter-time .
They were black , and were lined with very bright and showy Scotch plaids .
One winter 's night when I was starting to church to square a crime of some kind committed during the week , I hid my cloak near the gate and went off and played with the other boys until church was over .
Then I returned home .
But in the dark I put the cloak on wrong side out , entered the room , threw the cloak aside , and then stood the usual examination .
I got along very well until the temperature of the church was mentioned .
Four years ago ( 1902 ) I was invited by the University of Missouri to come out there and receive the honorary degree of LL.D .
I took that opportunity to spend a week in Hannibal -- a city now , a village in my day .
It had been fifty-three years since Tom Nash and I had had that adventure .
When I was at the railway station ready to leave Hannibal , there was a crowd of citizens there .
I saw Tom Nash approaching me across a vacant space , and I walked toward him , for I recognized him at once .
He was old and white-headed , but the boy of fifteen was still visible in him .
He came up to me , made a trumpet of his hands at my ear , nodded his head toward the citizens and said confidentially -- in a yell like a fog-horn --
He went on to say that the enemy , however , necessarily originated a great many of the plans that the general on the opposite side gets the credit for ; at the same time that the enemy is doing that , he is laying open other moves which the opposing general sees and takes advantage of .
In this case , Sherman had a plan all thought out , of course .
He meant to destroy the two remaining railroads in that part of the country , and that would finish up that region .
But General Hood did not play the military part that he was expected to play .
On the contrary , General Hood made a dive at Chattanooga .
This left the march to the sea open to Sherman , and so after sending part of his army to defend and hold what he had acquired in the Chattanooga region , he was perfectly free to proceed , with the rest of it , through Georgia .
He saw the opportunity , and he would not have been fit for his place if he had not seized it .
The next day mamma planned to take the four o'clock car back to Hartford .
We rose quite early that morning and went to the Vienna Bakery and took breakfast there .
From there we went to a German bookstore and bought some German books for Clara 's birthday .
At last it was time for papa to return to Hartford , and Langdon was real sick at that time , but still mamma decided to go with him , thinking the journey might do him good .
But after they reached Hartford he became very sick , and his trouble prooved to be diptheeria .
He died about a week after mamma and papa reached Hartford .
He was burried by the side of grandpa at Elmira , New York .
[ Susy rests there with them.
L. C. ] After that , mamma became very very ill , so ill that there seemed great danger of death , but with a great deal of good care she recovered .
Some months afterward mamma and papa [ and Susy , who was perhaps fourteen or fifteen months old at the time.
L. C. ] went to Europe and stayed for a time in Scotland and England .
In Scotland mamma and papa became very well equanted with Dr. John Brown , the author of `` Rab and His Friends , '' and he mett , but was not so well equanted with , Mr. Charles Kingsley , Mr. Henry M. Stanley , Sir Thomas Hardy grandson of the Captain Hardy to whom Nellson said `` Kiss me Hardy , '' when dying on shipboard , Mr. Henry Irving , Robert Browning , Sir Charles Dilke , Mr. Charles Reade , Mr. William Black , Lord Houghton , Frank Buckland , Mr. Tom Hughes , Anthony Trollope , Tom Hood , son of the poet -- and mamma and papa were quite well equanted with Dr. Macdonald and family , and papa met Harrison Ainsworth .
`` Oh , '' I said , `` never mind .
We can not stop to discuss that now .
Wo n't you please sign your name ? ''
( I handed her a fountain-pen . )
In accordance with the suggestion made in Gilder 's letter recently received I have written the following note to ex-President Cleveland upon his sixty-ninth birthday :
As of date March 18 , 1906 ... .
The Major stood Joe up straight ; stood Steve Gillis up fifteen paces away ; made Joe turn right side towards Steve , cock his navy six-shooter -- that prodigious weapon -- and hold it straight down against his leg ; told him that _that_ was the correct position for the gun -- that the position ordinarily in use at Virginia City ( that is to say , the gun straight up in the air , then brought slowly down to your man ) was all wrong .
At the word `` _One_ , '' you must raise the gun slowly and steadily to the place on the other man 's body that you desire to convince .
Then , after a pause , `` _two , three -- fire -- Stop !
_ '' At the word `` stop , '' you may fire -- but not earlier .
You may give yourself as much time as you please _after_ that word .
Then , when you fire , you may advance and go on firing at your leisure and pleasure , if you can get any pleasure out of it .
And , in the meantime , the other man , if he has been properly instructed and is alive to his privileges , is advancing on _you_ , and firing -- and it is always likely that more or less trouble will result .
`` Clemens did it . ''
He was supposing very sagaciously , but I did n't say anything .
Well , they said good morning .
The second took Mr. Laird home , a little tottery on his legs , and Laird sent back a note in his own hand declining to fight a duel with me on any terms whatever .
By breakfast-time the news was all over town that I had sent a challenge and Steve Gillis had carried it .
Now that would entitle us to two years apiece in the penitentiary , according to the brand-new law .
Judge North sent us no message as coming from himself , but a message _came_ from a close friend of his .
He said it would be a good idea for us to leave the territory by the first stage-coach .
This would sail next morning , at four o'clock -- and in the meantime we would be searched for , but not with avidity ; and if we were in the Territory after that stage-coach left , we would be the first victims of the new law .
Judge North was anxious to have some object-lessons for that law , and he would absolutely keep us in the prison the full two years .
Mr. Root then got up and in the most quiet and orderly manner touched off the successor to the San Francisco earthquake .
As a result , the several State governments were well shaken up and considerably weakened .
Mr. Root was prophesying .
He was prophesying , and it seems to me that no shrewder and surer forecasting has been done in this country for a good many years .
`` We are urging forward in a development of business and social life which tends more and more to the obliteration of State lines and the decrease of State power as compared with national power . ''
Human nature being what it is , I suppose we must expect to drift into monarchy by and by .
It is a saddening thought , but we can not change our nature : we are all alike , we human beings ; and in our blood and bone , and ineradicable , we carry the seeds out of which monarchies and aristocracies are grown : worship of gauds , titles , distinctions , power .
We have to worship these things and their possessors , we are all born so , and we can not help it .
We have to be despised by somebody whom we regard as above us , or we are not happy ; we have to have somebody to worship and envy , or we can not be content .
In America we manifest this in all the ancient and customary ways .
In public we scoff at titles and hereditary privilege , but privately we hanker after them , and when we get a chance we buy them for cash and a daughter .
Sometimes we get a good man and worth the price , but we are ready to take him anyway , whether he be ripe or rotten , whether he be clean and decent , or merely a basket of noble and sacred and long-descended offal .
And when we get him the whole nation publicly chaffs and scoffs -- and privately envies ; and also is proud of the honor which has been conferred upon us .
We run over our list of titled purchases every now and then , in the newspapers , and discuss them and caress them , and are thankful and happy .
The truth is , I did not have to wait long to get tired of my triumphs .
Not thirty days , I think .
The glory which is built upon a lie soon becomes a most unpleasant incumbrance .
No doubt for a while I enjoyed having my exploits told and retold and told again in my presence and wondered over and exclaimed about , but I quite distinctly remember that there presently came a time when the subject was wearisome and odious to me and I could not endure the disgusting discomfort of it .
I am well aware that the world-glorified doer of a deed of great and real splendor has just my experience ; I know that he deliciously enjoys hearing about it for three or four weeks , and that pretty soon after that he begins to dread the mention of it , and by and by wishes he had been with the damned before he ever thought of doing that deed ; I remember how General Sherman used to rage and swear over `` When we were Marching through Georgia , '' which was played at him and sung at him everywhere he went ; still , I think I suffered a shade more than the legitimate hero does , he being privileged to soften his misery with the reflection that his glory was at any rate golden and reproachless in its origin , whereas I had no such privilege , there being no possible way to make mine respectable .
It did not affect her at all ; it did not budge her the fraction of an inch from her position .
If this was hard for me to endure , it did not begin with the blister she put upon the raw when she began to put my sworn oath out of court with _arguments_ to prove that I was under a delusion and did not know what I was talking about .
Arguments to show that a person on a man 's outside can know better what is on his inside than he does himself !
I had cherished some contempt for arguments before , I have not enlarged my respect for them since .
She refused to believe that I had invented my visions myself ; she said it was folly : that I was only a child at the time and could not have done it .
She cited the Richmond fire and the colonial mansion and said they were quite beyond my capacities .
Then I saw my chance !
I said she was right -- I did n't invent those , I got them from Dr. Peake .
Even this great shot did no damage .
She said Dr. Peake 's evidence was better than mine , and he had said in plain words that it was impossible for me to have heard about those things .
Dear , dear , what a grotesque and unthinkable situation : a confessed swindler convicted of honesty and condemned to acquittal by circumstantial evidence furnished by the swindled !
Orion 's boyhood was spent in that wee little log hamlet of Jamestown up there among the `` knobs '' -- so called -- of East Tennessee .
The family migrated to Florida , Missouri , then moved to Hannibal , Missouri , when Orion was twelve and a half years old .
When he was fifteen or sixteen he was sent to St. Louis and there he learned the printer 's trade .
One of his characteristics was eagerness .
He woke with an eagerness about some matter or other every morning ; it consumed him all day ; it perished in the night and he was on fire with a fresh new interest next morning before he could get his clothes on .
He exploited in this way three hundred and sixty-five red-hot new eagernesses every year of his life .
But I am forgetting another characteristic , a very pronounced one .
That was his deep glooms , his despondencies , his despairs ; these had their place in each and every day along with the eagernesses .
Thus his day was divided -- no , not divided , mottled -- from sunrise to midnight with alternating brilliant sunshine and black cloud .
Every day he was the most joyous and hopeful man that ever was , I think , and also every day he was the most miserable man that ever was .
He had another conspicuous characteristic , and it was the father of those which I have just spoken of .
This was an intense lust for approval .
He was so eager to be approved , so girlishly anxious to be approved by anybody and everybody , without discrimination , that he was commonly ready to forsake his notions , opinions and convictions at a moment 's notice in order to get the approval of any person who disagreed with them .
I wish to be understood as reserving his fundamental principles all the time .
He never forsook those to please anybody .
Born and reared among slaves and slaveholders , he was yet an abolitionist from his boyhood to his death .
He was always truthful ; he was always sincere ; he was always honest and honorable .
But in light matters -- matters of small consequence , like religion and politics and such things -- he never acquired a conviction that could survive a disapproving remark from a cat .
There were two other apprentices .
One was Steve Wilkins , seventeen or eighteen years old and a giant .
When he was in Mr. S. 's clothes they fitted him as the candle-mould fits the candle -- thus he was generally in a suffocated condition , particularly in the summer-time .
He was a reckless , hilarious , admirable creature ; he had no principles , and was delightful company .
At first we three apprentices had to feed in the kitchen with the old slave cook and her very handsome and bright and well-behaved young mulatto daughter .
For his own amusement -- for he was not generally laboring for other people 's amusement -- Steve was constantly and persistently and loudly and elaborately making love to that mulatto girl and distressing the life out of her and worrying the old mother to death .
She would say , `` Now , Marse Steve , Marse Steve , ca n't you behave yourself ? ''
With encouragement like that , Steve would naturally renew his attentions and emphasize them .
It was killingly funny to Ralph and me .
And , to speak truly , the old mother 's distress about it was merely a pretence .
She quite well understood that by the customs of slaveholding communities it was Steve 's right to make love to that girl if he wanted to .
But the girl 's distress was very real .
She had a refined nature , and she took all Steve 's extravagant love-making in resentful earnest .
[ _Dictated April 5 , 1906._ ] There were several candidates for all the offices in the gift of the new State of Nevada save two -- United States Senator , and Secretary of State .
Nye was certain to get a Senatorship , and Orion was so sure to get the Secretaryship that no one but him was named for that office .
But he was hit with one of his spasms of virtue on the very day that the Republican party was to make its nominations in the Convention , and refused to go near the Convention .
He was urged , but all persuasions failed .
He said his presence there would be an unfair and improper influence and that if he was to be nominated the compliment must come to him as a free and unspotted gift .
This attitude would have settled his case for him without further effort , but he had another attack of virtue on the same day , that made it absolutely sure .
It had been his habit for a great many years to change his religion with his shirt , and his ideas about temperance at the same time .
He would be a teetotaler for a while and the champion of the cause ; then he would change to the other side for a time .
On nomination day he suddenly changed from a friendly attitude toward whiskey -- which was the popular attitude -- to uncompromising teetotalism , and went absolutely dry .
His friends besought and implored , but all in vain .
He could not be persuaded to cross the threshold of a saloon .
The paper next morning contained the list of chosen nominees .
His name was not in it .
He had not received a vote .
His rich income ceased when the State government came into power .
He was without an occupation .
Something had to be done .
He put up his sign as attorney-at-law , but he got no clients .
It was difficult to account for .
I can not account for it -- but if I were going to guess at a solution I should guess that by the make of him he would examine both sides of a case so diligently and so conscientiously that when he got through with his argument neither he nor a jury would know which side he was on .
I think that his client would find out his make in laying his case before him , and would take warning and withdraw it in time to save himself from probable disaster .
Later , Mr. Camp gave me another chance .
He agreed to buy our Tennessee land for two hundred thousand dollars , pay a part of the amount in cash and give long notes for the rest .
His scheme was to import foreigners from grape-growing and wine-making districts in Europe , settle them on the land , and turn it into a wine-growing country .
He knew what Mr. Longworth thought of those Tennessee grapes , and was satisfied .
I sent the contracts and things to Orion for his signature , he being one of the three heirs .
But they arrived at a bad time -- in a doubly bad time , in fact .
The temperance virtue was temporarily upon him in strong force , and he wrote and said that he would not be a party to debauching the country with wine .
Also he said how could he know whether Mr. Camp was going to deal fairly and honestly with those poor people from Europe or not ?
-- and so , without waiting to find out , he quashed the whole trade , and there it fell , never to be brought to life again .
The land , from being suddenly worth two hundred thousand dollars , became as suddenly worth what it was before -- nothing , and taxes to pay .
I had paid the taxes and the other expenses for some years , but I dropped the Tennessee land there , and have never taken any interest in it since , pecuniarily or otherwise , until yesterday .
Innumerable were Orion 's projects for acquiring the means to pay off the debt to me .
These projects extended straight through the succeeding thirty years , but in every case they failed .
During all those thirty years his well-established honesty kept him in offices of trust where other people 's money had to be taken care of , but where no salary was paid .
He was treasurer of all the benevolent institutions ; he took care of the money and other property of widows and orphans ; he never lost a cent for anybody , and never made one for himself .
Every time he changed his religion the church of his new faith was glad to get him ; made him treasurer at once , and at once he stopped the graft and the leaks in that church .
He exhibited a facility in changing his political complexion that was a marvel to the whole community .
Once the following curious thing happened , and he wrote me all about it himself .
In my schoolboy days I had no aversion to slavery .
I was not aware that there was anything wrong about it .
No one arraigned it in my hearing ; the local papers said nothing against it ; the local pulpit taught us that God approved it , that it was a holy thing , and that the doubter need only look in the Bible if he wished to settle his mind -- and then the texts were read aloud to us to make the matter sure ; if the slaves themselves had an aversion to slavery they were wise and said nothing .
In Hannibal we seldom saw a slave misused ; on the farm , never .
Down the forest slopes to the left were the swings .
They were made of bark stripped from hickory saplings .
When they became dry they were dangerous .
They usually broke when a child was forty feet in the air , and this was why so many bones had to be mended every year .
I had no ill-luck myself , but none of my cousins escaped .
There were eight of them , and at one time and another they broke fourteen arms among them .
But it cost next to nothing , for the doctor worked by the year -- $ 25 for the whole family .
I remember two of the Florida doctors , Chowning and Meredith .
They not only tended an entire family for $ 25 a year , but furnished the medicines themselves .
Good measure , too .
Only the largest persons could hold a whole dose .
Castor-oil was the principal beverage .
The dose was half a dipperful , with half a dipperful of New Orleans molasses added to help it down and make it taste good , which it never did .
The next standby was calomel ; the next , rhubarb ; and the next , jalap .
Then they bled the patient , and put mustard-plasters on him .
It was a dreadful system , and yet the death-rate was not heavy .
The calomel was nearly sure to salivate the patient and cost him some of his teeth .
There were no dentists .
When teeth became touched with decay or were otherwise ailing , the doctor knew of but one thing to do : he fetched his tongs and dragged them out .
If the jaw remained , it was not his fault .
Doctors were not called , in cases of ordinary illness ; the family's grandmother attended to those .
Every old woman was a doctor , and gathered her own medicines in the woods , and knew how to compound doses that would stir the vitals of a cast-iron dog .
And then there was the `` Indian doctor '' ; a grave savage , remnant of his tribe , deeply read in the mysteries of nature and the secret properties of herbs ; and most backwoodsmen had high faith in his powers and could tell of wonderful cures achieved by him .
In Mauritius , away off yonder in the solitudes of the Indian Ocean , there is a person who answers to our Indian doctor of the old times .
He is a negro , and has had no teaching as a doctor , yet there is one disease which he is master of and can cure , and the doctors ca n't .
They send for him when they have a case .
It is a child 's disease of a strange and deadly sort , and the negro cures it with a herb medicine which he makes , himself , from a prescription which has come down to him from his father and grandfather .
He will not let any one see it .
He keeps the secret of its components to himself , and it is feared that he will die without divulging it ; then there will be consternation in Mauritius .
I was told these things by the people there , in 1896 .
`` Afraid I would n't live ? ''
Clara 's pious remark is the main detail , and Susy has accurately remembered its phrasing .
The three-year-older 's wound was of a formidable sort , and not one which the mother 's surgery would have been equal to .
The flesh of the finger had been burst by a cruel accident .
It was the doctor that sewed it up , and to all appearances it was he , and the other independent witnesses , that did the main part of the suffering ; each stitch that he took made Clara wince slightly , but it shrivelled the others .
`` Why , papa , if it keeps going on like this , pretty soon there wo n't be anybody left for you to get acquainted with but God . ''
It was n't so .
But no matter -- it was so to Harris at the time .
He walked along -- walked to the church -- but his mind was far away .
All his affection and homage and worship of his General had come to the fore .
His heart was full of these emotions .
He hardly knew where he was .
In his pulpit , he stood up and began the service , but with a voice over which he had almost no command .
The congregation had never seen him thus moved , before , in his pulpit .
They sat there and gazed at him and wondered what was the matter ; because he was now reading , in this broken voice and with occasional tears trickling down his face , what to them seemed a quite unemotional chapter -- that one about Moses begat Aaron , and Aaron begat Deuteronomy , and Deuteronomy begat St. Peter , and St. Peter begat Cain , and Cain begat Abel -- and he was going along with this , and half crying -- his voice continually breaking .
The congregation left the church that morning without being able to account for this most extraordinary thing -- as it seemed to them .
That a man who had been a soldier for more than four years , and who had preached in that pulpit so many , many times on really moving subjects , without even the quiver of a lip , should break all down over the Begats , they could n't understand .
But there it is -- any one can see how such a mystery as that would arouse the curiosity of those people to the boiling-point .
Well , Harris said -- no , Harris did n't say , _I_ say , that as the days went on and Sunday followed Sunday , the interest in Harris 's hair grew and grew ; because it did n't stay merely and monotonously green , it took on deeper and deeper shades of green ; and then it would change and become reddish , and would go from that to some other color -- purplish , yellowish , bluish , and so on -- but it was never a solid color .
It was always mottled .
And each Sunday it was a little more interesting than it was the Sunday before -- and Harris 's head became famous , and people came from New York , and Boston , and South Carolina , and Japan , and so on , to look .
There was n't seating-capacity for all the people that came while his head was undergoing these various and fascinating mottlings .
And it was a good thing in several ways , because the business had been languishing a little , and now a lot of people joined the church so that they could have the show , and it was the beginning of a prosperity for that church which has never diminished in all these years .
[ _Dictated October 8 , 1906._ ]
Many persons would like to have the society of cats during the summer vacation in the country , but they deny themselves this pleasure because they think they must either take the cats along when they return to the city , where they would be a trouble and an encumbrance , or leave them in the country , houseless and homeless .
These people have no ingenuity , no invention , no wisdom ; or it would occur to them to do as I do : rent cats by the month for the summer and return them to their good homes at the end of it .
Early last May I rented a kitten of a farmer 's wife , by the month ; then I got a discount by taking three .
They have been good company for about five months now , and are still kittens -- at least they have not grown much , and to all intents and purposes are still kittens , and as full of romping energy and enthusiasm as they were in the beginning .
I am an expert in cats , but I have not seen a kitten keep its kittenhood nearly so long before .
These are beautiful creatures -- these triplets .
Two of them wear the blackest and shiniest and thickest of sealskin vestments all over their bodies except the lower half of their faces and the terminations of their paws .
The black masks reach down below the eyes , therefore when the eyes are closed they are not visible ; the rest of the face , and the gloves and stockings , are snow white .
These markings are just the same on both cats -- so exactly the same that when you call one the other is likely to answer , because they can not tell each other apart .
Since the cats are precisely alike , and ca n't be told apart by any of us , they do not need two names , so they have but one between them .
We call both of them Sackcloth , and we call the gray one Ashes .
I believe I have never seen such intelligent cats as these before .
They are full of the nicest discriminations .
When I read German aloud they weep ; you can see the tears run down .
It shows what pathos there is in the German tongue .
I had not noticed before that all German is pathetic , no matter what the subject is nor how it is treated .
It was these humble observers that brought the knowledge to me .
I have tried all kinds of German on these cats ; romance , poetry , philosophy , theology , market reports ; and the result has always been the same -- the cats sob , and let the tears run down , which shows that all German is pathetic .
French is not a familiar tongue to me , and the pronunciation is difficult , and comes out of me encumbered with a Missouri accent ; but the cats like it , and when I make impassioned speeches in that language they sit in a row and put up their paws , palm to palm , and frantically give thanks .
Hardly any cats are affected by music , but these are ; when I sing they go reverently away , showing how deeply they feel it .
Sour Mash never cared for these things .
She had many noble qualities , but at bottom she was not refined , and cared little or nothing for theology and the arts .
In summer we poor creatures have a respite , and may clothe ourselves in white garments ; loose , soft , and in some degree shapely ; but in the winter -- the sombre winter , the depressing winter , the cheerless winter , when white clothes and bright colors are especially needed to brighten our spirits and lift them up -- we all conform to the prevailing insanity , and go about in dreary black , each man doing it because the others do it , and not because he wants to .
They are really no sincerer than Sackcloth and Ashes .
At bottom the Sackcloths do not care to exhibit their emotions when I am performing before them , they only do it because Ashes started it .
I would like to dress in a loose and flowing costume made all of silks and velvets , resplendent with all the stunning dyes of the rainbow , and so would every sane man I have ever known ; but none of us dares to venture it .
There is such a thing as carrying conspicuousness to the point of discomfort ; and if I should appear on Fifth Avenue on a Sunday morning , at church-time , clothed as I would like to be clothed , the churches would be vacant , and I should have all the congregations tagging after me , to look , and secretly envy , and publicly scoff .
It is the way human beings are made ; they are always keeping their real feelings shut up inside , and publicly exploiting their fictitious ones .
I am nearly seventy-one , and I recognize that my age has given me a good many privileges ; valuable privileges ; privileges which are not granted to younger persons .
Little by little I hope to get together courage enough to wear white clothes all through the winter , in New York .
It will be a great satisfaction to me to show off in this way ; and perhaps the largest of all the satisfactions will be the knowledge that every scoffer , of my sex , will secretly envy me and wish he dared to follow my lead .
When the summer was over , we went home to Hartford , and one day Mr. George Robertson arrived from Boston with two or three hours to spare between then and the return train , and as he was a young gentleman to whom we were in debt for much social pleasure , it was my duty , and a welcome duty , to make his two or three hours interesting for him .
So I took him up-stairs and set up my billiard scheme for his comfort .
Mine was a good table , in perfect repair ; the cues were in perfect condition ; the balls were ivory , and flawless -- but I knew that Mr. Robertson was my prey , just the same , for by exhaustive tests with this outfit I had found that my limit was thirty-one .
I had proved to my satisfaction that whereas I could not fairly expect to get more than six or eight or a dozen caroms out of a run , I could now and then reach twenty and twenty-five , and after a long procession of failures finally achieve a run of thirty-one ; but in no case had I ever got beyond thirty-one .
Robertson 's game , as I knew , was a little better than mine , so I resolved to require him to make thirty-two .
I believed it would entertain him .
He was one of these brisk and hearty and cheery and self-satisfied young fellows who are brimful of confidence , and who plunge with grateful eagerness into any enterprise that offers a showy test of their abilities .
I emptied the balls on the table and said ,
`` Take a cue and a ball , George , and begin .
How many caroms do you think you can make out of that layout ? ''
He laughed the laugh of the gay and the care-free , as became his youth and inexperience , and said ,
Confidence is a necessary thing in billiards , but overconfidence is bad .
George went at his task with much too much lightsomeness of spirit and disrespect for the situation .
On his first shot he scored three caroms ; on his second shot he scored four caroms ; and on his third shot he missed as simple a carom as could be devised .
He was very much astonished , and said he would not have supposed that careful play could be needed with an acre of bunched balls in front of a person .
At last , when we were notified that Patrick was at the door to drive him to his train , George owed me five thousand cigars at twenty-five cents apiece , and I was so sorry I could have hugged him .
`` Mr. Clemens , how far is it from the front door to the upper gate ? ''
The subject under discussion on the night in question was Dreams .
The talk passed from mouth to mouth in the usual serene way .
Oh well , never mind the rest of it .
The physicians on watch were young fellows hardly out of the medical college , and they made a mistake -- they had no way of measuring the eighth of a grain of morphine , so they guessed at it and gave him a vast quantity heaped on the end of a knife-blade , and the fatal effects were soon apparent .
I think he died about dawn , I do n't remember as to that .
He was carried to the dead-room and I went away for a while to a citizen 's house and slept off some of my accumulated fatigue -- and meantime something was happening .
The coffins provided for the dead were of unpainted white pine , but in this instance some of the ladies of Memphis had made up a fund of sixty dollars and bought a metallic case , and when I came back and entered the dead-room Henry lay in that open case , and he was dressed in a suit of my clothing .
He had borrowed it without my knowledge during our last sojourn in St. Louis ; and I recognized instantly that my dream of several weeks before was here exactly reproduced , so far as these details went -- and I think I missed one detail ; but that one was immediately supplied , for just then an elderly lady entered the place with a large bouquet consisting mainly of white roses , and in the centre of it was a red rose , and she laid it on his breast .
Dr. Burton swung his leonine head around , focussed me with his eye , and said :
`` Very well , then you 've told it , we 'll say , seventy or eighty times since it happened ? ''
_From Susy 's Biography of Me._
My teaching and training enabled me to see deeper into these tragedies than an ignorant person could have done .
I knew what they were for .
I tried to disguise it from myself , but down in the secret deeps of my heart I knew -- and I _knew_ that I knew .
They were inventions of Providence to beguile me to a better life .
It sounds curiously innocent and conceited , now , but to me there was nothing strange about it ; it was quite in accordance with the thoughtful and judicious ways of Providence as I understood them .
It would not have surprised me , nor even over-flattered me , if Providence had killed off that whole community in trying to save an asset like me .
Educated as I had been , it would have seemed just the thing , and well worth the expense .
_Why_ Providence should take such an anxious interest in such a property -- that idea never entered my head , and there was no one in that simple hamlet who would have dreamed of putting it there .
For one thing , no one was equipped with it .
Oh no , I should n't think of such a thing .
You are always doing wonderful things .
With your mouth . ''
`` _You_ think I das n't -- _you_ do !
Think what you blame please -- _I_ don't care what you think .
I 'll show you ! ''
The incident was ended .
But I was not done with it yet , though I supposed I was .
Eighteen or twenty years later I arrived in New York from California , and by that time I had failed in all my other undertakings and had stumbled into literature without intending it .
This was early in 1867 .
I was offered a large sum to write something for the `` Sunday Mercury , '' and I answered with the tale of `` Jim Wolf and the Cats . ''
I also collected the money for it -- twenty-five dollars .
It seemed over-pay , but I did not say anything about that , for I was not so scrupulous then as I am now .
A couple of years went by ; then the original story -- my own version -- cropped up again and went floating around in the spelling , and with my name to it .
Soon first one paper and then another fell upon me rigorously for `` stealing '' Jim Wolf and the Cats from the Tennessee man .
I got a merciless beating , but I did not mind it .
It 's all in the game .
Besides , I had learned , a good while before that , that it is not wise to keep the fire going under a slander unless you can get some large advantage out of keeping it alive .
Few slanders can stand the wear of silence .
[ Sidenote : ( 1873 . )
But I was not done with Jim and the Cats yet .
In 1873 I was lecturing in London , in the Queen 's Concert Rooms , Hanover Square , and was living at the Langham Hotel , Portland place .
I had no domestic household , and no official household except George Dolby , lecture-agent , and Charles Warren Stoddard , the California poet , now ( 1900 ) Professor of English Literature in the Roman Catholic University , Washington .
Ostensibly Stoddard was my private secretary ; in reality he was merely my comrade -- I hired him in order to have his company .
As secretary there was nothing for him to do except to scrap-book the daily reports of the great trial of the Tichborne Claimant for perjury .
But he made a sufficient job out of that , for the reports filled six columns a day and he usually postponed the scrap-booking until Sunday ; then he had 36 columns to cut out and paste in -- a proper labor for Hercules .
He did his work well , but if he had been older and feebler it would have killed him once a week .
Without doubt he does his literary lectures well , but also without doubt he prepares them fifteen minutes before he is due on his platform and thus gets into them a freshness and sparkle which they might lack if they underwent the staling process of overstudy .
`` Now , young man , you are going to the hotel with us and state your case to the other member of the family .
If you do n't make him believe in you I sha'n't honor this poet 's drafts in your interest any longer , for I do n't believe in you myself . ''
We cut that short and told him not to trouble about it , leave it all to us ; send the bills to Mr. Dolby and --
`` Oh , I know this kind , the woods are full of them .
I 'll make this offer : if he will show me his family I will give him twenty pounds .
The young man said he would not remain to be insulted ; and he said good-night and took his hat .
But Dolby said he would go with him , and stay by him until he found the family .
Stoddard went along to soothe the young man and modify Dolby .
They drove across the river and all over Southwark , but did not find the family .
At last the young man confessed there was n't any .
Our very worst nautinesses were punished by being taken to the bath-room and being whipped by the paper cutter .
But after the whipping was over , mamma did not allow us to leave her until we were perfectly happy , and perfectly understood why we had been whipped .
I never remember having felt the least bit bitterly toward mamma for punishing me .
I always felt I had deserved my punishment , and was much happier for having received it .
For after mamma had punished us and shown her displeasure , she showed no signs of further displeasure , but acted as if we had not displeased her in any way .
She was too much surprised , ( and pleased privately , too ) to say much at first , but as we all expected publicly , ( or rather when she remembered that this article was to be read by every one that took the Christian Union ) she was rather shocked and a little displeased .
She probably put the letter between the leaves of the Biography and it got lost out .
She threw away the hostile letters , but tried to keep the pleasantest one for her book ; surely there has been no kindlier biographer than this one .
Yet to a quite creditable degree she is loyal to the responsibilities of her position as historian -- not eulogist -- and honorably gives me a quiet prod now and then .
But how many , many , many she has withheld that I deserved !
I could prize them now ; there would be no acid in her words , and it is loss to me that she did not set them all down .
Oh , Susy , you sweet little biographer , you break my old heart with your gentle charities !
`` And the next greatest ? ''
Papa has been very much interested of late , in the `` Mind Cure '' theory .
And in fact so have we all .
A young lady in town has worked wonders by using the `` Mind Cure '' upon people ; she is constantly busy now curing peoples deseases in this way -- and curing her own even , which to me seems the most remarkable of all .
A little while past , papa was delighted with the knowledge of what he thought the best way of curing a cold , which was by starving it .
This starving did work beautifully , and freed him from a great many severe colds .
Now he says it was n't the starving that helped his colds , but the trust in the starving , the mind cure connected with the starving .
_From Susy 's Biography of Me._
_March 23 , '86._ -- The other day was my birthday , and I had a little birthday party in the evening and papa acted some very funny charades with Mr. Gherhardt , Mr. Jesse Grant ( who had come up from New York and was spending the evening with us ) and Mr. Frank Warner .
One of them was `` on his knees '' honys-sneeze .
There were a good many other funny ones , all of which I dont remember .
Mr. Grant was very pleasant , and began playing the charades in the most delightful way .
Your 's and the dear familie's GEORGE W. CABLE .
It would be a pity to replace the vivacity and quaintness and felicity of Susy 's innocent free spelling with the dull and petrified uniformities of the spelling-book .
Nearly all the grimness it taken out of the `` expergating '' of my books by the subtle mollification accidentally infused into the word by Susy 's modification of the spelling of it .
The lion was outraged because we , a nation of children , without any grown-up people among us , with no property in the language , but using it merely by courtesy of its owner the English nation , were trying to defile the sacredness of it by removing from it peculiarities which had been its ornament and which had made it holy and beautiful for ages .
Jean and Papa were walking out past the barn the other day when Jean saw some little newly born baby ducks , she exclaimed as she perceived them `` I dont see why God gives us so much ducks when Patrick kills them so . ''
But she said the same words over again , and in the same decided way .
I suppose I ought to have been outraged ; but I was n't , I was charmed .
And I suppose I ought to have spanked her ; but I did n't , I fraternized with the enemy , and we went on and spent half an hour with the cows .
That incident is followed in the `` Record '' by the following paragraph , which is another instance of a juvenile characteristic maintaining itself into mature age .
Susy was persistently and conscientiously truthful throughout her life with the exception of one interruption covering several months , and perhaps a year .
This was while she was still a little child .
Suddenly -- not gradually -- she began to lie ; not furtively , but frankly , openly , and on a scale quite disproportioned to her size .
Her mother was so stunned , so nearly paralyzed for a day or two , that she did not know what to do with the emergency .
Reasonings , persuasions , beseechings , all went for nothing ; they produced no effect ; the lying went tranquilly on .
Other remedies were tried , but they failed .
There is a tradition that success was finally accomplished by whipping .
I think the Record says so , but if it does it is because the Record is incomplete .
Whipping was indeed tried , and was faithfully kept up during two or three weeks , but the results were merely temporary ; the reforms achieved were discouragingly brief .
_Susy aged eleven , Jean three._ -- Susy said the other day when she saw Jean bringing a cat to me of her own motion , `` Jean has found out already that mamma loves morals and papa loves cats . ''
`` I know who wrote that book -- Harriet Beecher Stowe ! ''
`` Why Clara , you gave that horse to papa , and now you 've tooken it again . ''
I could n't accommodate him with this information , as I had n't it in stock .
I could have made oath that I had not stolen anything , therefore my vanity was not hurt nor my spirit troubled .
At bottom I supposed that he had mistaken another book for mine , and was now getting himself into an untenable place and preparing sorrow for himself and triumph for me .
We entered a bookstore and he asked for `` The Innocents Abroad '' and for the dainty little blue and gold edition of Dr. Oliver Wendell Holmes's poems .
He opened the books , exposed their dedications and said : `` Read them .
It is plain that the author of the second one stole the first one , is n't it ? ''
`` There are three kinds of lies : lies , damned lies , and statistics . ''
[ _Dictated , November 8 , 1906._ ] I have a defect of a sort which I think is not common ; certainly I hope it is n't : it is rare that I can call before my mind 's eye the form and face of either friend or enemy .
If I should make a list , now , of persons whom I know in America and abroad -- say to the number of even an entire thousand -- it is quite unlikely that I could reproduce five of them in my mind 's eye .
Of my dearest and most intimate friends , I could name eight whom I have seen and talked with four days ago , but when I try to call them before me they are formless shadows .
Jean has been absent , this past eight or ten days , in the country , and I wish I could reproduce her in the mirror of my mind , but I ca n't do it .
All this talk is suggested by Susy 's remark : `` The other evening as papa and I were promenading up and down the library . ''
Down to the bottom of my heart I am thankful that I can see _that_ picture !
And it is not dim , but stands out clear in the unfaded light of twenty-one years ago .
In those days Susy and I used to `` promonade '' daily up and down the library , with our arms about each other 's waists , and deal in intimate communion concerning affairs of State , or the deep questions of human life , or our small personal affairs .
Blank-Blank said , `` X , of course you have your troubles like other people , but they never show on the outside .
I have never seen you when you were not cheerful .
Are you always cheerful ?
Really always cheerful ? ''
[ _Dictated at Hamilton , Bermuda , January 6 , 1907._ ] `` That reminds me . ''
In conversation we are always using that phrase , and seldom or never noticing how large a significance it bears .
It stands for a curious and interesting fact , to wit : that sleeping or waking , dreaming or talking , the thoughts which swarm through our heads are almost constantly , almost continuously , accompanied by a like swarm of reminders of incidents and episodes of our past .
A man can never know what a large traffic this commerce of association carries on in our minds until he sets out to write his autobiography ; he then finds that a thought is seldom born to him that does not immediately remind him of some event , large or small , in his past experience .
Quite naturally these remarks remind me of various things , among others this : that sometimes a thought , by the power of association , will bring back to your mind a lost word or a lost name which you have not been able to recover by any other process known to your mental equipment .
Yesterday we had an instance of this .
Joseph H. Twichell is with me on this flying trip to Bermuda .
He was with me on my last visit to Bermuda , and to-day we were trying to remember when it was .
We thought it was somewhere in the neighborhood of thirty years ago , but that was as near as we could get at the date .
Twichell said that the landlady in whose boarding-house we sojourned in that ancient time could doubtless furnish us the date , and we must look her up .
We wanted to see her , anyway , because she and her blooming daughter of eighteen were the only persons whose acquaintance we had made at that time , for we were travelling under fictitious names , and people who wear aliases are not given to seeking society and bringing themselves under suspicion .
But at this point in our talk we encountered an obstruction : we could not recall the landlady 's name .
We hunted all around through our minds for that name , using all the customary methods of research , but without success ; the name was gone from us , apparently permanently .
We finally gave the matter up , and fell to talking about something else .
The talk wandered from one subject to another , and finally arrived at Twichell 's school-days in Hartford -- the Hartford of something more than half a century ago -- and he mentioned several of his schoolmasters , dwelling with special interest upon the peculiarities of an aged one named Olney .
He remarked that Olney , humble village schoolmaster as he was , was yet a man of superior parts , and had published text-books which had enjoyed a wide currency in America in their day .
I said I remembered those books , and had studied Olney's Geography in school when I was a boy .
She did not lose her mind ; she did not exhibit any excitement at all , but said quite simply , quite tranquilly ,
Dean Sage was a delightful man , yet in one way a terror to his friends , for he loved them so well that he could not refrain from playing practical jokes on them .
We have to be pretty deeply in love with a person before we can do him the honor of joking familiarly with him .
Dean Sage was the best citizen I have known in America .
It takes courage to be a good citizen , and he had plenty of it .
He allowed no individual and no corporation to infringe his smallest right and escape unpunished .
He was very rich , and very generous , and benevolent , and he gave away his money with a prodigal hand ; but if an individual or corporation infringed a right of his , to the value of ten cents , he would spend thousands of dollars ' worth of time and labor and money and persistence on the matter , and would not lower his flag until he had won his battle or lost it .
`` I am the paymaster .
What is the bill ? ''
Why , it 's impossible !
I am no robber .
I am charging you what I charge everybody .
It 's a dollar and thirty cents , and that's all it is . ''
`` Well , I understand it .
I know what I am about .
It 's thirteen dollars , and I want the bill made out for that .
There 's no other terms .
Get it ready and bring it out here .
I will examine it and be outraged .
I will dispute the bill .
You must stand to it .
You must refuse to take less .
I will begin to lose my temper ; you must begin to lose yours .
I will call you hard names ; you must answer with harder ones .
I will raise my voice ; you must raise yours .
You must go into a rage -- foam at the mouth , if you can ; insert some soap to help it along .
Now go along and follow your instructions . ''
Sage broke in , in a voice that was eloquent with remorse and self-reproach , `` I never thought of that , and I ask your pardon ; I am ashamed of myself and of my friend .
Here 's your thirteen dollars , and my apologies along with it . ''
Next , a duel between a lieutenant and a student of medicine .
According to the newspaper report these are the details .
The student was in a restaurant one evening : passing along , he halted at a table to speak with some friends ; near by sat a dozen military men ; the student conceived that one of these was `` staring '' at him ; he asked the officer to step outside and explain .
This officer and another one gathered up their caps and sabres and went out with the student .
Outside -- this is the student 's account -- the student introduced himself to the offending officer and said , `` You seemed to stare at me '' ; for answer , the officer struck at the student with his fist ; the student parried the blow ; both officers drew their sabres and attacked the young fellow , and one of them gave him a wound on the left arm ; then they withdrew .
This was Saturday night .
The duel followed on Monday , in the military riding-school -- the customary duelling-ground all over Austria , apparently .
The weapons were pistols .
The duelling terms were somewhat beyond custom in the matter of severity , if I may gather that from the statement that the combat was fought `` _unter sehr schweren Bedingungen_ '' -- to wit , `` Distance , 15 steps -- with 3 steps advance . ''
There was but one exchange of shots .
The student was hit .
`` He put his hand on his breast , his body began to bend slowly forward , then collapsed in death and sank to the ground . ''
Since the duellist 's family are the real principals in a duel , the State ought to compel them to be present at it .
Custom , also , ought to be so amended as to require it ; and without it no duel ought to be allowed to go on .
If that student 's unoffending mother had been present and watching the officer through her tears as he raised his pistol , he -- why , he would have fired in the air .
For we know how we are all made .
Laws ought to be based upon the ascertained facts of our nature .
It would be a simple thing to make a duelling law which would stop duelling .
She kissed him good night and lay down paralyzed with grief and fear , but said nothing .
But she did not sleep ; she prayed and mourned till the first streak of dawn , then fled to the nearest church and implored the Virgin for help ; and from that church she went to another and another and another ; church after church , and still church after church , and so spent all the day until three o'clock on her knees in agony and tears ; then dragged herself home and sat down comfortless and desolate , to count the minutes , and wait , with an outward show of calm , for what had been ordained for her -- happiness , or endless misery .
Presently she heard the clank of a sabre -- she had not known before what music was in that sound !
-- and her son put his head in and said :
`` X was in the wrong , and he apologized . ''
In one of my listed duels -- however , let it go , there is nothing particularly striking about it except that the seconds interfered .
And prematurely , too , for neither man was dead .
This was certainly irregular .
Neither of the men liked it .
It was a duel with cavalry sabres , between an editor and a lieutenant .
The editor walked to the hospital , the lieutenant was carried .
In this country an editor who can write well is valuable , but he is not likely to remain so unless he can handle a sabre with charm .
The following very recent telegram shows that also in France duels are humanely stopped as soon as they approach the ( French ) danger-point :
[ _Dictated December 20 , 1906._ ] Six months ago , when I was recalling early days in San Francisco , I broke off at a place where I was about to tell about Captain Osborn 's odd adventure at the `` What Cheer , '' or perhaps it was at another cheap feeding-place -- the `` Miners ' Restaurant . ''
It was a place where one could get good food on the cheapest possible terms , and its popularity was great among the multitudes whose purses were light It was a good place to go to , to observe mixed humanity .
Captain Osborn and Bret Harte went there one day and took a meal , and in the course of it Osborn fished up an interesting reminiscence of a dozen years before and told about it .
It was to this effect :
`` I believe it is .
Let him alone -- do n't pay any attention to him ; wait till we can get a good look at him . ''
`` Yes , '' said Osborn .
`` Yes , sir , I was . ''
`` I reckon you may be right .
You do certainly know a good deal about that incident .
What is your name ? ''
The Captain sprang up , excited , and said ,
[ 19 ] Can this be correct ?
I think there must be some mistake.
And there was Mary Lacy .
She was a schoolmate .
But she also was out of my class because of her advanced age .
She was pretty wild and determined and independent .
But she married , and at once settled down and became in all ways a model matron and was as highly respected as any matron in the town .
Four years ago she was still living , and had been married fifty years .
Jimmie McDaniel was another schoolmate .
His age and mine about tallied .
His father kept the candy-shop and he was the most envied little chap in the town -- after Tom Blankenship ( `` Huck Finn '' ) -- for although we never saw him eating candy , we supposed that it was , nevertheless , his ordinary diet .
He pretended that he never ate it , and did n't care for it because there was nothing forbidden about it -- there was plenty of it and he could have as much of it as he wanted .
He was the first human being to whom I ever told a humorous story , so far as I can remember .
This was about Jim Wolfe and the cats ; and I gave him that tale the morning after that memorable episode .
I thought he would laugh his teeth out .
I had never been so proud and happy before , and have seldom been so proud and happy since .
I saw him four years ago when I was out there .
He wore a beard , gray and venerable , that came half-way down to his knees , and yet it was not difficult for me to recognize him .
He had been married fifty-four years .
He had many children and grandchildren and great-grandchildren , and also even posterity , they all said -- thousands -- yet the boy to whom I had told the cat story when we were callow juveniles was still present in that cheerful little old man .
It was a good case of measles that resulted .
It brought me within a shade of death 's door .
It brought me to where I no longer took any interest in anything , but , on the contrary , felt a total absence of interest -- which was most placid and enchanting .
I have never enjoyed anything in my life any more than I enjoyed dying that time .
I _was_ , in effect , dying .
The word had been passed and the family notified to assemble around the bed and see me off .
I knew them all .
There was no doubtfulness in my vision .
They were all crying , but that did not affect me .
I took but the vaguest interest in it , and that merely because I was the centre of all this emotional attention and was gratified by it and vain of it .
When Dr. Cunningham had made up his mind that nothing more could be done for me he put bags of hot ashes all over me .
He put them on my breast , on my wrists , on my ankles ; and so , very much to his astonishment -- and doubtless to my regret -- he dragged me back into this world and set me going again .
If those ladies had stayed all day , and if all the wasps in Missouri had come and climbed up Jim 's legs , nobody there would ever have known it but Jim and the wasps and me .
There he would have sat until the ladies left .
I am not proposing to discuss all of the peculiarities of the human race , at this time ; I only wish to touch lightly upon one or two of them .
To begin with , I wonder why a man should prefer a good billiard-table to a poor one ; and why he should prefer straight cues to crooked ones ; and why he should prefer round balls to chipped ones ; and why he should prefer a level table to one that slants ; and why he should prefer responsive cushions to the dull and unresponsive kind .
I wonder at these things , because when we examine the matter we find that the essentials involved in billiards are as competently and exhaustively furnished by a bad billiard outfit as they are by the best one .
One of the essentials is amusement .
Very well , if there is any more amusement to be gotten out of the one outfit than out of the other , the facts are in favor of the bad outfit .
The bad outfit will always furnish thirty per cent .
more fun for the players and for the spectators than will the good outfit .
Another essential of the game is that the outfit shall give the players full opportunity to exercise their best skill , and display it in a way to compel the admiration of the spectators .
Very well , the bad outfit is nothing behind the good one in this regard .
It is a difficult matter to estimate correctly the eccentricities of chipped balls and a slanting table , and make the right allowance for them and secure a count ; the finest kind of skill is required to accomplish the satisfactory result .
Another essential of the game is that it shall add to the interest of the game by furnishing opportunities to bet .
Very well , in this regard no good outfit can claim any advantage over a bad one .
I know , by experience , that a bad outfit is as valuable as the best one ; that an outfit that could n't be sold at auction for seven dollars is just as valuable for all the essentials of the game as an outfit that is worth a thousand .
I acquired some of this learning in Jackass Gulch , California , more than forty years ago .
Jackass Gulch had once been a rich and thriving surface-mining camp .
By and by its gold deposits were exhausted ; then the people began to go away , and the town began to decay , and rapidly ; in my time it had disappeared .
Where the bank , and the city hall , and the church , and the gambling-dens , and the newspaper office , and the streets of brick blocks had been , was nothing now but a wide and beautiful expanse of green grass , a peaceful and charming solitude .
Half a dozen scattered dwellings were still inhabited , and there was still one saloon of a ruined and rickety character struggling for life , but doomed .
In its bar was a billiard outfit that was the counterpart of the one in my father-in-law 's garret .
The balls were chipped , the cloth was darned and patched , the table 's surface was undulating , and the cues were headless and had the curve of a parenthesis -- but the forlorn remnant of marooned miners played games there , and those games were more entertaining to look at than a circus and a grand opera combined .
Nothing but a quite extraordinary skill could score a carom on that table -- a skill that required the nicest estimate of force , distance , and how much to allow for the various slants of the table and the other formidable peculiarities and idiosyncrasies furnished by the contradictions of the outfit .
Last winter , here in New York , I saw Hoppe and Schaefer and Sutton and the three or four other billiard champions of world-wide fame contend against each other , and certainly the art and science displayed were a wonder to see ; yet I saw nothing there in the way of science and art that was more wonderful than shots which I had seen Texas Tom make on the wavy surface of that poor old wreck in the perishing saloon at Jackass Gulch forty years before .
Once I saw Texas Tom make a string of seven points on a single inning !
-- all calculated shots , and not a fluke or a scratch among them .
I often saw him make runs of four , but when he made his great string of seven , the boys went wild with enthusiasm and admiration .
The joy and the noise exceeded that which the great gathering at Madison Square produced when Sutton scored five hundred points at the eighteen-inch game , on a world-famous night last winter .
With practice , that champion could score nineteen or twenty on the Jackass Gulch table ; but to start with , Texas Tom would show him miracles that would astonish him ; also it might have another handsome result : it might persuade the great experts to discard their own trifling game and bring the Jackass Gulch outfit here and exhibit their skill in a game worth a hundred of the discarded one , for profound and breathless interest , and for displays of almost superhuman skill .
_January 11 , 1906._ Answer to a letter received this morning :
It came this morning , and if there is any vulgarity about it I am not able to discover it .
If it is n't innocently and ridiculously funny , I am no judge .
I will see to it that you get a copy .
`` 'Through the deep cares of thought I hear a voice that sings , Build thee more stately mansions , O my soul ! '
`` They were pretty how-come-you-so , by now , and they begun to blow .
Emerson says , 'The nobbiest thing I ever wrote was Barbara Frietchie . '
Says Longfellow , 'It do n't begin with my Biglow Papers . '
Says Holmes , 'My Thanatopsis lays over 'em both . '
They mighty near ended in a fight .
Then they wished they had some more company -- and Mr. Emerson pointed to me and says --
`` 'Is yonder squalid peasant all That this proud nursery could breed ? '
As I said , Mr .
Twain , you are the fourth in twenty-four hours -- and I 'm going to move ; I ai n't suited to a littery atmosphere . ''
The miner investigated me with a calm eye for a while ; then said he , `` Ah !
impostors , were they ?
[ _Dictated October 3 , 1907._ ] In some ways , I was always honest ; even from my earliest years I could never bring myself to use money which I had acquired in questionable ways ; many a time I tried , but principle was always stronger than desire .
Six or eight months ago , Lieutenant-General Nelson A .
Miles was given a great dinner-party in New York , and when he and I were chatting together in the drawing-room before going out to dinner he said ,
`` I 've known you as much as thirty years , is n't it ? ''
I remember a time when a shortage occurred ; we had to have three dollars , and we had to have it before the close of the day .
I do n't know now how we happened to want all that money at one time ; I only know we had to have it .
Clinton told me to go out and find it -- and he said he would also go out and see what he could do .
He did n't seem to have any doubt that we would succeed , but I knew that that was his religion working in him ; I had n't the same confidence ; I had n't any idea where to turn to raise all that bullion , and I said so .
I think he was ashamed of me , privately , because of my weak faith .
He told me to give myself no uneasiness , no concern ; and said in a simple , confident , and unquestioning way , `` the Lord will provide . ''
I saw that he fully believed the Lord would provide , but it seemed to me that if he had had my experience --
`` Very well , since you insist upon it , '' said the General , and he gave me three dollars and led the dog away , and disappeared up-stairs .
`` No , three is the price '' -- and I started for the stairs without waiting for any further argument , for Clinton had said that that was the amount that the Lord would provide , and it seemed to me that it would be sacrilegious to take a penny more than was promised .
`` Yes , '' I said , `` it is true -- but I have to have him , because the man wants him again . ''
`` Then why did you sell him ? ''
The pair remained five weeks in Edinburgh , and then took lodgings in York , where Shelley 's college mate , Hogg , lived .
Shelley presently ran down to London , and Hogg took this opportunity to make love to the young wife .
She repulsed him , and reported the fact to her husband when he got back .
It seems a pity that Shelley did not copy this creditable conduct of hers some time or other when under temptation , so that we might have seen the author of his biography hang the miracle in the skies and squirt rainbows at it .
`` O thou Whose dear love gleamed upon the gloomy path Which this lone spirit travelled , ... ... ... ... .
... wilt thou not turn Those spirit-beaming eyes and look on me .
Until I be assured that Earth is Heaven And Heaven is Earth ?
... ... .. Harriet !
let death all mortal ties dissolve , But ours shall not be mortal . ''
Shelley had made the acquaintance of a charming gray-haired , young-hearted Mrs. Boinville , whose face `` retained a certain youthful beauty '' ; she lived at Bracknell , and had a young daughter named Cornelia Turner , who was equipped with many fascinations .
Apparently these people were sufficiently sentimental .
Hogg says of Mrs. Boinville :
Up to this time we have submitted to having Mrs. Boinville pushed upon us as ostensibly concerned in these Italian lessons , but the biographer drops her now , of his own accord .
Cornelia `` perhaps '' is sole teacher .
Hogg says she was a prey to a kind of sweet melancholy , arising from causes purely imaginary ; she required consolation , and found it in Petrarch .
He also says , `` Bysshe entered at once fully into her views and caught the soft infection , breathing the tenderest and sweetest melancholy , as every true poet ought . ''
Then the author of the book interlards a most stately and fine compliment to Cornelia , furnished by a man of approved judgment who knew her well `` in later years . ''
It is a very good compliment indeed , and she no doubt deserved it in her `` later years , '' when she had for generations ceased to be sentimental and lackadaisical , and was no longer engaged in enchanting young husbands and sowing sorrow for young wives .
But why is that compliment to that old gentlewoman intruded there ?
Is it to make the reader believe she was well-chosen and safe society for a young , sentimental husband ?
The biographer 's device was not well planned .
That old person was not present -- it was her other self that was there , her young , sentimental , melancholy , warm-blooded self , in those early sweet times before antiquity had cooled her off and mossed her back .
`` In choosing for friends such women as Mrs. Newton , Mrs. Boinville , and Cornelia Turner , Shelley gave good proof of his insight and discrimination . ''
That is the fabulist 's opinion -- Harriet Shelley 's is not reported .
However , we learn -- by authority of deeply reasoned and searching conjecture -- that the baby bore the journey well , and that that was why the young wife was happy .
That accounts for two per cent .
of the happiness , but it was not right to imply that it accounted for the other ninety-eight also .
Peacock , a scholar , poet , and friend of the Shelleys , was of their party when they went away .
He used to laugh at the Boinville menagerie , and `` was not a favorite . ''
One of the Boinville group , writing to Hogg , said , `` The Shelleys have made an addition to their party in the person of a cold scholar , who , I think , has neither taste nor feeling .
This , Shelley will perceive sooner or later , for his warm nature craves sympathy . ''
True , and Shelley will fight his way back there to get it -- there will be no way to head him off .
The young wife was not invited , perhaps .
If she was , she most certainly did not come , or she would have straightened the room up ; the most ignorant of us knows that a wife would not endure a room in the condition in which Hogg found this one when he occupied it one night .
Shelley was away -- why , nobody can divine .
Clothes were scattered about , there were books on every side : `` Wherever a book could be laid was an open book turned down on its face to keep its place . ''
It seems plain that the wife was not invited .
No , not that ; I think she was invited , but said to herself that she could not bear to go there and see another young woman touching heads with her husband over an Italian book and making thrilling hand-contacts with him accidentally .
Shelley `` likes theM so well that he is resolved to leave off rambling -- ''
It is fair to conjecture that he was feeling ashamed .
Shelley could send Eliza away , of course ; could have cleared her out long ago if so minded , just as he had previously done with a predecessor of hers whom he had first worshipped and then turned against ; but perhaps she was useful there as a thin excuse for staying away himself .
Eliza Westbrook , sister-in-law , was still of the household .
The evidence against Harriet Shelley is all in ; there is no more .
Upon these six counts she stands indicted of the crime of driving her husband into that sty at Bracknell ; and this crime , by these helps , the biographical prosecuting attorney has set himself the task of proving upon her .
Shelley 's happiness in his home had been wounded and bruised almost to death , first , because Harriet had persuaded him to set up a carriage .
I can not discover that any evidence is offered that she asked him to set up a carriage .
Still , if she did , was it a heavy offence ?
Other young wives had committed it before , others have committed it since .
Shelley had dearly loved her in those London days ; possibly he set up the carriage gladly to please her ; affectionate young husbands do such things .
When Shelley ran away with another girl , by-and-by , this girl persuaded him to pour the price of many carriages and many horses down the bottomless well of her father 's debts , but this impartial judge finds no fault with that .
Once she appeals to Shelley to raise money -- necessarily by borrowing , there was no other way -- to pay her father 's debts with at a time when Shelley was in danger of being arrested and imprisoned for his own debts ; yet the good judge finds no fault with her even for this .
We accept the `` cordial intimacy '' -- it was the very thing Harriet was complaining of -- but there is nothing to show that it was Turner who brought his wife back .
The statement is thrown in as if it were not only true , but was proof that Turner was not uneasy .
Turner 's movements are proof of nothing .
Nothing but a statement from Turner 's mouth would have any value here , and he made none .
`` Thou in the grave shalt rest -- yet , till the phantoms flee Which that house and hearth and garden made dear to thee ere while , Thy remembrance and repentance and deep musings are not free From the music of two voices and the light of one sweet smile . ''
We have named the several members and advantages of the new paradise in Skinner Street , with its crazy book-shop underneath .
Shelley was all right now , this was a better place than the other ; more variety anyway , and more different kinds of fragrance .
One could turn out poetry here without any trouble at all .
After Shelley 's ( conjectured ) visit to Harriet at Bath -- 8th of June to 18th -- '' it seems to have been arranged that Shelley should henceforth join the Skinner Street household each day at dinner . ''
`` Although now Shelley was coming to believe that his wedded union with Harriet was a thing of the past , he had not ceased to regard her with affectionate consideration ; he wrote to her frequently , and kept her informed of his whereabouts . ''
I find no fault with that sentence except that the `` perhaps '' is not strictly warranted .
It should have been left out .
In support -- or shall we say extenuation ?
-- of this opinion I submit that there is not sufficient evidence to warrant the uncertainty which it implies .
The only `` evidence '' offered that Harriet was hard and proud and standing out against a reconciliation is a poem -- the poem in which Shelley beseeches her to `` bid the remorseless feeling flee '' and `` pity '' if she `` can not love . ''
We have just that as `` evidence , '' and out of its meagre materials the biographer builds a cobhouse of conjectures as big as the Coliseum ; conjectures which convince him , the prosecuting attorney , but ought to fall far short of convincing any fair-minded jury .
Hardness , stubbornness , pride , vindictiveness -- these may sometimes reside in a young wife and mother of nineteen , but they are not charged against Harriet Shelley outside of that poem , and one has no right to insert them into her character on such shadowy `` evidence '' as that .
Peacock knew Harriet well , and she has a flexible and persuadable look , as painted by him :
Then the biographer attacks Harriet Shelley 's honor -- by authority of random and unverified gossip scavengered from a group of people whose very names make a person shudder : Mary Godwin , mistress to Shelley ; her part-sister , discarded mistress of Lord Byron ; Godwin , the philosophical tramp , who gathers his share of it from a shadow -- that is to say , from a person whom he shirks out of naming .
Yet the biographer dignifies this sorry rubbish with the name of `` evidence . ''
On the credit side of the account we have strong opinions from the people who knew her best .
`` There is not a trace of evidence or a whisper of scandal against her before her voluntary departure from Shelley . ''
Harriet Shelley wrote her distressed letter on the 7th of July .
On the 28th her husband ran away with Mary Godwin and her part-sister Claire to the Continent .
He deserted his wife when her confinement was approaching .
She bore him a child at the end of November , his mistress bore him another one something over two months later .
The truants were back in London before either of these events occurred .
On one occasion , presently , Shelley was so pressed for money to support his mistress with that he went to his wife and got some money of his that was in her hands -- twenty pounds .
Yet the mistress was not moved to gratitude ; for later , when the wife was troubled to meet her engagements , the mistress makes this entry in her diary :
CHAPTER 2 -- Driscoll Spares His Slaves
_Adam was but human -- this explains it all .
He did not want the apple for the apple 's sake , he wanted it only because it was forbidden .
The mistake was in not forbidding the serpent ; then he would have eaten the serpent._ -- Pudd'nhead Wilson 's Calendar
D A V I D W I L S O N
JOHN SMITH , right hand --
He often studied his records , examining and poring over them with absorbing interest until far into the night ; but what he found there -- if he found anything -- he revealed to no one .
Sometimes he copied on paper the involved and delicate pattern left by the ball of the finger , and then vastly enlarged it with a pantograph so that he could examine its web of curving lines with ease and convenience .
`` Oh , I 's middlin ' ; hai n't got noth'n ' to complain of , I 's gwine to come a-court'n you bimeby , Roxy . ''
`` Oh , yes , _you_ got me , hai n't you .
'Clah to goodness if dat conceit o ' yo'n strikes in , Jasper , it gwine to kill you sho ' .
If you b'longed to me , I 'd sell you down de river 'fo ' you git too fur gone .
Fust time I runs acrost yo ' marster , I 's gwine to tell him so . ''
`` Oh , _I_ kin tell 'em 'part , Misto Wilson , but I bet Marse Percy could n't , not to save his life . ''
`` Dad blame dat revival , I wisht it had 'a ' be'n put off till tomorrow ! ''
`` I give you one minute . ''
He took out his watch .
`` If at the end of that time , you have not confessed , I will not only sell all four of you , BUT -- I will sell you DOWN THE RIVER ! ''
`` I done it ! ''
`` Very good , '' said the master , putting up his watch , `` I will sell you _here_ though you do n't deserve it .
You ought to be sold down the river . ''
By this time she had stripped off the shirt .
Now she clothed the naked little creature in one of Thomas `a Becket 's snowy , long baby gowns , with its bright blue bows and dainty flummery of ruffles .
`` You 's young Marse _Tom_ fum dis out , en I got to practice and git used to 'memberin ' to call you dat , honey , or I 's gwine to make a mistake sometime en git us bofe into trouble .
Dah -- now you lay still en do n't fret no mo ' , Marse Tom .
Oh , thank de lord in heaven , you 's saved , you 's saved !
Dey ai n't no man kin ever sell mammy 's po ' little honey down de river now ! ''
She put the heir of the house in her own child 's unpainted pine cradle , and said , contemplating its slumbering form uneasily :
She flung herself on her bed and began to think and toss , toss and think .
By and by she sat suddenly upright , for a comforting thought had flown through her worried mind --
She got lighthearted and happy , and went to the cradles , and spent what was left of the night `` practicing . ''
She would give her own child a light pat and say humbly , `` Lay still , Marse Tom , '' then give the real Tom a pat and say with severity , `` Lay _still_ , Chambers !
Does you want me to take somep'n _to_ you ? ''
As she progressed with her practice , she was surprised to see how steadily and surely the awe which had kept her tongue reverent and her manner humble toward her young master was transferring itself to her speech and manner toward the usurper , and how similarly handy she was becoming in transferring her motherly curtness of speech and peremptoriness of manner to the unlucky heir of the ancient house of Driscoll .
The new Negros gave Roxy no trouble , of course .
The master gave her none , for one of his speculations was in jeopardy , and his mind was so occupied that he hardly saw the children when he looked at them , and all Roxy had to do was to get them both into a gale of laughter when he came about ; then their faces were mainly cavities exposing gums , and he was gone again before the spasm passed and the little creatures resumed a human aspect .
_There is this trouble about special providences -- namely , there is so often a doubt as to which party was intended to be the beneficiary .
In the case of the children , the bears , and the prophet , the bears got more real satisfaction out of the episode than the prophet did , because they got the children._ -- Pudd'nhead Wilson 's Calendar
When he got to be old enough to begin to toddle about and say broken words and get an idea of what his hands were for , he was a more consummate pest than ever .
Roxy got no rest while he was awake .
He would call for anything and everything he saw , simply saying , `` Awnt it ! ''
( want it ) , which was a command .
When it was brought , he said in a frenzy , and motioning it away with his hands , `` Do n't awnt it !
do n't awnt it ! ''
and the moment it was gone he set up frantic yells of `` Awnt it !
and Roxy had to give wings to her heels to get that thing back to him again before he could get time to carry out his intention of going into convulsions about it .
What he preferred above all other things was the tongs .
This was because his `` father '' had forbidden him to have them lest he break windows and furniture with them .
The moment Roxy 's back was turned he would toddle to the presence of the tongs and say , `` Like it ! ''
and cock his eye to one side or see if Roxy was observed ; then , `` Awnt it ! ''
and cock his eye again ; then , `` Hab it ! ''
with another furtive glance ; and finally , `` Take it ! ''
-- and the prize was his .
The next moment the heavy implement was raised aloft ; the next , there was a crash and a squall , and the cat was off on three legs to meet an engagement ; Roxy would arrive just as the lamp or a window went to irremediable smash .
Tom got all the petting , Chambers got none .
Tom got all the delicacies , Chambers got mush and milk , and clabber without sugar .
In consequence Tom was a sickly child and Chambers was n't .
Tom was `` fractious , '' as Roxy called it , and overbearing ; Chambers was meek and docile .
He was good at games of skill , too .
Tom staked him with marbles to play `` keeps '' with , and then took all the winnings away from him .
In the winter season Chambers was on hand , in Tom 's worn-out clothes , with `` holy '' red mittens , and `` holy '' shoes , and pants `` holy '' at the knees and seat , to drag a sled up the hill for Tom , warmly clad , to ride down on ; but he never got a ride himself .
He built snowmen and snow fortifications under Tom 's directions .
He was Tom 's patient target when Tom wanted to do some snowballing , but the target could n't fire back .
Chambers carried Tom 's skates to the river and strapped them on him , then trotted around after him on the ice , so as to be on hand when he wanted ; but he was n't ever asked to try the skates himself .
This was the last feather .
Tom had managed to endure everything else , but to have to remain publicly and permanently under such an obligation as this to a nigger , and to this nigger of all niggers -- this was too much .
He heaped insults upon Chambers for `` pretending '' to think he was in earnest in calling for help , and said that anybody but a blockheaded nigger would have known he was funning and left him alone .
Tom sprang at him and drove his pocketknife into him two or three times before the boys could snatch him away and give the wounded lad a chance to escape .
He was considerably hurt , but not seriously .
If the blade had been a little longer , his career would have ended there .
Sometimes she could not go to sleep , even when worn out with fatigue , because her rage boiled so high over the day 's experiences with her boy .
She would mumble and mutter to herself :
Wilson was chatting with him when Roxy arrived .
He asked her how she could bear to go off chambermaiding and leave her boys ; and chaffingly offered to copy off a series of their fingerprints , reaching up to their twelfth year , for her to remember them by ; but she sobered in a moment , wondering if he suspected anything ; then she said she believed she did n't want them .
Wilson said to himself , `` The drop of black blood in her is superstitious ; she thinks there 's some devilry , some witch business about my glass mystery somewhere ; she used to come here with an old horseshoe in her hand ; it could have been an accident , but I doubt it . ''
CHAPTER 5 -- The Twins Thrill Dawson 's Landing
He was getting into deep waters .
He was taking chances , privately , which might get him into trouble some day -- in fact , _did_ .
The widow had a large spare room , which she let to a lodger , with board , when she could find one , but this room had been empty for a year now , to her sorrow .
Her income was only sufficient for the family support , and she needed the lodging money for trifling luxuries .
But now , at last , on a flaming June day , she found herself happy ; her tedious wait was ended ; her year-worn advertisement had been answered ; and not by a village applicant , no , no !
-- this letter was from away off yonder in the dim great world to the North ; it was from St. Louis .
She sat on her porch gazing out with unseeing eyes upon the shining reaches of the mighty Mississippi , her thoughts steeped in her good fortune .
Indeed it was specially good fortune , for she was to have two lodgers instead of one .
Eleven o'clock came ; and the Cooper house was the only one in the town that still had lights burning .
The rain and thunder were booming yet , and the anxious family were still waiting , still hoping .
At last there was a knock at the door , and the family jumped to open it .
Two Negro men entered , each carrying a trunk , and proceeded upstairs toward the guest room .
Then entered the twins -- the handsomest , the best dressed , the most distinguished-looking pair of young fellows the West had ever seen .
One was a little fairer than the other , but otherwise they were exact duplicates .
It was a proud occasion for the widow , and she promised herself high satisfaction in showing off her fine foreign birds before her neighbors and friends -- simple folk who had hardly ever seen a foreigner of any kind , and never one of any distinction or style .
Yet her feeling was moderate indeed when contrasted with Rowena 's .
Rowena was in the clouds , she walked on air ; this was to be the greatest day , the most romantic episode in the colorless history of that dull country town .
She was to be familiarly near the source of its glory and feel the full flood of it pour over her and about her ; the other girls could only gaze and envy , not partake .
The party moved along the hall , the twins in advance , and entered the open parlor door , whence issued a low hum of conversation .
The twins took a position near the door , the widow stood at Luigi 's side , Rowena stood beside Angelo , and the march-past and the introductions began .
The widow was all smiles and contentment .
She received the procession and passed it on to Rowena .
`` Good morning , Brother Higgins -- Count Luigi Capello , Mr. Higgins '' -- handshake , followed by a devouring stare and `` I 'm glad to see ye , '' on the part of Higgins , and a courteous inclination of the head and a pleasant `` Most happy ! ''
on the part of Count Luigi .
He was now awaiting for the twins , and still puzzling over the problem of who that girl might be , and how she happened to be in that young fellow 's room at daybreak in the morning .
By the time she reached Dawson 's Landing , she was her old self again ; her blues were gone , she was in high feather .
She would get along , surely ; there were many kitchens where the servants would share their meals with her , and also steal sugar and apples and other dainties for her to carry home -- or give her a chance to pilfer them herself , which would answer just as well .
And there was the church .
She was a more rabid and devoted Methodist than ever , and her piety was no sham , but was strong and sincere .
Yes , with plenty of creature comforts and her old place in the amen corner in her possession again , she would be perfectly happy and at peace thenceforward to the end .
Roxy threw up her hands in astonishment , and Chambers went on :
`` Means he bu'sted de will . ''
`` Bu 's -- ted de will !
He would n't _ever_ treat him so !
Take it back , you mis'able imitation nigger dat I bore in sorrow en tribbilation . ''
Jes listen to dat !
If I 's imitation , what is you ?
Bofe of us is imitation _white_ -- dat 's what we is -- en pow'ful good imitation , too .
We do n't 'mount to noth'n as imitation _niggers_ ; en as for -- ''
`` Well , _'tain't_ -- 'ca'se dey 's a new one made , en Marse Tom 's all right ag'in .
But what is you in sich a sweat 'bout it for , Mammy ?
'Tai n't none o ' your business I do n't reckon . ''
The petition was meekly repeated .
`` Who gave you permission to come and disturb me with the social attentions of niggers ? ''
Roxy backed slowly toward the door .
When she was halfway she stopped , and said mournfully :
`` Ai n't you ever gwine to he'p me , Marse Tom ? ''
Then he worked up a rather sickly sample of a gay laugh and a hollow chipperness of manner , and said :
`` Look-a-heah , what 'uz it I tole you ? ''
`` I 'll let you know mighty quick whether I means it or not !
You call me names , en as good as spit on me when I comes here , po ' en ornery en 'umble , to praise you for bein ' growed up so fine and handsome , en tell you how I used to nuss you en tend you en watch you when you 'uz sick en had n't no mother but me in de whole worl ' , en beg you to give de po ' ole nigger a dollah for to get her som'n ' to eat , en you call me names -- _names_ , dad blame you !
Yassir , I gives you jes one chance mo ' , and dat 's _now_ , en it las ' on'y half a second -- you hear ? ''
`` You see I 'm begging , and it 's honest begging , too !
Now tell me , Roxy , tell me . ''
`` Yes , a little . ''
Tom humbly held the door for her , and she marched out as grim and erect as a grenadier .
Tom stared at her , and said :
Tom sprang up and seized a billet of wood and raised it , but his mother only laughed at him , and said :
`` Come back , come back ! ''
`` I did n't mean it , Roxy ; I take it all back , and I 'll never say it again !
Please come back , Roxy ! ''
She went and sat down on her candle box , and the pride and pomp of her victorious attitude made it a throne .
`` Now den , Chambers , we 's gwine to talk business , en dey ai n't gwine to be no mo ' foolishness .
In de fust place , you gits fifty dollahs a month ; you 's gwine to han ' over half of it to yo ' ma .
Plank it out ! ''
She fell to sobbing , and broke down .
Tom said : `` But you know I did n't know you were my mother ; and besides -- ''
When they were parting , Tom said , in the most persuasive way he could command :
`` Ma , would you mind telling me who was my father ? ''
`` Dey ai n't another nigger in dis town dat 's as highbawn as you is .
Now den , go 'long !
En jes you hold yo ' head up as high as you want to -- you has de right , en dat I kin swah . ''
He sighed and groaned an hour or more away .
Then `` Chambers '' came humbly in to say that breakfast was nearly ready .
`` Tom '' blushed scarlet to see this aristocratic white youth cringe to him , a nigger , and call him `` Young Marster . ''
For days he wandered in lonely places , thinking , thinking , thinking -- trying to get his bearings .
It was new work .
If he met a friend , he found that the habit of a lifetime had in some mysterious way vanished -- his arm hung limp , instead of involuntarily extending the hand for a shake .
It was the `` nigger '' in him asserting its humility , and he blushed and was abashed .
And the `` nigger '' in him was surprised when the white friend put out his hand for a shake with him .
He found the `` nigger '' in him involuntarily giving the road , on the sidewalk , to a white rowdy and loafer .
When Rowena , the dearest thing his heart knew , the idol of his secret worship , invited him in , the `` nigger '' in him made an embarrassed excuse and was afraid to enter and sit with the dread white folks on equal terms .
The `` nigger '' in him went shrinking and skulking here and there and yonder , and fancying it saw suspicion and maybe detection in all faces , tones , and gestures .
So strange and uncharacteristic was Tom 's conduct that people noticed it , and turned to look after him when he passed on ; and when he glanced back -- as he could not help doing , in spite of his best resistance -- and caught that puzzled expression in a person 's face , it gave him a sick feeling , and he took himself out of view as quickly as he could .
He presently came to have a hunted sense and a hunted look , and then he fled away to the hilltops and the solitudes .
He said to himself that the curse of Ham was upon him .
He dreaded his meals ; the `` nigger '' in him was ashamed to sit at the white folk 's table , and feared discovery all the time ; and once when Judge Driscoll said , `` What 's the matter with you ?
You look as meek as a nigger , '' he felt as secret murderers are said to feel when the accuser says , `` Thou art the man ! ''
Tom said he was not well , and left the table .
For as much as a week after this , Tom imagined that his character had undergone a pretty radical change .
But that was because he did not know himself .
But he was ill at ease .
He had changed back to Roxy 's dress , with the stoop of age added to the disguise , so that Wilson would not bother himself about a humble old women leaving a neighbor 's house by the back way in the early morning , in case he was still spying .
But supposing Wilson had seen him leave , and had thought it suspicious , and had also followed him ?
The thought made Tom cold .
He gave up the raid for the day , and hurried back to the haunted house by the obscurest route he knew .
His mother was gone ; but she came back , by and by , with the news of the grand reception at Patsy Cooper 's , and soon persuaded him that the opportunity was like a special Providence , it was so inviting and perfect .
So he went raiding , after all , and made a nice success of it while everybody was gone to Patsy Cooper 's .
Success gave him nerve and even actual intrepidity ; insomuch , indeed , that after he had conveyed his harvest to his mother in a back alley , he went to the reception himself , and added several of the valuables of that house to his takings .
After this long digression we have now arrived once more at the point where Pudd'nhead Wilson , while waiting for the arrival of the twins on that same Friday evening , sat puzzling over the strange apparition of that morning -- a girl in young Tom Driscoll 's bedroom ; fretting , and guessing , and puzzling over it , and wondering who the shameless creature might be .
CHAPTER 11 -- Pudd'nhead 's Thrilling Discovery
There was an interruption now .
Young Driscoll appeared , and joined the party .
He pretended to be seeing the distinguished strangers for the first time when they rose to shake hands ; but this was only a blind , as he had already had a glimpse of them , at the reception , while robbing the house .
The twins made mental note that he was smooth-faced and rather handsome , and smooth and undulatory in his movements -- graceful , in fact .
Angelo thought he had a good eye ; Luigi thought there was something veiled and sly about it .
Angelo thought he had a pleasant free-and-easy way of talking ; Luigi thought it was more so than was agreeable .
Angelo thought he was a sufficiently nice young man ; Luigi reserved his decision .
Tom 's first contribution to the conversation was a question which he had put to Wilson a hundred times before .
It was always cheerily and good-natured put , and always inflicted a little pang , for it touched a secret sore ; but this time the pang was sharp , since strangers were present .
`` I do n't practice , it is true .
It is true that I have never had a case , and have had to earn a poor living for twenty years as an expert accountant in a town where I ca n't get a hold of a set of books to untangle as often as I should like .
But it is also true that I did myself well for the practice of the law .
By the time I was your age , Tom , I had chosen a profession , and was soon competent to enter upon it . ''
`` I never got a chance to try my hand at it , and I may never get a chance ; and yet if I ever do get it , I shall be found ready , for I have kept up my law studies all these years . ''
Tom looked surprised and incredulous .
`` There was this much in it , '' said Angelo : `` what was told us of our characters was minutely exact -- we could have not have bettered it ourselves .
Next , two or three memorable things that have happened to us were laid bare -- things which no one present but ourselves could have known about . ''
`` 'YOU HAVE KILLED SOMEONE , BUT WHETHER MAN , WOMAN , OR CHILD , I DO NOT MAKE OUT . '
Wilson and Tom drew deep breaths , and after some general chat about the tragedy , Pudd'nhead said , taking Tom 's hand :
Tom had snatched away his hand , and was looking a good deal confused .
`` Well , if I am , it ai n't because I 'm a murderer ! ''
Luigi 's dark face flushed , but before he could speak or move , Tom added with anxious haste : `` Oh , I beg a thousand pardons .
I did n't mean that ; it was out before I thought , and I 'm very , very sorry -- you must forgive me ! ''
The twins left with Buckstone , and Tom Driscoll joined the company with them uninvited .
The chairman inquired , and then reported :
`` We have made an unfortunate mistake , gentlemen .
I find that the Count Angelo Capello is opposed to our creed -- is a teetotaler , in fact , and was not intending to apply for membership with us .
He desires that we reconsider the vote by which he was elected .
What is the pleasure of the house ? ''
Glasses were handed around , and everybody on the platform drank Angelo 's health , while the house bellowed forth in song :
The chairman was still standing at the front , the twins at his side .
The extraordinarily close resemblance of the brothers to each other suggested a witticism to Tom Driscoll , and just as the chairman began a speech he skipped forward and said , with an air of tipsy confidence , to the audience :
The fighting ceased instantly ; the cursing ceased ; for one distinctly defined moment , there was a dead hush , a motionless calm , where the tempest had been ; then with one impulse the multitude awoke to life and energy again , and went surging and struggling and swaying , this way and that , its outer edges melting away through windows and doors and gradually lessening the pressure and relieving the mass .
`` N -- no , '' hesitated Tom , turning pale .
`` A coward in my family !
A Driscoll a coward !
Oh , what have I done to deserve this infamy ! ''
He tottered to his secretary in the corner , repeated that lament again and again in heartbreaking tones , and got out of a drawer a paper , which he slowly tore to bits , scattering the bits absently in his track as he walked up and down the room , still grieving and lamenting .
At last he said :
CHAPTER 13 -- Tom Stares at Ruin
_When I reflect upon the number of disagreeable people who I know have gone to a better world , I am moved to lead a different life._ -- Pudd'nhead Wilson 's Calendar
`` And you did n't wake him ?
Tom , is that possible ? ''
Howard said , with great satisfaction :
Pembroke read and witnessed the will , then gave the old man 's hand a hearty shake and said :
`` Did you stand there all the time ? ''
`` Dat 's a question to ask , ai n't it !
What else would I do ?
Does I git a chance to see a duel every day ? ''
`` Hold ON , I tell you , and let me finish .
The swag I gathered wo n't half square me up , and the first thing we know , my creditors -- well , you know what 'll happen . ''
Roxana dropped her chin , and told her son to leave her alone -- she must think this matter out .
Presently she said impressively :
`` Dat 's it .
Den you take and sell yo ' truck aroun ' , a little at a time , en pay de intrust .
How long will it las ' ? ''
_Nothing so needs reforming as other people 's habits._ -- Pudd'nhead Wilson 's Calendar
The twins were prodigiously great now ; the town took them to its bosom with enthusiasm .
Day after day , and night after night , they went dining and visiting from house to house , making friends , enlarging and solidifying their popularity , and charming and surprising all with their musical prodigies , and now and then heightening the effects with samples of what they could do in other directions , out of their stock of rare and curious accomplishments .
They were so pleased that they gave the regulation thirty days ' notice , the required preparation for citizenship , and resolved to finish their days in this pleasant place .
That was the climax .
The delighted community rose as one man and applauded ; and when the twins were asked to stand for seats in the forthcoming aldermanic board , and consented , the public contentment was rounded and complete .
`` No , I have n't caught her .
If anybody could have caught her , I could ; but nobody could n't , I do n't care who he is . ''
Wilson showed a trifle of irritation when he replied :
`` Yes , '' said Wilson .
`` Has any friend of yours ? ''
Wilson 's blood warmed a little , and he wondered if he had been played upon by those strangers ; it certainly had something of that look .
But what could they gain by it ?
He threw out that suggestion .
`` You find the old woman , Blake , and if she ca n't furnish the knife , go and search the twins ! ''
`` I believe they had it ; if it had been stolen , the scheme would have restored it , that is certain .
And so I believe they 've got it . ''
`` It 's perfectly true .
Wilson detected it in his hand , by palmistry , and charged him with it , and cornered him up so close that he had to confess ; but both twins begged us on their knees to keep the secret , and swore they would lead straight lives here ; and it was all so pitiful that we gave our word of honor never to expose them while they kept the promise .
You would have done it yourself , uncle . ''
Another point scored against the detested twins !
Really it was a great day for Tom .
He was encouraged to chance a parting shot , now , at the same target , and did it .
He was not sure he had heard aright .
He was dumb for a moment ; then he said :
For a whole week he was not able to sleep well , so much the villainy which he had played upon his trusting mother preyed upon his rag of conscience ; but after that he began to get comfortable again , and was presently able to sleep like any other miscreant .
The boat bore Roxy away from St. Louis at four in the afternoon , and she stood on the lower guard abaft the paddle box and watched Tom through a blur of tears until he melted into the throng of people and disappeared ; then she looked no more , but sat there on a coil of cable crying till far into the night .
When she went to her foul steerage bunk at last , between the clashing engines , it was not to sleep , but only to wait for the morning , and , waiting , grieve .
`` Keep still -- I 's yo ' mother ! ''
`` I know it , I know it !
I 'm a scoundrel .
But I swear I meant it for the best .
It was a mistake , of course , but I thought it was for the best , I truly did . ''
`` Sell a pusson down de river -- DOWN DE RIVER !
-- for de bes ' !
I would n't treat a dog so !
I is all broke down en wore out now , en so I reckon it ai n't in me to storm aroun ' no mo ' , like I used to when I 'uz trompled on en 'bused .
I do n't know -- but maybe it 's so .
Leastways , I 's suffered so much dat mournin ' seem to come mo ' handy to me now den stormin ' . ''
`` In 'bout an hour I heard de ready bell jingle , en den de racket begin .
Putty soon I hear de gong strike .
'Set her back on de outside , ' I says to myself .
'I reckon I knows dat music ! '
I hear de gong ag'in .
'Come ahead on de inside , ' I says .
'Stop de outside . '
'Come ahead on de outside -- now we 's pinted for Sent Louis , en I 's outer de woods en ai n't got to drown myself at all . '
I knowed de MOGUL 'uz in de Sent Louis trade now , you see .
It 'uz jes fair daylight when we passed our plantation , en I seed a gang o ' niggers en white folks huntin ' up en down de sho ' , en troublin ' deyselves a good deal 'bout me ; but I war n't troublin ' myself none 'bout dem .
`` 'Bout dat time Sally Jackson , dat used to be my second chambermaid en 'uz head chambermaid now , she come out on de guard , en 'uz pow'ful glad to see me , en so 'uz all de officers ; en I tole 'em I 'd got kidnapped en sole down de river , en dey made me up twenty dollahs en give it to me , en Sally she rigged me out wid good clo'es , en when I got here I went straight to whah you used to wuz , en den I come to dis house , en dey say you 's away but 'spected back every day ; so I did n't dast to go down de river to Dawson 's , 'ca'se I might miss you .
`` Well , las ' Monday I 'uz pass'n by one o ' dem places in fourth street whah deh sticks up runaway nigger bills , en he'ps to ketch 'em , en I seed my marster !
I 'mos ' flopped down on de groun ' , I felt so gone .
He had his back to me , en 'uz talkin ' to de man en givin ' him some bills -- nigger bills , I reckon , en I 's de nigger .
He 's offerin ' a reward -- dat 's it .
Ai n't I right , do n't you reckon ? ''
`` Read it to me ! ''
`` I do n't know -- but you is .
Dat 's my opinion , anyways .
But nemmine 'bout dat .
When I seed dat man I 'uz dat sk'yerd dat I could sca'cely wobble home .
Den I give a nigger man a dollar for dese clo'es , en I ai n't be'in in a house sence , night ner day , till now .
I blacked my face en laid hid in de cellar of a ole house dat 's burnt down , daytimes , en robbed de sugar hogsheads en grain sacks on de wharf , nights , to git somethin ' to eat , en never dast to try to buy noth'n ' , en I 's 'mos ' starved .
En I never dast to come near dis place till dis rainy night , when dey ai n't no people roun ' sca'cely .
But tonight I be'n a-stanin ' in de dark alley ever sence night come , waitin ' for you to go by .
En here I is . ''
`` Did he give you de bill dat time ? ''
What are you thinking of ?
Go and ask him for three hundred dollars and odd ?
What would I tell him I want it for , pray ? ''
`` You 'll tell him you 's sole me to pay yo ' gamblin ' debts en dat you lied to me en was a villain , en dat I 'quires you to git dat money en buy me back ag'in . ''
`` Why , you 've gone stark mad !
He would tear the will to shreds in a minute -- do n't you know that ? ''
They were not followed .
Tom trembled every time a late straggler brushed by them on the street , and half expected to feel the cold steel in his back .
Roxy was right at his heels and always in reach .
After tramping a mile they reached a wide vacancy on the deserted wharves , and in this dark and rainy desert they parted .
`` There is but the one way out .
I must follow her plan .
But with a variation -- I will not ask for the money and ruin myself ; I will ROB the old skinflint . ''
Dawson 's Landing was comfortably finishing its season of dull repose and waiting patiently for the duel .
Count Luigi was waiting , too ; but not patiently , rumor said .
Sunday came , and Luigi insisted on having his challenge conveyed .
Judge Driscoll declined to fight with an assassin -- '' that is , '' he added significantly , `` in the field of honor . ''
Tom put on his coat , buttoned his hat under it , threw on his suit of girl 's clothes , dropped the veil , blew out his light , locked the room door by which he had just entered , taking the key , passed through his other door into the black hall , locked that door and kept the key , then worked his way along in the dark and descended the black stairs .
He was not expecting to meet anybody , for all interest was centered in the other part of the house now ; his calculation proved correct .
By the time he was passing through the backyard , Mrs. Pratt , her servants , and a dozen half-dressed neighbors had joined the twins and the dead , and accessions were still arriving at the front door .
`` One of the twins ! ''
It is the knife that has done him this grace .
We never know when fortune is trying to favor us .
I actually cursed Pudd'nhead Wilson in my heart for putting it out of my power to sell that knife .
I take it back now . ''
When Wilson reached the house of mourning and had gathered such details as Mrs. Pratt and the rest of the crowd could tell him , he took command as mayor , and gave orders that nothing should be touched , but everything left as it was until Justice Robinson should arrive and take the proper measures as coroner .
He cleared everybody out of the room but the twins and himself .
The sheriff soon arrived and took the twins away to jail .
Wilson told them to keep heart , and promised to do his best in their defense when the case should come to trial .
Justice Robinson came presently , and with him Constable Blake .
They examined the room thoroughly .
They found the knife and the sheath .
Wilson noticed that there were fingerprints on the knife 's handle .
That pleased him , for the twins had required the earliest comers to make a scrutiny of their hands and clothes , and neither these people nor Wilson himself had found any bloodstains upon them .
Could there be a possibility that the twins had spoken the truth when they had said they found the man dead when they ran into the house in answer to the cry for help ?
He thought of that mysterious girl at once .
But this was not the sort of work for a girl to be engaged in .
No matter ; Tom Driscoll 's room must be examined .
Wilson said that he had three witnesses , the Misses Clarkson , who would testify that they met a veiled young woman leaving Judge Driscoll 's premises by the back gate a few minutes after the cries for help were heard , and that their evidence , taken with certain circumstantial evidence which he would call the court 's attention to , would in his opinion convince the court that there was still one person concerned in this crime who had not yet been found , and also that a stay of proceedings ought to be granted , in justice to his clients , until that person should be discovered .
As it was late , he would ask leave to defer the examination of his three witnesses until the next morning .
In parting with the twins Aunt Patsy did attempt a good-night with a gay pretense of hope and cheer in it , but broke down without finishing .
`` Oh , no , '' said Wilson , with a sigh , `` I did n't expect that , but I ca n't believe Luigi killed your uncle , and I feel very sorry for him .
It makes me blue .
And you would feel as I do , Tom , if you were not prejudiced against those young fellows . ''
`` I do n't know about that , '' and Tom 's countenance darkened , for his memory reverted to his kicking .
`` I owe them no good will , considering the brunet one 's treatment of me that night .
Prejudice or no prejudice , Pudd'nhead , I do n't like them , and when they get their deserts you 're not going to find me sitting on the mourner 's bench . ''
`` Why , here 's old Roxy 's label !
Are you going to ornament the royal palaces with nigger paw marks , too ?
By the date here , I was seven months old when this was done , and she was nursing me and her little nigger cub .
There 's a line straight across her thumbprint .
How comes that ? ''
and Tom held out the piece of glass to Wilson .
Tom sprang for a glass of water and offered it , but Wilson shrank shuddering from him and said :
`` It 's so !
Heavens , what a revelation !
And for twenty-three years no man has ever suspected it ! ''
`` Then why did they stay there , after the deed was done ?
Mrs. Pratt had time , although she did not hear the cry for help , but woke up some moments later , to run to that room -- and there she found these men standing and making no effort to escape .
If they were guilty , they ought to have been running out of the house at the same time that she was running to that room .
If they had had such a strong instinct toward self-preservation as to move them to kill that unarmed man , what had become of it now , when it should have been more alert than ever .
Would any of us have remained there ?
Let us not slander our intelligence to that degree .
`` This certainly approaches the miraculous ! ''
He passed a powerful magnifying glass to the foreman .
`` Please turn that cardboard face down , and take this one , and compare it searchingly , by the magnifier , with the fatal signature upon the knife handle , and report your finding to the court . ''
`` These men are innocent -- I have no further concern with them .
[ Another outbreak of applause began , but was promptly checked . ]
We will now proceed to find the guilty .
[ Tom 's eyes were starting from their sockets -- yes , it was a cruel day for the bereaved youth , everybody thought . ]
We will return to the infant autographs of A and B. I will ask the jury to take these large pantograph facsimilies of A 's marked five months and seven months .
Do they tally ? ''
`` Yes -- perfectly . ''
`` Take this third pantograph marked B , eight months .
Does it tally with B 's other two ? ''
`` Do you know how to account for those strange discrepancies ?
I will tell you .
For a purpose unknown to us , but probably a selfish one , somebody changed those children in the cradle . ''
`` There is no need .
He has confessed . ''
The town sat up all night to discuss the amazing events of the day and swap guesses as to when Tom 's trial would begin .
Troop after troop of citizens came to serenade Wilson , and require a speech , and shout themselves hoarse over every sentence that fell from his lips -- for all his sentences were golden , now , all were marvelous .
His long fight against hard luck and prejudice was ended ; he was a made man for good .
And as each of these roaring gangs of enthusiasts marched away , some remorseful member of it was quite sure to raise his voice and say :
The twins were heroes of romance , now , and with rehabilitated reputations .
But they were weary of Western adventure , and straightway retired to Europe .
The false heir made a full confession and was sentenced to imprisonment for life .
But now a complication came up .
The Percy Driscoll estate was in such a crippled shape when its owner died that it could pay only sixty percent of its great indebtedness , and was settled at that rate .
But the creditors came forward now , and complained that inasmuch as through an error for which THEY were in no way to blame the false heir was not inventoried at the time with the rest of the property , great wrong and loss had thereby been inflicted upon them .
They rightly claimed that `` Tom '' was lawfully their property and had been so for eight years ; that they had already lost sufficiently in being deprived of his services during that long period , and ought not to be required to add anything to that loss ; that if he had been delivered up to them in the first place , they would have sold him and he could not have murdered Judge Driscoll ; therefore it was not that he had really committed the murder , the guilt lay with the erroneous inventory .
Everybody saw that there was reason in this .
Everybody granted that if `` Tom '' were white and free it would be unquestionably right to punish him -- it would be no loss to anybody ; but to shut up a valuable slave for life -- that was quite another matter .
A man who is not born with the novel-writing gift has a troublesome time of it when he tries to build a novel .
I know this from experience .
He has no clear idea of his story ; in fact he has no story .
He merely has some people in his mind , and an incident or two , also a locality , and he trusts he can plunge those people into those incidents with interesting results .
So he goes to work .
To write a novel ?
No -- that is a thought which comes later ; in the beginning he is only proposing to tell a little tale , a very little tale , a six-page tale .
But as it is a tale which he is not acquainted with , and can only find out what it is by listening as it goes along telling itself , it is more than apt to go on and on and on till it spreads itself into a book .
I know about this , because it has happened to me so many times .
Naturally the question suggests itself , Why did these people want the river now when nobody had wanted it in the five preceding generations ?
Apparently it was because at this late day they thought they had discovered a way to make it useful ; for it had come to be believed that the Mississippi emptied into the Gulf of California , and therefore afforded a short cut from Canada to China .
Previously the supposition had been that it emptied into the Atlantic , or Sea of Virginia .
A big cat-fish collided with Marquette 's canoe , and startled him ; and reasonably enough , for he had been warned by the Indians that he was on a foolhardy journey , and even a fatal one , for the river contained a demon 'whose roar could be heard at a great distance , and who would engulf them in the abyss where he dwelt . '
I have seen a Mississippi catfish that was more than six feet long , and weighed two hundred and fifty pounds ; and if Marquette 's fish was the fellow to that one , he had a fair right to think the river 's roaring demon was come .
They did this day after day and night after night ; and at the end of two weeks they had not seen a human being .
The river was an awful solitude , then .
And it is now , over most of its stretch .
At Peoria Lake they struck open water , and paddled thence to the Mississippi and turned their prows southward .
They plowed through the fields of floating ice , past the mouth of the Missouri ; past the mouth of the Ohio , by-and-by ; 'and , gliding by the wastes of bordering swamp , landed on the 24th of February near the Third Chickasaw Bluffs , ' where they halted and built Fort Prudhomme .
These performances took place on the site of the future town of Napoleon , Arkansas , and there the first confiscation-cross was raised on the banks of the great river .
Marquette 's and Joliet 's voyage of discovery ended at the same spot -- the site of the future town of Napoleon .
When De Soto took his fleeting glimpse of the river , away back in the dim early days , he took it from that same spot -- the site of the future town of Napoleon , Arkansas .
Therefore , three out of the four memorable events connected with the discovery and exploration of the mighty river , occurred , by accident , in one and the same place .
It is a most curious distinction , when one comes to look at it and think about it .
France stole that vast country on that spot , the future Napoleon ; and by and by Napoleon himself was to give the country back again !
-- make restitution , not to the owners , but to their white American heirs .
Seventy years elapsed , after the exploration , before the river 's borders had a white population worth considering ; and nearly fifty more before the river had a commerce .
Between La Salle 's opening of the river and the time when it may be said to have become the vehicle of anything like a regular and active commerce , seven sovereigns had occupied the throne of England , America had become an independent nation , Louis XIV .
had rotted and died , the French monarchy had gone down in the red tempest of the revolution , and Napoleon was a name that was beginning to be talked about .
Truly , there were snails in those days .
Then he jumped up in the air and cracked his heels together again and shouted out --
I laid still and waited for fifteen minutes , and had a smoke out of a pipe that one of them left in reach ; then the crossing was finished , and they stumped back and had a drink around and went to talking and singing again .
Next they got out an old fiddle , and one played and another patted juba , and the rest turned themselves loose on a regular old-fashioned keel-boat break-down .
They could n't keep that up very long without getting winded , so by and by they settled around the jug again .
The Child of Calamity said that was so ; he said there was nutritiousness in the mud , and a man that drunk Mississippi water could grow corn in his stomach if he wanted to .
' '' Why looky-here , '' he says , `` ai n't that Buck Miller 's place , over yander in the bend . ''
' '' I thought it too , when I went off watch '' -- we was standing six hours on and six off -- '' but the boys told me , '' I says , `` that the raft did n't seem to hardly move , for the last hour , '' says I , `` though she 's a slipping along all right , now , '' says I .
He give a kind of a groan , and says --
' '' I 've seed a raft act so before , along here , '' he says , `` 'pears to me the current has most quit above the head of this bend durin ' the last two years , '' he says .
'He never said nothing .
The thing gained and gained , and I judged it must be a dog that was about tired out .
Well , we swung down into the crossing , and the thing floated across the bright streak of the moonshine , and , by George , it was bar'l .
' '' Dick Allbright , what made you think that thing was a bar'l , when it was a half a mile off , '' says I .
'I called the rest of the watch , and they come and stood there , and I told them what Dick said .
It floated right along abreast , now , and did n't gain any more .
It was about twenty foot off .
Some was for having it aboard , but the rest did n't want to .
Dick Allbright said rafts that had fooled with it had got bad luck by it .
The captain of the watch said he did n't believe in it .
He said he reckoned the bar'l gained on us because it was in a little better current than what we was .
He said it would leave by and by .
'But next night about half-past nine , when there was songs and high jinks going on , here she comes again , and took her old roost on the stabboard side .
There war n't no more high jinks .
Everybody got solemn ; nobody talked ; you could n't get anybody to do anything but set around moody and look at the bar'l .
It begun to cloud up again .
When the watch changed , the off watch stayed up , 'stead of turning in .
The storm ripped and roared around all night , and in the middle of it another man tripped and sprained his ankle , and had to knock off .
The bar'l left towards day , and nobody see it go .
'I do n't know how it done it , ' says Ed .
'It done it though -- that 's all I know about it . '
'What was the brand on that bar'l , Eddy ? '
says a fellow they called Bill .
'Come out of that , you beggar ! '
'Good , that 's it .
Go for the paint , Jimmy . '
So I looked around on them , and some of them grumbled and growled , and Bob put down the paint , and the others did n't take it up .
'Not over a quarter of a minute , sir , ' says I .
'How did you get dry so quick ? '
'I do n't know , sir .
I 'm always that way , mostly . '
'Charles William Allbright , sir . '
My father was a justice of the peace , and I supposed he possessed the power of life and death over all men and could hang anybody that offended him .
This was distinction enough for me as a general thing ; but the desire to be a steamboatman kept intruding , nevertheless .
I first wanted to be a cabin-boy , so that I could come out with a white apron on and shake a tablecloth over the side , where all my old comrades could see me ; later I thought I would rather be the deckhand who stood on the end of the stage-plank with the coil of rope in his hand , because he was particularly conspicuous .
But these were only day-dreams , -- they were too heavenly to be contemplated as real possibilities .
By and by one of our boys went away .
He was not heard of for a long time .
At last he turned up as apprentice engineer or 'striker ' on a steamboat .
This thing shook the bottom out of all my Sunday-school teachings .
That boy had been notoriously worldly , and I just the reverse ; yet he was exalted to this eminence , and I left in obscurity and misery .
There was nothing generous about this fellow in his greatness .
He would always manage to have a rusty bolt to scrub while his boat tarried at our town , and he would sit on the inside guard and scrub it , where we could all see him and envy him and loathe him .
And whenever his boat was laid up he would come home and swell around the town in his blackest and greasiest clothes , so that nobody could help remembering that he was a steamboatman ; and he used all sorts of steamboat technicalities in his talk , as if he were so used to them that he forgot common people could not understand them .
He would speak of the 'labboard ' side of a horse in an easy , natural way that would make one wish he was dead .
And he was always talking about 'St .
Looy ' like an old citizen ; he would refer casually to occasions when he 'was coming down Fourth Street , ' or when he was 'passing by the Planter 's House , ' or when there was a fire and he took a turn on the brakes of 'the old Big Missouri ; ' and then he would go on and lie about how many towns the size of ours were burned down there that day .
Two or three of the boys had long been persons of consideration among us because they had been to St. Louis once and had a vague general knowledge of its wonders , but the day of their glory was over now .
They lapsed into a humble silence , and learned to disappear when the ruthless 'cub'-engineer approached .
This fellow had money , too , and hair oil .
Also an ignorant silver watch and a showy brass watch chain .
He wore a leather belt and used no suspenders .
If ever a youth was cordially admired and hated by his comrades , this one was .
No girl could withstand his charms .
He 'cut out ' every boy in the village .
When his boat blew up at last , it diffused a tranquil contentment among us such as we had not known for months .
But when he came home the next week , alive , renowned , and appeared in church all battered up and bandaged , a shining hero , stared at and wondered over by everybody , it seemed to us that the partiality of Providence for an undeserving reptile had reached a point where it was open to criticism .
Chapter 5 I Want to be a Cub-pilot
And then he left .
I could not understand this extraordinary procedure ; so I presently gave up trying to , and dozed off to sleep .
Pretty soon the watchman was back again , and this time he was gruff .
Mr. Bixby said to the mate : --
'Upper end of the plantation , or the lower ? '
It seemed to me that I had put my life in the keeping of a peculiarly reckless outcast .
Presently he turned on me and said : --
What do you start out from , above Twelve-Mile Point , to cross over ? '
'You -- you -- do n't know ? '
mimicking my drawling manner of speech .
'What DO you know ? '
'My boy , you must get a little memorandum book , and every time I tell you a thing , put it down right away .
There 's only one way to be a pilot , and that is to get this entire river by heart .
You have to know it just like A B C . '
'What 's this , sir ? '
'It was in the night , there , and I ran it the way one of the boys on the `` Diana '' told me ; started out about fifty yards above the wood pile on the false point , and held on the cabin under Plum Point till I raised the reef -- quarter less twain -- then straightened up for the middle bar till I got well abreast the old one-limbed cotton-wood in the bend , then got my stern on the cotton-wood and head on the low place above the point , and came through a-booming -- nine and a half . '
There was an approving nod all around as this quiet snub dropped on the boaster and 'settled ' him .
And so they went on talk-talk-talking .
Meantime , the thing that was running in my mind was , 'Now if my ears hear aright , I have not only to get the names of all the towns and islands and bends , and so on , by heart , but I must even get up a warm personal acquaintanceship with every old snag and one-limbed cotton-wood and obscure wood pile that ornaments the banks of this river for twelve hundred miles ; and more than that , I must actually know where these things are in the dark , unless these guests are gifted with eyes that can pierce through two miles of solid blackness ; I wish the piloting business was in Jericho and I had never thought of it . '
Next morning I felt pretty rusty and low-spirited .
We went booming along , taking a good many chances , for we were anxious to 'get out of the river ' ( as getting out to Cairo was called ) before night should overtake us .
But Mr. Bixby 's partner , the other pilot , presently grounded the boat , and we lost so much time in getting her off that it was plain that darkness would overtake us a good long way above the mouth .
This was a great misfortune , especially to certain of our visiting pilots , whose boats would have to wait for their return , no matter how long that might be .
It sobered the pilot-house talk a good deal .
Coming up-stream , pilots did not mind low water or any kind of darkness ; nothing stopped them but fog .
But down-stream work was different ; a boat was too nearly helpless , with a stiff current pushing behind her ; so it was not customary to run down-stream at night in low water .
'Oh , it was done beautiful -- BEAUTIFUL ! '
Instantly Mr. Bixby set a lot of bells ringing , shouted through the tube , 'NOW , let her have it -- every ounce you've got ! '
then to his partner , 'Put her hard down !
The boat rasped and ground her way through the sand , hung upon the apex of disaster a single tremendous instant , and then over she went !
And such a shout as went up at Mr. Bixby 's back never loosened the roof of a pilot-house before !
There was no more trouble after that .
Mr. Bixby was a hero that night ; and it was some little time , too , before his exploit ceased to be talked about by river men .
However , I must have gone to sleep in the course of time , because the next thing I was aware of was the fact that day was breaking , Mr. W -- -- gone , and Mr. Bixby at the wheel again .
So it was four o'clock and all well -- but me ; I felt like a skinful of dry bones and all of them trying to ache at once .
I said I thought it might be a convenience to him .
'Well , I can follow the front hall in the dark if I know it IS the front hall ; but suppose you set me down in the middle of it in the dark and not tell me which hall it is ; how am I to know ? '
'Well you 've GOT to , on the river ! '
It was plain that I had got to learn the shape of the river in all the different ways that could be thought of , -- upside down , wrong end first , inside out , fore-and-aft , and 'thortships , ' -- and then know what to do on gray nights when it had n't any shape at all .
So I set about it .
In the course of time I began to get the best of this knotty lesson , and my self-complacency moved to the front once more .
Mr. Bixby was all fixed , and ready to start it to the rear again .
He opened on me after this fashion --
Wait till I give the word .
She wo n't want to mount the reef ; a boat hates shoal water .
Stand by -- wait -- WAIT -- keep her well in hand .
NOW cramp her down !
He seized the other side of the wheel and helped to spin it around until it was hard down , and then we held it so .
The boat resisted , and refused to answer for a while , and next she came surging to starboard , mounted the reef , and sent a long , angry ridge of water foaming away from her bows .
'Now watch her ; watch her like a cat , or she 'll get away from you .
When she fights strong and the tiller slips a little , in a jerky , greasy sort of way , let up on her a trifle ; it is the way she tells you at night that the water is too shoal ; but keep edging her up , little by little , toward the point .
You are well up on the bar , now ; there is a bar under every point , because the water that comes down around it forms an eddy and allows the sediment to sink .
Do you see those fine lines on the face of the water that branch out like the ribs of a fan .
Well , those are little reefs ; you want to just miss the ends of them , but run them pretty close .
Now look out -- look out !
Do n't you crowd that slick , greasy-looking place ; there ai n't nine feet there ; she wo n't stand it .
She begins to smell it ; look sharp , I tell you !
Oh blazes , there you go !
Stop the starboard wheel !
Ship up to back !
No , the romance and the beauty were all gone from the river .
All the value any feature of it had for me now was the amount of usefulness it could furnish toward compassing the safe piloting of a steamboat .
Since those days , I have pitied doctors from my heart .
What does the lovely flush in a beauty 's cheek mean to a doctor but a 'break ' that ripples above some deadly disease .
Are not all her visible charms sown thick with what are to him the signs and symbols of hidden decay ?
Does he ever see her beauty at all , or does n't he simply view her professionally , and comment upon her unwholesome condition all to himself ?
And does n't he sometimes wonder whether he has gained most or lost most by learning his trade ?
'No it ai n't . '
By and by I ventured again --
'It is kind of you , and I swear _I_ am willing .
I have n't got another drop of perspiration left in me .
I have been spinning around and around the wheel like a squirrel .
It is so dark I ca n't tell which way she is swinging till she is coming around like a whirligig . '
'Dart for the pilot-house , quicker than lightning ! '
By and by the watchman came back and said --
'Did n't that lunatic tell you he was asleep , when he first came up here ? '
'It ai n't , either .
It 's been new-painted ; and it 's been up on the ladies ' cabin guards two days , drying . '
I looked over , and there was the gallant sounding-boat booming away , the unprincipled Tom presiding at the tiller , and my chief sitting by him with the sounding-pole which I had been sent on a fool 's errand to fetch .
Then that young girl said to me --
He stopped the engines .
A moment or two later he said --
'I can make it !
Stand by with a rope ! '
The yawl crew searched everywhere , but found no sign of the two men .
They probably failed to catch the guard , tumbled back , and were struck by the wheel and killed .
Tom had never jumped for the guard at all , but had plunged head-first into the river and dived under the wheel .
It was nothing ; I could have done it easy enough , and I said so ; but everybody went on just the same , making a wonderful to do over that ass , as if he had done something great .
That girl could n't seem to have enough of that pitiful 'hero ' the rest of the trip ; but little I cared ; I loathed her , any way .
BUT I am wandering from what I was intending to do , that is , make plainer than perhaps appears in the previous chapters , some of the peculiar requirements of the science of piloting .
First of all , there is one faculty which a pilot must incessantly cultivate until he has brought it to absolute perfection .
Nothing short of perfection will do .
That faculty is memory .
He can not stop with merely thinking a thing is so and so ; he must know it ; for this is eminently one of the 'exact' sciences .
With what scorn a pilot was looked upon , in the old times , if he ever ventured to deal in that feeble phrase 'I think , ' instead of the vigorous one 'I know ! '
One can not easily realize what a tremendous thing it is to know every trivial detail of twelve hundred miles of river and know it with absolute exactness .
If you will take the longest street in New York , and travel up and down it , conning its features patiently until you know every house and window and door and lamp-post and big and little sign by heart , and know them so accurately that you can instantly name the one you are abreast of when you are set down at random in that street in the middle of an inky black night , you will then have a tolerable notion of the amount and the exactness of a pilot 's knowledge who carries the Mississippi River in his head .
And then if you will go on until you know every street crossing , the character , size , and position of the crossing-stones , and the varying depth of mud in each of those numberless places , you will have some idea of what the pilot must know in order to keep a Mississippi steamer out of trouble .
Next , if you will take half of the signs in that long street , and CHANGE THEIR PLACES once a month , and still manage to know their new positions accurately on dark nights , and keep up with these repeated changes without making any mistakes , you will understand what is required of a pilot 's peerless memory by the fickle Mississippi .
'Oh , I knew HIM .
Sallow-faced , red-headed fellow , with a little scar on the side of his throat , like a splinter under the flesh .
He was only in the Southern trade six months .
That was thirteen years ago .
I made a trip with him .
There was five feet in the upper river then ; the `` Henry Blake '' grounded at the foot of Tower Island drawing four and a half ; the `` George Elliott '' unshipped her rudder on the wreck of the `` Sunflower '' -- '
The growth of courage in the pilot-house is steady all the time , but it does not reach a high and satisfactory condition until some time after the young pilot has been 'standing his own watch , ' alone and under the staggering weight of all the responsibilities connected with the position .
When an apprentice has become pretty thoroughly acquainted with the river , he goes clattering along so fearlessly with his steamboat , night or day , that he presently begins to imagine that it is HIS courage that animates him ; but the first time the pilot steps out and leaves him to his own devices he finds out it was the other man 's .
He discovers that the article has been left out of his own cargo altogether .
The whole river is bristling with exigencies in a moment ; he is not prepared for them ; he does not know how to meet them ; all his knowledge forsakes him ; and within fifteen minutes he is as white as a sheet and scared almost to death .
Therefore pilots wisely train these cubs by various strategic tricks to look danger in the face a little more calmly .
A favorite way of theirs is to play a friendly swindle upon the candidate .
This was almost an affront .
It was about the plainest and simplest crossing in the whole river .
One could n't come to any harm , whether he ran it right or not ; and as for depth , there never had been any bottom there .
I knew all this , perfectly well .
'Gone below , sir . '
But that did the business for me .
My imagination began to construct dangers out of nothing , and they multiplied faster than I could keep the run of them .
All at once I imagined I saw shoal water ahead !
The wave of coward agony that surged through me then came near dislocating every joint in me .
All my confidence in that crossing vanished .
I seized the bell-rope ; dropped it , ashamed ; seized it again ; dropped it once more ; clutched it tremblingly one again , and pulled it so feebly that I could hardly hear the stroke myself .
Captain and mate sang out instantly , and both together --
This was another shock .
I began to climb the wheel like a squirrel ; but I would hardly get the boat started to port before I would see new dangers on that side , and away I would spin to the other ; only to find perils accumulating to starboard , and be crazy to get to port again .
Then came the leadsman 's sepulchral cry --
I seized the bell-ropes and stopped the engines .
I did not know what in the world to do .
I was quaking from head to foot , and I could have hung my hat on my eyes , they stuck out so far .
'Very well , then .
You should n't have allowed me or anybody else to shake your confidence in that knowledge .
Try to remember that .
And another thing : when you get into a dangerous place , do n't turn coward .
That is n't going to help matters any . '
It was a good enough lesson , but pretty hardly learned .
Yet about the hardest part of it was that for months I so often had to hear a phrase which I had conceived a particular distaste for .
It was , 'Oh , Ben , if you love me , back her ! '
The barber of the 'Grand Turk ' was a spruce young negro , who aired his importance with balmy complacency , and was greatly courted by the circle in which he moved .
The young colored population of New Orleans were much given to flirting , at twilight , on the banquettes of the back streets .
Somebody saw and heard something like the following , one evening , in one of those localities .
A middle-aged negro woman projected her head through a broken pane and shouted ( very willing that the neighbors should hear and envy ) , 'You Mary Ann , come in de house dis minute !
Stannin ' out dah foolin ' 'long wid dat low trash , an ' heah 's de barber offn de `` Gran ' Turk '' wants to conwerse wid you ! '
'Well , I should say so !
Bank-full IS a pretty liberal stage . '
'Is n't it easier in toward shore than it is out here in the middle ? '
W -- -- , do n't that chute cut off a good deal of distance ? '
Chapter 15 The Pilots ' Monopoly
'For gracious ' sake , give her steam , Mr. Bixby !
She'll never raise the reef on this headway ! '
'I will provide for you , ' said the secretary .
'I will detail a pilot to go with you , and he shall be on board at twelve o'clock . '
PILOTS , JOHN JONES AND THOMAS BROWN .
Imagine the benefits of so admirable a system in a piece of river twelve or thirteen hundred miles long , whose channel was shifting every day !
The pilot who had formerly been obliged to put up with seeing a shoal place once or possibly twice a month , had a hundred sharp eyes to watch it for him , now , and bushels of intelligent brains to tell him how to run it .
His information about it was seldom twenty-four hours old .
If the reports in the last box chanced to leave any misgivings on his mind concerning a treacherous crossing , he had his remedy ; he blew his steam-whistle in a peculiar way as soon as he saw a boat approaching ; the signal was answered in a peculiar way if that boat 's pilots were association men ; and then the two steamers ranged alongside and all uncertainties were swept away by fresh information furnished to the inquirer by word of mouth and in minute detail .
IT was always the custom for the boats to leave New Orleans between four and five o'clock in the afternoon .
From three o'clock onward they would be burning rosin and pitch pine ( the sign of preparation ) , and so one had the picturesque spectacle of a rank , some two or three miles long , of tall , ascending columns of coal-black smoke ; a colonnade which supported a sable roof of the same smoke blended together and spreading abroad over the city .
Every outward-bound boat had its flag flying at the jack-staff , and sometimes a duplicate on the verge staff astern .
Two or three miles of mates were commanding and swearing with more than usual emphasis ; countless processions of freight barrels and boxes were spinning athwart the levee and flying aboard the stage-planks , belated passengers were dodging and skipping among these frantic things , hoping to reach the forecastle companion way alive , but having their doubts about it ; women with reticules and bandboxes were trying to keep up with husbands freighted with carpet-sacks and crying babies , and making a failure of it by losing their heads in the whirl and roar and general distraction ; drays and baggage-vans were clattering hither and thither in a wild hurry , every now and then getting blocked and jammed together , and then during ten seconds one could not see them for the profanity , except vaguely and dimly ; every windlass connected with every forehatch , from one end of that long array of steamboats to the other , was keeping up a deafening whiz and whir , lowering freight into the hold , and the half-naked crews of perspiring negroes that worked them were roaring such songs as 'De Las ' Sack !
De Las ' Sack ! '
-- inspired to unimaginable exaltation by the chaos of turmoil and racket that was driving everybody else mad .
By this time the hurricane and boiler decks of the steamers would be packed and black with passengers .
The 'last bells ' would begin to clang , all down the line , and then the powwow seemed to double ; in a moment or two the final warning came , -- a simultaneous din of Chinese gongs , with the cry , 'All dat ai n't goin ' , please to git asho ' ! '
-- and behold , the powwow quadrupled !
People came swarming ashore , overturning excited stragglers that were trying to swarm aboard .
One more moment later a long array of stage-planks was being hauled in , each with its customary latest passenger clinging to the end of it with teeth , nails , and everything else , and the customary latest procrastinator making a wild spring shoreward over his head .
In the old times , whenever two fast boats started out on a race , with a big crowd of people looking on , it was inspiring to hear the crews sing , especially if the time were night-fall , and the forecastle lit up with the red glare of the torch-baskets .
Racing was royal fun .
The public always had an idea that racing was dangerous ; whereas the opposite was the case -- that is , after the laws were passed which restricted each boat to just so many pounds of steam to the square inch .
No engineer was ever sleepy or careless when his heart was in a race .
He was constantly on the alert , trying gauge-cocks and watching things .
The dangerous place was on slow , plodding boats , where the engineers drowsed around and allowed chips to get into the 'doctor ' and shut off the water supply from the boilers .
There is a great difference in boats , of course .
For a long time I was on a boat that was so slow we used to forget what year it was we left port in .
But of course this was at rare intervals .
Ferryboats used to lose valuable trips because their passengers grew old and died , waiting for us to get by .
This was at still rarer intervals .
I had the documents for these occurrences , but through carelessness they have been mislaid .
This boat , the 'John J. Roe , ' was so slow that when she finally sunk in Madrid Bend , it was five years before the owners heard of it .
That was always a confusing fact to me , but it is according to the record , any way .
She was dismally slow ; still , we often had pretty exciting times racing with islands , and rafts , and such things .
One trip , however , we did rather well .
We went to St. Louis in sixteen days .
But even at this rattling gait I think we changed watches three times in Fort Adams reach , which is five miles long .
A 'reach ' is a piece of straight river , and of course the current drives through such a place in a pretty lively way .
FROM NEW ORLEANS TO CAIRO -- 1,024 MILES
D. H. M. 1844 J. M. White made the run in 3 6 44 1852 Reindeer `` `` 3 12 45 1853 Eclipse `` `` 3 4 4 1853 A. L. Shotwell `` `` 3 3 40 1869 Dexter `` `` 3 6 20 1870 Natchez `` `` 3 4 34 1870 R. E. Lee `` `` 3 1
In June , 1859 , the St. Louis and Keokuk Packet , City of Louisiana , made the run from St. Louis to Keokuk ( 214 miles ) in 16 hours and 20 minutes , the best time on record .
Now , if I wanted to be one of those ponderous scientific people , and 'let on ' to prove what had occurred in the remote past by what had occurred in a given time in the recent past , or what will occur in the far future by what has occurred in late years , what an opportunity is here !
Geology never had such a chance , nor such exact data to argue from !
Nor 'development of species , ' either !
Glacial epochs are great things , but they are vague -- vague .
The old Raccourci cut-off reduced the river 's length twenty-eight miles .
There used to be a tradition connected with it .
It was said that a boat came along there in the night and went around the enormous elbow the usual way , the pilots not knowing that the cut-off had been made .
It was a grisly , hideous night , and all shapes were vague and distorted .
The old bend had already begun to fill up , and the boat got to running away from mysterious reefs , and occasionally hitting one .
The perplexed pilots fell to swearing , and finally uttered the entirely unnecessary wish that they might never get out of that place .
As always happens in such cases , that particular prayer was answered , and the others neglected .
So to this day that phantom steamer is still butting around in that deserted river , trying to find her way out .
More than one grave watchman has sworn to me that on drizzly , dismal nights , he has glanced fearfully down that forgotten river as he passed the head of the island , and seen the faint glow of the specter steamer 's lights drifting through the distant gloom , and heard the muffled cough of her 'scape-pipes and the plaintive cry of her leadsmen .
Yates 's life became a burden to him .
He could not escape his debtor and his debtor 's awful sufferings on account of not being able to pay .
He dreaded to show himself in the street , lest he should find Stephen lying in wait for him at the corner .
Bogart 's billiard saloon was a great resort for pilots in those days .
They met there about as much to exchange river news as to play .
One morning Yates was there ; Stephen was there , too , but kept out of sight .
But by and by , when about all the pilots had arrived who were in town , Stephen suddenly appeared in the midst , and rushed for Yates as for a long-lost brother .
Chapter 18 I Take a Few Extra Lessons
After this there was a pause and another inspection .
'In Florida , Missouri . '
'Dern sight better staid there ! '
You going to hold her all day ?
Let her go -- meet her !
One day we were approaching New Madrid , bound down and heavily laden .
Brown was at one side of the wheel , steering ; I was at the other , standing by to 'pull down ' or 'shove up . '
He cast a furtive glance at me every now and then .
I had long ago learned what that meant ; viz.
, he was trying to invent a trap for me .
I wondered what shape it was going to take .
By and by he stepped back from the wheel and said in his usual snarly way --
-- See if you 've got gumption enough to round her to . '
Presently , sure enough , we went sailing by that plantation .
Captain Klinefelter appeared on the deck , and said --
'He did come up ; and that 's all the good it done , the dod-derned fool .
He never said anything . '
'Did n't YOU hear him ? '
asked the captain of me .
'You lie , yourself .
He did tell you . '
'So you have been fighting Mr .
The 'Lacey ' started up the river two days behind the 'Pennsylvania . '
We touched at Greenville , Mississippi , a couple of days out , and somebody shouted --
Many people were flung to considerable distances , and fell in the river ; among these were Mr. Wood and my brother , and the carpenter .
The carpenter was still stretched upon his mattress when he struck the water seventy-five feet from the boat .
Brown , the pilot , and George Black , chief clerk , were never seen or heard of after the explosion .
The barber 's chair , with Captain Klinefelter in it and unhurt , was left with its back overhanging vacancy -- everything forward of it , floor and all , had disappeared ; and the stupefied barber , who was also unhurt , stood with one toe projecting over space , still stirring his lather unconsciously , and saying , not a word .
When George Ealer saw the chimneys plunging aloft in front of him , he knew what the matter was ; so he muffled his face in the lapels of his coat , and pressed both hands there tightly to keep this protection in its place so that no steam could get to his nose or mouth .
He had ample time to attend to these details while he was going up and returning .
He presently landed on top of the unexploded boilers , forty feet below the former pilot-house , accompanied by his wheel and a rain of other stuff , and enveloped in a cloud of scalding steam .
All of the many who breathed that steam , died ; none escaped .
But Ealer breathed none of it .
He made his way to the free air as quickly as he could ; and when the steam cleared away he returned and climbed up on the boilers again , and patiently hunted out each and every one of his chessmen and the several joints of his flute .
By this time the fire was making fierce headway , and several persons who were imprisoned under the ruins were begging piteously for help .
All efforts to conquer the fire proved fruitless ; so the buckets were presently thrown aside and the officers fell-to with axes and tried to cut the prisoners out .
A striker was one of the captives ; he said he was not injured , but could not free himself ; and when he saw that the fire was likely to drive away the workers , he begged that some one would shoot him , and thus save him from the more dreadful death .
The fire did drive the axmen away , and they had to listen , helpless , to this poor fellow 's supplications till the flames ended his miseries .
But he was the only one who went to the death-room and returned alive .
Dr. Peyton , a principal physician , and rich in all the attributes that go to constitute high and flawless character , did all that educated judgment and trained skill could do for Henry ; but , as the newspapers had said in the beginning , his hurts were past help .
On the evening of the sixth day his wandering mind busied itself with matters far away , and his nerveless fingers 'picked at his coverlet . '
His hour had struck ; we bore him to the death-room , poor boy .
Let us resume , now .
'Heretofore , all along , the station-loafer has been often observed to scratch one shin with the other foot ; here , these remains of activity are wanting .
This has an ominous look . '
'What is a person to do here when he wants a drink of water ?
-- drink this slush ? '
He used to fringe the river all the way ; his close-ranked merchandise stretched from the one city to the other , along the banks , and he sold uncountable cords of it every year for cash on the nail ; but all the scattering boats that are left burn coal now , and the seldomest spectacle on the Mississippi to-day is a wood-pile .
Where now is the once wood-yard man ?
'Bless you , no , boss .
She ai n't unloadened , yit .
She only come in dis mawnin ' . '
At eight o'clock , promptly , we backed out and crossed the river .
As we crept toward the shore , in the thick darkness , a blinding glory of white electric light burst suddenly from our forecastle , and lit up the water and the warehouses as with a noon-day glare .
Another big change , this -- no more flickering , smoky , pitch-dripping , ineffectual torch-baskets , now : their day is past .
Next , instead of calling out a score of hands to man the stage , a couple of men and a hatful of steam lowered it from the derrick where it was suspended , launched it , deposited it in just the right spot , and the whole thing was over and done with before a mate in the olden time could have got his profanity-mill adjusted to begin the preparatory services .
Why this new and simple method of handling the stages was not thought of when the first steamboat was built , is a mystery which helps one to realize what a dull-witted slug the average human being is .
It was another good contrivance which ought to have been invented half a century sooner .
So I was thinking , when the pilot asked --
I had a mighty impulse to destroy him , but it seemed to me that killing , in any ordinary way , would be too good for him .
The Town of Grand Tower was evidently a busier place than it had been in old times , but it seemed to need some repairs here and there , and a new coat of whitewash all over .
Still , it was pleasant to me to see the old coat once more .
'Uncle ' Mumford , our second officer , said the place had been suffering from high water , and consequently was not looking its best now .
But he said it was not strange that it did n't waste white-wash on itself , for more lime was made there , and of a better quality , than anywhere in the West ; and added -- 'On a dairy farm you never can get any milk for your coffee , nor any sugar for it on a sugar plantation ; and it is against sense to go to a lime town to hunt for white-wash. ' In my own experience I knew the first two items to be true ; and also that people who sell candy do n't care for candy ; therefore there was plausibility in Uncle Mumford 's final observation that 'people who make lime run more to religion than whitewash . '
Uncle Mumford said , further , that Grand Tower was a great coaling center and a prospering place .
Uniforms on the Mississippi !
It beats all the other changes put together , for surprise .
Still , there is another surprise -- that it was not made fifty years ago .
It is so manifestly sensible , that it might have been thought of earlier , one would suppose .
During fifty years , out there , the innocent passenger in need of help and information , has been mistaking the mate for the cook , and the captain for the barber -- and being roughly entertained for it , too .
But his troubles are ended now .
And the greatly improved aspect of the boat 's staff is another advantage achieved by the dress-reform period .
Steered down the bend below Cape Girardeau .
They used to call it 'Steersman 's Bend ; ' plain sailing and plenty of water in it , always ; about the only place in the Upper River that a new cub was allowed to take a boat through , in low water .
Thebes , at the head of the Grand Chain , and Commerce at the foot of it , were towns easily rememberable , as they had not undergone conspicuous alteration .
Nor the Chain , either -- in the nature of things ; for it is a chain of sunken rocks admirably arranged to capture and kill steamboats on bad nights .
A good many steamboat corpses lie buried there , out of sight ; among the rest my first friend the 'Paul Jones ; ' she knocked her bottom out , and went down like a pot , so the historian told me -- Uncle Mumford .
He said she had a gray mare aboard , and a preacher .
To me , this sufficiently accounted for the disaster ; as it did , of course , to Mumford , who added --
'But there are many ignorant people who would scoff at such a matter , and call it superstition .
But you will always notice that they are people who have never traveled with a gray mare and a preacher .
I went down the river once in such company .
We grounded at Bloody Island ; we grounded at Hanging Dog ; we grounded just below this same Commerce ; we jolted Beaver Dam Rock ; we hit one of the worst breaks in the 'Graveyard ' behind Goose Island ; we had a roustabout killed in a fight ; we burnt a boiler ; broke a shaft ; collapsed a flue ; and went into Cairo with nine feet of water in the hold -- may have been more , may have been less .
I remember it as if it were yesterday .
The men lost their heads with terror .
They painted the mare blue , in sight of town , and threw the preacher overboard , or we should not have arrived at all .
The preacher was fished out and saved .
He acknowledged , himself , that he had been to blame .
I remember it all , as if it were yesterday . '
The next time I saw my partner , I said , 'Now , come out , be honest , and tell me the truth .
Where did you go when you went to see that battle ? '
He says , 'I went down in the hold . '
All through that fight I was scared nearly to death .
I hardly knew anything , I was so frightened ; but you see , nobody knew that but me .
Next day General Polk sent for me , and praised me for my bravery and gallant conduct .
I never said anything , I let it go at that .
I judged it was n't so , but it was not for me to contradict a general officer .
A plain story , straightforwardly told ; but Mumford told me that that pilot had 'gilded that scare of his , in spots ; ' that his subsequent career in the war was proof of it .
No one in the world speaks blemishless grammar ; no one has ever written it -- NO one , either in the world or out of it ( taking the Scriptures for evidence on the latter point ) ; therefore it would not be fair to exact grammatical perfection from the peoples of the Valley ; but they and all other peoples may justly be required to refrain from KNOWINGLY and PURPOSELY debauching their grammar .
Then , whilst the musketry volleyed and rejoicing shouts burst forth , the victorious discoverer planted the column , and made proclamation in a loud voice , taking formal possession of the river and the vast countries watered by it , in the name of the King .
The column bore this inscription --
With these abundant beacons , the banishment of snags , plenty of daylight in a box and ready to be turned on whenever needed , and a chart and compass to fight the fog with , piloting , at a good stage of water , is now nearly as safe and simple as driving stage , and is hardly more than three times as romantic .
During our trip to New Orleans and back , we had many conversations with river men , planters , journalists , and officers of the River Commission -- with conflicting and confusing results .
Yes , you are his sure victim : yet his work is not all to your hurt -- only part of it ; for he is like your family physician , who comes and cures the mumps , and leaves the scarlet-fever behind .
If your man is a Lake-Borgne-relief theorist , for instance , he will exhale a cloud of deadly facts and statistics which will lay you out with that disease , sure ; but at the same time he will cure you of any other of the five theories that may have previously got into your system .
There is a tradition that Island 37 was one of the principal abiding places of the once celebrated 'Murel 's Gang . '
This was a colossal combination of robbers , horse-thieves , negro-stealers , and counterfeiters , engaged in business along the river some fifty or sixty years ago .
While our journey across the country towards St. Louis was in progress we had had no end of Jesse James and his stirring history ; for he had just been assassinated by an agent of the Governor of Missouri , and was in consequence occupying a good deal of space in the newspapers .
Cheap histories of him were for sale by train boys .
According to these , he was the most marvelous creature of his kind that had ever existed .
It was a mistake .
Murel was his equal in boldness ; in pluck ; in rapacity ; in cruelty , brutality , heartlessness , treachery , and in general and comprehensive vileness and shamelessness ; and very much his superior in some larger aspects .
James was a retail rascal ; Murel , wholesale .
James 's modest genius dreamed of no loftier flight than the planning of raids upon cars , coaches , and country banks ; Murel projected negro insurrections and the capture of New Orleans ; and furthermore , on occasion , this Murel could go into a pulpit and edify the congregation .
What are James and his half-dozen vulgar rascals compared with this stately old-time criminal , with his sermons , his meditated insurrections and city-captures , and his majestic following of ten hundred men , sworn to do his evil will !
'I collected all my friends about New Orleans at one of our friends' houses in that place , and we sat in council three days before we got all our plans to our notion ; we then determined to undertake the rebellion at every hazard , and make as many friends as we could for that purpose .
Every man 's business being assigned him , I started to Natchez on foot , having sold my horse in New Orleans , -- with the intention of stealing another after I started .
I walked four days , and no opportunity offered for me to get a horse .
The fifth day , about twelve , I had become tired , and stopped at a creek to get some water and rest a little .
While I was sitting on a log , looking down the road the way that I had come , a man came in sight riding on a good-looking horse .
The very moment I saw him , I was determined to have his horse , if he was in the garb of a traveler .
He rode up , and I saw from his equipage that he was a traveler .
I arose and drew an elegant rifle pistol on him and ordered him to dismount .
He did so , and I took his horse by the bridle and pointed down the creek , and ordered him to walk before me .
He went a few hundred yards and stopped .
I hitched his horse , and then made him undress himself , all to his shirt and drawers , and ordered him to turn his back to me .
He said , 'If you are determined to kill me , let me have time to pray before I die , ' I told him I had no time to hear him pray .
He turned around and dropped on his knees , and I shot him through the back of the head .
I ripped open his belly and took out his entrails , and sunk him in the creek .
I then searched his pockets , and found four hundred dollars and thirty-seven cents , and a number of papers that I did not take time to examine .
I sunk the pocket-book and papers and his hat , in the creek .
His boots were brand-new , and fitted me genteelly ; and I put them on and sunk my old shoes in the creek , to atone for them .
I rolled up his clothes and put them into his portmanteau , as they were brand-new cloth of the best quality .
I mounted as fine a horse as ever I straddled , and directed my course for Natchez in much better style than I had been for the last five days .
As we neared Memphis , we began to cast about for an excuse to stay with the 'Gold Dust ' to the end of her course -- Vicksburg .
We were so pleasantly situated , that we did not wish to make a change .
I had an errand of considerable importance to do at Napoleon , Arkansas , but perhaps I could manage it without quitting the 'Gold Dust . '
I said as much ; so we decided to stick to present quarters .
In the briefest space it struck down and swept away even the most vigorous victim .
A slight indisposition , then an hour of fever , then the hideous delirium , then -- the Yellow Death !
On the street corners , and in the squares , lay sick men , suddenly overtaken by the disease ; and even corpses , distorted and rigid .
Meat spoiled in a few hours in the fetid and pestiferous air , and turned black .
'The table was laid for fifty persons , and was nearly full .
They ate in perfect silence , and with such astonishing rapidity that their dinner was over literally before ours was begun ; the only sounds heard were those produced by the knives and forks , with the unceasing chorus of coughing , ETC . '
'Was she going fast ? '
'Now , do you know what boat that was ? '
'Why , uncle , that was the `` Eclipse . ''
'You are the feller that -- that -- '
Helena we visited , and also a town I had not heard of before , it being of recent birth -- Arkansas City .
It was born of a railway ; the Little Rock , Mississippi River and Texas Railroad touches the river there .
We asked a passenger who belonged there what sort of a place it was .
'Well , ' said he , after considering , and with the air of one who wishes to take time and be accurate , 'It 's a hell of a place . '
A description which was photographic for exactness .
There were several rows and clusters of shabby frame-houses , and a supply of mud sufficient to insure the town against a famine in that article for a hundred years ; for the overflow had but lately subsided .
There were stagnant ponds in the streets , here and there , and a dozen rude scows were scattered about , lying aground wherever they happened to have been when the waters drained off and people could do their visiting and shopping on foot once more .
Still , it is a thriving place , with a rich country behind it , an elevator in front of it , and also a fine big mill for the manufacture of cotton-seed oil .
I had never seen this kind of a mill before .
Toward the end of last year , I spent a few months in Munich , Bavaria .
In November I was living in Fraulein Dahlweiner 's PENSION , 1a , Karlstrasse ; but my working quarters were a mile from there , in the house of a widow who supported herself by taking lodgers .
She and her two young children used to drop in every morning and talk German to me -- by request .
One day , during a ramble about the city , I visited one of the two establishments where the Government keeps and watches corpses until the doctors decide that they are permanently dead , and not in a trance state .
It was a grisly place , that spacious room .
There were thirty-six corpses of adults in sight , stretched on their backs on slightly slanted boards , in three long rows -- all of them with wax-white , rigid faces , and all of them wrapped in white shrouds .
Along the sides of the room were deep alcoves , like bay windows ; and in each of these lay several marble-visaged babes , utterly hidden and buried under banks of fresh flowers , all but their faces and crossed hands .
Around a finger of each of these fifty still forms , both great and small , was a ring ; and from the ring a wire led to the ceiling , and thence to a bell in a watch-room yonder , where , day and night , a watchman sits always alert and ready to spring to the aid of any of that pallid company who , waking out of death , shall make a movement -- for any , even the slightest , movement will twitch the wire and ring that fearful bell .
I imagined myself a death-sentinel drowsing there alone , far in the dragging watches of some wailing , gusty night , and having in a twinkling all my body stricken to quivering jelly by the sudden clamor of that awful summons !
So I inquired about this thing ; asked what resulted usually ?
if the watchman died , and the restored corpse came and did what it could to make his last moments easy .
But I was rebuked for trying to feed an idle and frivolous curiosity in so solemn and so mournful a place ; and went my way with a humbled crest .
I have a lodger who shall tell you all you want to know .
He has been a night-watchman there . '
Let us shorten the story wherever we can , for it will need it , being long .
You already know how I came to go to America , and how I came to settle in that lonely region in the South .
But you do not know that I had a wife .
My wife was young , beautiful , loving , and oh , so divinely good and blameless and gentle !
And our little girl was her mother in miniature .
It was the happiest of happy households .
The other man interrupted in a low , half-crying voice --
The strangers shouted several times more , then rode by -- there seemed to be a dozen of the horses -- and I heard nothing more .
I went on telling fortunes .
Every night I shut myself in , all alone , and studied the day 's thumb-prints with a magnifying-glass .
Imagine the devouring eagerness with which I pored over those mazy red spirals , with that document by my side which bore the right-hand thumb-and-finger-marks of that unknown murderer , printed with the dearest blood -- to me -- that was ever shed on this earth !
And many and many a time I had to repeat the same old disappointed remark , 'will they NEVER correspond ! '
I fled through the woods , and made good my escape , leaving the accusing goggles behind me in that dead man 's hand .
Affirmative nod , accompanied by a spectral smile of such peculiar devilishness , that it struck an awakening light through my dull brain , and I cried --
The affirmative nod of the re-dying rascal was as joyous as his failing strength was able to put into its expression .
Chapter 32 The Disposal of a Bonanza
It is a heap of money . '
After a little , Rogers asked , hesitatingly :
Thompson said that he was thinking of the thing himself at the very moment that Rogers had originally spoken .
The captain glanced up at the pilot-house and said --
'Well , by -- - ? '
just a fifteen-minute job . '
or such a matter .
Did n't leave hide nor hair , shred nor shingle of it , except the fag-end of a shanty and one brick chimney .
This boat is paddling along right now , where the dead-center of that town used to be ; yonder is the brick chimney-all that 's left of Napoleon .
These dense woods on the right used to be a mile back of the town .
Take a look behind you -- up-stream -- now you begin to recognize this country , do n't you ? '
'For my share of the chromo . '
IN regard to Island 74 , which is situated not far from the former Napoleon , a freak of the river here has sorely perplexed the laws of men and made them a vanity and a jest .
When the State of Arkansas was chartered , she controlled 'to the center of the river ' -- a most unstable line .
The State of Mississippi claimed 'to the channel ' -- another shifty and unstable line .
74 belonged to Arkansas .
By and by a cut-off threw this big island out of Arkansas , and yet not within Mississippi .
'Middle of the river ' on one side of it , 'channel ' on the other .
That is as I understand the problem .
Whether I have got the details right or wrong , this FACT remains : that here is this big and exceedingly valuable island of four thousand acres , thrust out in the cold , and belonging to neither the one State nor the other ; paying taxes to neither , owing allegiance to neither .
One man owns the whole island , and of right is 'the man without a country . '
There was much talk on the boat about the Calhoun Land Company , an enterprise which is expected to work wholesome results .
Colonel Calhoun , a grandson of the statesman , went to Boston and formed a syndicate which purchased a large tract of land on the river , in Chicot County , Arkansas -- some ten thousand acres -- for cotton-growing .
The purpose is to work on a cash basis : buy at first hands , and handle their own product ; supply their negro laborers with provisions and necessaries at a trifling profit , say 8 or 10 per cent .
; furnish them comfortable quarters , etc.
, and encourage them to save money and remain on the place .
If this proves a financial success , as seems quite certain , they propose to establish a banking-house in Greenville , and lend money at an unburdensome rate of interest -- 6 per cent .
It is hoped that the Calhoun Company will show , by its humane and protective treatment of its laborers , that its method is the most profitable for both planter and negro ; and it is believed that a general adoption of that method will then follow .
Signs and scars still remain , as reminders of Vicksburg 's tremendous war experiences ; earthworks , trees crippled by the cannon balls , cave-refuges in the clay precipices , etc .
The caves did good service during the six weeks ' bombardment of the city -- May 8 to July 4 , 1863 .
They were used by the non-combatants -- mainly by the women and children ; not to live in constantly , but to fly to for safety on occasion .
They were mere holes , tunnels , driven into the perpendicular clay bank , then branched Y shape , within the hill .
Life in Vicksburg , during the six weeks was perhaps -- but wait ; here are some materials out of which to reproduce it : --
There being but three thousand of these cave-dwellers -- merely the population of a village -- would they not come to know each other , after a week or two , and familiarly ; insomuch that the fortunate or unfortunate experiences of one would be of interest to all ?
The war history of Vicksburg has more about it to interest the general reader than that of any other of the river-towns .
It is full of variety , full of incident , full of the picturesque .
Vicksburg held out longer than any other important river-town , and saw warfare in all its phases , both land and water -- the siege , the mine , the assault , the repulse , the bombardment , sickness , captivity , famine .
We had a strong desire to make a trip up the Yazoo and the Sunflower -- an interesting region at any time , but additionally interesting at this time , because up there the great inundation was still to be seen in force -- but we were nearly sure to have to wait a day or more for a New Orleans boat on our return ; so we were obliged to give up the project .
I went with him at once .
Arrived there , he put his head out , glanced up and down the saloon warily , then closed the door and locked it .
He sat down on the sofa , and he said --
'His level head will be his sufficient protection , ' I said to myself .
During the fortnight 's run from Acapulco to San Francisco I several times saw the gamblers talking earnestly with Backus , and once I threw out a gentle warning to him .
He chuckled comfortably and said --
'Let it alone , ' said Backus , with drunken gravity .
Chapter 37 The End of the 'Gold Dust'
Natchez , like her near and far river neighbors , has railways now , and is adding to them -- pushing them hither and thither into all rich outlying regions that are naturally tributary to her .
And like Vicksburg and New Orleans , she has her ice-factory : she makes thirty tons of ice a day .
In Vicksburg and Natchez , in my time , ice was jewelry ; none but the rich could wear it .
But anybody and everybody can have it now .
I visited one of the ice-factories in New Orleans , to see what the polar regions might look like when lugged into the edge of the tropics .
But there was nothing striking in the aspect of the place .
It was merely a spacious house , with some innocent steam machinery in one end of it and some big porcelain pipes running here and there .
No , not porcelain -- they merely seemed to be ; they were iron , but the ammonia which was being breathed through them had coated them to the thickness of your hand with solid milk-white ice .
It ought to have melted ; for one did not require winter clothing in that atmosphere : but it did not melt ; the inside of the pipe was too cold .
Sunk into the floor were numberless tin boxes , a foot square and two feet long , and open at the top end .
These were full of clear water ; and around each box , salt and other proper stuff was packed ; also , the ammonia gases were applied to the water in some way which will always remain a secret to me , because I was not able to understand the process .
While the water in the boxes gradually froze , men gave it a stir or two with a stick occasionally -- to liberate the air-bubbles , I think .
Other men were continually lifting out boxes whose contents had become hard frozen .
They gave the box a single dip into a vat of boiling water , to melt the block of ice free from its tin coffin , then they shot the block out upon a platform car , and it was ready for market .
These big blocks were hard , solid , and crystal-clear .
In certain of them , big bouquets of fresh and brilliant tropical flowers had been frozen-in ; in others , beautiful silken-clad French dolls , and other pretty objects .
These blocks were to be set on end in a platter , in the center of dinner-tables , to cool the tropical air ; and also to be ornamental , for the flowers and things imprisoned in them could be seen as through plate glass .
I was told that this factory could retail its ice , by wagon , throughout New Orleans , in the humblest dwelling-house quantities , at six or seven dollars a ton , and make a sufficient profit .
This being the case , there is business for ice-factories in the North ; for we get ice on no such terms there , if one take less than three hundred and fifty pounds at a delivery .
The Rosalie Yarn Mill , of Natchez , has a capacity of 6,000 spindles and 160 looms , and employs 100 hands .
The Natchez Cotton Mills Company began operations four years ago in a two-story building of 50 x 190 feet , with 4,000 spindles and 128 looms ; capital $ 105,000 , all subscribed in the town .
Two years later , the same stockholders increased their capital to $ 225,000 ; added a third story to the mill , increased its length to 317 feet ; added machinery to increase the capacity to 10,300 spindles and 304 looms .
The company now employ 250 operatives , many of whom are citizens of Natchez .
'The mill works 5,000 bales of cotton annually and manufactures the best standard quality of brown shirtings and sheetings and drills , turning out 5,000,000 yards of these goods per year . '
{ footnote [ New Orleans Times-Democrat , 26 Aug , 1882 . ]
} A close corporation -- stock held at $ 5,000 per share , but none in the market .
Goes to his state-room , brings back a couple of long bottles , and takes out the corks -- says :
Here is an extract from the prospectus of a Kentucky 'Female College . '
Female college sounds well enough ; but since the phrasing it in that unjustifiable way was done purely in the interest of brevity , it seems to me that she-college would have been still better -- because shorter , and means the same thing : that is , if either phrase means anything at all --
'The president is southern by birth , by rearing , by education , and by sentiment ; the teachers are all southern in sentiment , and with the exception of those born in Europe were born and raised in the south .
Believing the southern to be the highest type of civilization this continent has seen , the young ladies are trained according to the southern ideas of delicacy , refinement , womanhood , religion , and propriety ; hence we offer a first-class female college for the south and solicit southern patronage . '
About the same time , two young men in North Carolina quarreled about a girl , and 'hostile messages ' were exchanged .
Friends tried to reconcile them , but had their labor for their pains .
On the 24th the young men met in the public highway .
One of them had a heavy club in his hand , the other an ax .
The man with the club fought desperately for his life , but it was a hopeless fight from the first .
A well-directed blow sent his club whirling out of his grasp , and the next moment he was a dead man .
About the same time , two 'highly connected ' young Virginians , clerks in a hardware store at Charlottesville , while 'skylarking , ' came to blows .
Peter Dick threw pepper in Charles Roads 's eyes ; Roads demanded an apology ; Dick refused to give it , and it was agreed that a duel was inevitable , but a difficulty arose ; the parties had no pistols , and it was too late at night to procure them .
One of them suggested that butcher-knives would answer the purpose , and the other accepted the suggestion ; the result was that Roads fell to the floor with a gash in his abdomen that may or may not prove fatal .
If Dick has been arrested , the news has not reached us .
He 'expressed deep regret , ' and we are told by a Staunton correspondent of the PHILADELPHIA PRESS that 'every effort has been made to hush the matter up . '
-- EXTRACTS FROM THE PUBLIC JOURNALS . ]
THE approaches to New Orleans were familiar ; general aspects were unchanged .
When one goes flying through London along a railway propped in the air on tall arches , he may inspect miles of upper bedrooms through the open windows , but the lower half of the houses is under his level and out of sight .
Similarly , in high-river stage , in the New Orleans region , the water is up to the top of the enclosing levee-rim , the flat country behind it lies low -- representing the bottom of a dish -- and as the boat swims along , high on the flood , one looks down upon the houses and into the upper windows .
There is nothing but that frail breastwork of earth between the people and destruction .
The old brick salt-warehouses clustered at the upper end of the city looked as they had always looked ; warehouses which had had a kind of Aladdin 's lamp experience , however , since I had seen them ; for when the war broke out the proprietor went to bed one night leaving them packed with thousands of sacks of vulgar salt , worth a couple of dollars a sack , and got up in the morning and found his mountain of salt turned into a mountain of gold , so to speak , so suddenly and to so dizzy a height had the war news sent up the price of the article .
The vast reach of plank wharves remained unchanged , and there were as many ships as ever : but the long array of steamboats had vanished ; not altogether , of course , but not much of it was left .
However , New Orleans has begun -- just this moment , as one may say .
When completed , the new Cotton Exchange will be a stately and beautiful building ; massive , substantial , full of architectural graces ; no shams or false pretenses or uglinesses about it anywhere .
To the city , it will be worth many times its cost , for it will breed its species .
What has been lacking hitherto , was a model to build toward ; something to educate eye and taste ; a SUGGESTER , so to speak .
He chuckled blithely , took off his shining tile , pointed to a notched pink circlet of paper pasted into its crown , with something lettered on it , and went on chuckling while I read , 'J .
B -- -- , UNDERTAKER . '
Then he clapped his hat on , gave it an irreverent tilt to leeward , and cried out --
'Why , just look at it .
A rich man wo n't have anything but your very best ; and you can just pile it on , too -- pile it on and sock it to him -- he wo n't ever holler .
And you take in a poor man , and if you work him right he 'll bust himself on a single lay-out .
Or especially a woman .
F'r instance : Mrs. O'Flaherty comes in -- widow -- wiping her eyes and kind of moaning .
Unhandkerchiefs one eye , bats it around tearfully over the stock ; says --
With Mr. Cable along to see for you , and describe and explain and illuminate , a jog through that old quarter is a vivid pleasure .
And you have a vivid sense as of unseen or dimly seen things -- vivid , and yet fitful and darkling ; you glimpse salient features , but lose the fine shades or catch them imperfectly through the vision of the imagination : a case , as it were , of ignorant near-sighted stranger traversing the rim of wide vague horizons of Alps with an inspired and enlightened long-sighted native .
And by-and-bye we reached the West End , a collection of hotels of the usual light summer-resort pattern , with broad verandas all around , and the waves of the wide and blue Lake Pontchartrain lapping the thresholds .
We had dinner on a ground-veranda over the water -- the chief dish the renowned fish called the pompano , delicious as the less criminal forms of sin .
Jackson Asking Lee for a Match .
I found the half-forgotten Southern intonations and elisions as pleasing to my ear as they had formerly been .
A Southerner talks music .
At least it is music to me , but then I was born in the South .
The educated Southerner has no use for an r , except at the beginning of a word .
He says 'honah , ' and 'dinnah , ' and 'Gove'nuh , ' and 'befo ' the waw , ' and so on .
The words may lack charm to the eye , in print , but they have it to the ear .
When did the r disappear from Southern speech , and how did it come to disappear ?
The custom of dropping it was not borrowed from the North , nor inherited from England .
Many Southerners -- most Southerners -- put a y into occasional words that begin with the k sound .
For instance , they say Mr. K'yahtah ( Carter ) and speak of playing k'yahds or of riding in the k'yahs .
And they have the pleasant custom -- long ago fallen into decay in the North -- of frequently employing the respectful 'Sir . '
Instead of the curt Yes , and the abrupt No , they say 'Yes , Suh ' , 'No , Suh . '
'Give me something for lagniappe . '
The poet was sitting some little distance away ; and presently he began to speak -- about the moon .
A brief dispute followed , as to whether the difference between Northern and Southern moonlight really existed or was only imagined .
Moonlight talk drifted easily into talk about artificial methods of dispelling darkness .
Then somebody remembered that when Farragut advanced upon Port Hudson on a dark night -- and did not wish to assist the aim of the Confederate gunners -- he carried no battle-lanterns , but painted the decks of his ships white , and thus created a dim but valuable light , which enabled his own men to grope their way around with considerable facility .
At this point the war got the floor again -- the ten minutes not quite up yet .
A negro and a white man were in the ring ; everybody else outside .
The cocks were brought in in sacks ; and when time was called , they were taken out by the two bottle-holders , stroked , caressed , poked toward each other , and finally liberated .
The big black cock plunged instantly at the little gray one and struck him on the head with his spur .
The gray responded with spirit .
Then the Babel of many-tongued shoutings broke out , and ceased not thenceforth .
When the cocks had been fighting some little time , I was expecting them momently to drop dead , for both were blind , red with blood , and so exhausted that they frequently fell down .
Yet they would not give up , neither would they die .
The negro and the white man would pick them up every few seconds , wipe them off , blow cold water on them in a fine spray , and take their heads in their mouths and hold them there a moment -- to warm back the perishing life perhaps ; I do not know .
Then , being set down again , the dying creatures would totter gropingly about , with dragging wings , find each other , strike a guesswork blow or two , and fall exhausted once more .
Twenty-two words to say the ladies came aboard and the boat shoved out up the creek , is a clean waste of ten good words , and is also destructive of compactness of statement .
But let us return to the mule .
Since I left him , I have rummaged around and found a full report of the race .
In it I find confirmation of the theory which I broached just now -- namely , that the trouble with the Southern reporter is Women : Women , supplemented by Walter Scott and his knights and beauty and chivalry , and so on .
This is an excellent report , as long as the women stay out of it .
But when they intrude , we have this frantic result --
THE largest annual event in New Orleans is a something which we arrived too late to sample -- the Mardi-Gras festivities .
I saw the procession of the Mystic Crew of Comus there , twenty-four years ago -- with knights and nobles and so on , clothed in silken and golden Paris-made gorgeousnesses , planned and bought for that single night 's use ; and in their train all manner of giants , dwarfs , monstrosities , and other diverting grotesquerie -- a startling and wonderful sort of show , as it filed solemnly and silently down the street in the light of its smoking and flickering torches ; but it is said that in these latter days the spectacle is mightily augmented , as to cost , splendor , and variety .
There is a chief personage -- 'Rex ; ' and if I remember rightly , neither this king nor any of his great following of subordinates is known to any outsider .
All these people are gentlemen of position and consequence ; and it is a proud thing to belong to the organization ; so the mystery in which they hide their personality is merely for romance 's sake , and not on account of the police .
This Mardi-Gras pageant was the exclusive possession of New Orleans until recently .
But now it has spread to Memphis and St. Louis and Baltimore .
It has probably reached its limit .
It is a thing which could hardly exist in the practical North ; would certainly last but a very brief time ; as brief a time as it would last in London .
For the soul of it is the romantic , not the funny and the grotesque .
Take away the romantic mysteries , the kings and knights and big-sounding titles , and Mardi-Gras would die , down there in the South .
The very feature that keeps it alive in the South -- girly-girly romance -- would kill it in the North or in London .
Puck and Punch , and the press universal , would fall upon it and make merciless fun of it , and its first exhibition would be also its last .
He deeply disappointed a number of children who had flocked eagerly to Mr. Cable 's house to get a glimpse of the illustrious sage and oracle of the nation 's nurseries .
'Why , he 's white ! '
Mr. Warner and I had an experience of the same sort when we wrote the book called 'The Gilded Age . '
There is a character in it called 'Sellers . '
I do not remember what his first name was , in the beginning ; but anyway , Mr. Warner did not like it , and wanted it improved .
He asked me if I was able to imagine a person named 'Eschol Sellers . '
Of course I said I could not , without stimulants .
He said that away out West , once , he had met , and contemplated , and actually shaken hands with a man bearing that impossible name -- 'Eschol Sellers . '
So we borrowed that name ; and when the book had been out about a week , one of the stateliest and handsomest and most aristocratic looking white men that ever lived , called around , with the most formidable libel suit in his pocket that ever -- well , in brief , we got his permission to suppress an edition of ten million { footnote [ Figures taken from memory , and probably incorrect .
Think it was more . ]
} copies of the book and change that name to 'Mulberry Sellers ' in future editions .
His boat was just in .
I had been waiting several days for her , purposing to return to St. Louis in her .
The captain and I joined a party of ladies and gentlemen , guests of Major Wood , and went down the river fifty-four miles , in a swift tug , to ex-Governor Warmouth 's sugar plantation .
Strung along below the city , were a number of decayed , ram-shackly , superannuated old steamboats , not one of which had I ever seen before .
They had all been built , and worn out , and thrown aside , since I was here last .
This gives one a realizing sense of the frailness of a Mississippi boat and the briefness of its life .
We could have done a number of other things ; but on account of limited time , we went back home .
The sail up the breezy and sparkling river was a charming experience , and would have been satisfyingly sentimental and romantic but for the interruptions of the tug 's pet parrot , whose tireless comments upon the scenery and the guests were always this-worldly , and often profane .
He had also a superabundance of the discordant , ear-splitting , metallic laugh common to his breed -- a machine-made laugh , a Frankenstein laugh , with the soul left out of it .
He applied it to every sentimental remark , and to every pathetic song .
He cackled it out with hideous energy after 'Home again , home again from a foreign shore , ' and said he 'would n't give a damn for a tug-load of such rot . '
Romance and sentiment can not long survive this sort of discouragement ; so the singing and talking presently ceased ; which so delighted the parrot that he cursed himself hoarse for joy .
Would you say that under oath ?
We do not eat .
A. I did not die , I passed away .
( Much fumbling with pencil , on the part of the medium , accompanied by violent spasmodic jerkings of his head and body , for some little time .
Finally , explanation to the effect that spirits often forget dates , such things being without importance to them . )
( After long hesitation and many throes and spasms . )
Chapter 49 Episodes in Pilot Life
But I did not learn that any of these pilot-farmers had astonished anybody with their successes .
Their farms do not support them : they support their farms .
The pilot-farmer disappears from the river annually , about the breaking of spring , and is seen no more till next frost .
Then he appears again , in damaged homespun , combs the hayseed out of his hair , and takes a pilot-house berth for the winter .
In this way he pays the debts which his farming has achieved during the agricultural season .
So his river bondage is but half broken ; he is still the river's slave the hardest half of the year .
Some of the pilots whom I had known had had adventures -- the outcome fortunate , sometimes , but not in all cases .
Captain Montgomery , whom I had steered for when he was a pilot , commanded the Confederate fleet in the great battle before Memphis ; when his vessel went down , he swam ashore , fought his way through a squad of soldiers , and made a gallant and narrow escape .
He was always a cool man ; nothing could disturb his serenity .
Once when he was captain of the 'Crescent City , ' I was bringing the boat into port at New Orleans , and momently expecting orders from the hurricane deck , but received none .
I had stopped the wheels , and there my authority and responsibility ceased .
It was evening -- dim twilight -- the captain 's hat was perched upon the big bell , and I supposed the intellectual end of the captain was in it , but such was not the case .
The captain was very strict ; therefore I knew better than to touch a bell without orders .
My duty was to hold the boat steadily on her calamitous course , and leave the consequences to take care of themselves -- which I did .
So we went plowing past the sterns of steamboats and getting closer and closer -- the crash was bound to come very soon -- and still that hat never budged ; for alas , the captain was napping in the texas ... .
Things were becoming exceedingly nervous and uncomfortable .
It seemed to me that the captain was not going to appear in time to see the entertainment .
Just as we were walking into the stern of a steamboat , he stepped out on deck , and said , with heavenly serenity , 'Set her back on both ' -- which I did ; but a trifle late , however , for the next moment we went smashing through that other boat 's flimsy outer works with a most prodigious racket .
The captain never said a word to me about the matter afterwards , except to remark that I had done right , and that he hoped I would not hesitate to act in the same way again in like circumstances .
I was told that one of my pilot friends fell dead at the wheel , from heart disease , in 1869 .
The captain was on the roof at the time .
He saw the boat breaking for the shore ; shouted , and got no answer ; ran up , and found the pilot lying dead on the floor .
Mr. Bixby had been blown up , in Madrid bend ; was not injured , but the other pilot was lost .
It so chanced that one of these paragraphs -- { footnote [ The original MS. of it , in the captain 's own hand , has been sent to me from New Orleans .
It reads as follows --
The finest thing we saw on our whole Mississippi trip , we saw as we approached New Orleans in the steam-tug .
This was the curving frontage of the crescent city lit up with the white glare of five miles of electric lights .
It was a wonderful sight , and very beautiful .
By and by , when the fog began to clear off , I noticed that the reflection of a tree in the smooth water of an overflowed bank , six hundred yards away , was stronger and blacker than the ghostly tree itself .
The faint spectral trees , dimly glimpsed through the shredding fog , were very pretty things to see .
I went away stupefied with astonishment , and saying to myself , 'How strange it is !
WE always thought this fellow a fool ; yet the moment he comes to a great city , where intelligence and appreciation abound , the talent concealed in this shabby napkin is at once discovered , and promptly welcomed and honored . '
'Why did n't you see them Roman soldiers that stood back there in a rank , and sometimes marched in procession around the stage ? '
A day or two after we reached St. Louis , I was walking along Fourth Street when a grizzly-headed man gave a sort of start as he passed me , then stopped , came back , inspected me narrowly , with a clouding brow , and finally said with deep asperity --
'Look here , HAVE YOU GOT THAT DRINK YET ? '
A maniac , I judged , at first .
But all in a flash I recognized him .
I made an effort to blush that strained every muscle in me , and answered as sweetly and winningly as ever I knew how --
Upon that text I desire to depart from the direct line of my subject , and make a little excursion .
I wish to reveal a secret which I have carried with me nine years , and which has become burdensome .
My friend went on summer vacation up into the fishing regions of our northern British neighbors , and carried this sermon with him , since he might possibly chance to need a sermon .
He was asked to preach , one day .
The little church was full .
Among the people present were the late Dr. J. G. Holland , the late Mr. Seymour of the 'New York Times , ' Mr .
Page , the philanthropist and temperance advocate , and , I think , Senator Frye , of Maine .
The marvelous letter did its wonted work ; all the people were moved , all the people wept ; the tears flowed in a steady stream down Dr. Holland 's cheeks , and nearly the same can be said with regard to all who were there .
Page was so full of enthusiasm over the letter that he said he would not rest until he made pilgrimage to that prison , and had speech with the man who had been able to inspire a fellow-unfortunate to write so priceless a tract .
But meantime Brother Page had been agitating .
He had not visited the penitentiary , but he had sent a copy of the illustrious letter to the chaplain of that institution , and accompanied it with -- apparently inquiries .
He got an answer , dated four days later than that other Brother 's reassuring epistle ; and before my article was complete , it wandered into my hands .
The original is before me , now , and I here append it .
It is pretty well loaded with internal evidence of the most solid description --
That 'nub ' is so ingeniously , so casually , flung in , and immediately left there in the tail of the letter , undwelt upon , that an indifferent reader would never suspect that it was the heart and core of the epistle , if he even took note of it at all , This is the 'nub ' --
When I for the first time heard that letter read , nine years ago , I felt that it was the most remarkable one I had ever encountered .
And it so warmed me toward Mr. Brown of St. Louis that I said that if ever I visited that city again , I would seek out that excellent man and kiss the hem of his garment if it was a new one .
Well , I visited St. Louis , but I did not hunt for Mr. Brown ; for , alas !
the investigations of long ago had proved that the benevolent Brown , like 'Jack Hunt , ' was not a real person , but a sheer invention of that gifted rascal , Williams -- burglar , Harvard graduate , son of a clergyman .
There was a railway bridge across the river here well sprinkled with glowing lights , and a very beautiful sight it was .
An old gentleman , out on an early morning walk , came along , and we discussed the weather , and then drifted into other matters .
I could not remember his face .
He said he had been living here twenty-eight years .
So he had come after my time , and I had never seen him before .
I asked him various questions ; first about a mate of mine in Sunday school -- what became of him ?
'He is a success , always has been , always will be , I think . '
I inquired after a young fellow who came to the town to study for one of the professions when I was a boy .
Same verdict concerning other boys .
'She is all right .
Been married three times ; buried two husbands , divorced from the third , and I hear she is getting ready to marry an old fellow out in Colorado somewhere .
She 's got children scattered around here and there , most everywheres . '
'It 's actually so .
I 'm telling you the truth . '
'Well , yes , it does seem to .
But do n't you think maybe it was the Hannibal people who were mistaken about the boy , and not the St. Louis people . '
I mentioned a great number of people whom I had formerly known .
Some were dead , some were gone away , some had prospered , some had come to naught ; but as regarded a dozen or so of the lot , the answer was comforting :
Died in the insane asylum three or four years ago -- never was out of it from the time she went in ; and was always suffering , too ; never got a shred of her mind back . '
If he spoke the truth , here was a heavy tragedy , indeed .
Thirty-six years in a madhouse , that some young fools might have some fun !
I was a small boy , at the time ; and I saw those giddy young ladies come tiptoeing into the room where Miss -- -- sat reading at midnight by a lamp .
The girl at the head of the file wore a shroud and a doughface , she crept behind the victim , touched her on the shoulder , and she looked up and screamed , and then fell into convulsions .
She did not recover from the fright , but went mad .
In these days it seems incredible that people believed in ghosts so short a time ago .
Being left to myself , up there , I went on picking out old houses in the distant town , and calling back their former inmates out of the moldy past .
Among them I presently recognized the house of the father of Lem Hackett ( fictitious name ) .
It carried me back more than a generation in a moment , and landed me in the midst of a time when the happenings of life were not the natural and logical results of great general laws , but of special orders , and were freighted with very precise and distinct purposes -- partly punitive in intent , partly admonitory ; and usually local in application .
There was a remark or two more , and then a pause .
Talking ceased , and all began to peer through the vines .
Before long , the boys ' faces began to look uneasy , then anxious , then terrified .
Still there was no movement of the placid water .
Hearts began to beat fast , and faces to turn pale .
We all glided out , silently , and stood on the bank , our horrified eyes wandering back and forth from each other 's countenances to the water .
'Somebody must go down and see ! '
The boy had been caught among the hoop poles and entangled there , helplessly .
I fled to the surface and told the awful news .
Some of us knew that if the boy were dragged out at once he might possibly be resuscitated , but we never thought of that .
We did not think of anything ; we did not know what to do , so we did nothing -- except that the smaller lads cried , piteously , and we all struggled frantically into our clothes , putting on anybody 's that came handy , and getting them wrong-side-out and upside-down , as a rule .
Then we scurried away and gave the alarm , but none of us went back to see the end of the tragedy .
We had a more important thing to attend to : we all flew home , and lost not a moment in getting ready to lead a better life .
If the Model Boy was in either of these Sunday-schools , I did not see him .
The Model Boy of my time -- we never had but the one -- was perfect : perfect in manners , perfect in dress , perfect in conduct , perfect in filial piety , perfect in exterior godliness ; but at bottom he was a prig ; and as for the contents of his skull , they could have changed place with the contents of a pie and nobody would have been the worse off for it but the pie .
This fellow 's reproachlessness was a standing reproach to every lad in the village .
He was the admiration of all the mothers , and the detestation of all their sons .
I was told what became of him , but as it was a disappointment to me , I will not enter into details .
He succeeded in life .
The people of Hannibal are not more changed than is the town .
It is no longer a village ; it is a city , with a mayor , and a council , and water-works , and probably a debt .
It has fifteen thousand people , is a thriving and energetic place , and is paved like the rest of the west and south -- where a well-paved street and a good sidewalk are things so seldom seen , that one doubts them when he does see them .
The customary half-dozen railways center in Hannibal now , and there is a new depot which cost a hundred thousand dollars .
In my time the town had no specialty , and no commercial grandeur ; the daily packet usually landed a passenger and bought a catfish , and took away another passenger and a hatful of freight ; but now a huge commerce in lumber has grown up and a large miscellaneous commerce is one of the results .
A deal of money changes hands there now .
I came to a sitting posture in an instant , with my kidneys in my throat and my hair on end .
-- I do n't know what you are talking about .
I think you are sick or crazy or something .
But anyway , you 're awake , and I 'll get to sleep while I 've got a chance . '
'Suppose a man should come to you drunk -- '
'This is foolish -- I never get drunk . '
'Well , I should think I was guilty of something -- maybe murder -- yes , probably murder , but I do n't quite know . '
'Wish you may die in your tracks if you have ? '
'Yes , it is .
Now , is that boy a murderer , do you think ? '
I came out of my collapse as one who rises from the dead .
I said , with admiration --
'Why , how in the world did you ever guess it ? '
My brother rattled innocently on --
'Are you going to give him up to the law ? '
'No , ' I said ; 'I believe that this will be a lesson to him .
I shall keep an eye on him , of course , for that is but right ; but if he stops where he is and reforms , it shall never be said that I betrayed him . '
'De time is mos ' an hour en a half slower in de country en what it is in de town ; you 'll be in plenty time , boss .
Sometimes we shoves out early for church , Sunday , en fetches up dah right plum in de middle er de sermon .
Diffunce in de time .
A body ca n't make no calculations 'bout it . '
I had lost two hours and a half ; but I had learned a fact worth four .
In the beginning Quincy had the aspect and ways of a model New England town : and these she has yet : broad , clean streets , trim , neat dwellings and lawns , fine mansions , stately blocks of commercial buildings .
And there are ample fair-grounds , a well kept park , and many attractive drives ; library , reading-rooms , a couple of colleges , some handsome and costly churches , and a grand court-house , with grounds which occupy a square .
The population of the city is thirty thousand .
There are some large factories here , and manufacturing , of many sorts , is done on a great scale .
In Burlington , as in all these Upper-River towns , one breathes a go-ahead atmosphere which tastes good in the nostrils .
An opera-house has lately been built there which is in strong contrast with the shabby dens which usually do duty as theaters in cities of Burlington 's size .
Opposite Davenport is the flourishing town of Rock Island , which lies at the foot of the Upper Rapids .
A great railroad bridge connects the two towns -- one of the thirteen which fret the Mississippi and the pilots , between St. Louis and St. Paul .
We noticed that above Dubuque the water of the Mississippi was olive-green -- rich and beautiful and semi-transparent , with the sun on it .
Of course the water was nowhere as clear or of as fine a complexion as it is in some other seasons of the year ; for now it was at flood stage , and therefore dimmed and blurred by the mud manufactured from caving banks .
' '' 'll take two of them '' -- and do n't even condescend to look at him .
'Oh , yes , eight years ago , the captain was on top ; but it 's Smith 's turn now .
Eight years ago a boat used to go up the river with every stateroom full , and people piled five and six deep on the cabin floor ; and a solid deck-load of immigrants and harvesters down below , into the bargain .
To get a first-class stateroom , you 'd got to prove sixteen quarterings of nobility and four hundred years of descent , or be personally acquainted with the nigger that blacked the captain 's boots .
But it 's all changed now ; plenty staterooms above , no harvesters below -- there 's a patent self-binder now , and they do n't have harvesters any more ; they 've gone where the woodbine twineth -- and they did n't go by steamboat , either ; went by the train . '
WE added several passengers to our list , at La Crosse ; among others an old gentleman who had come to this north-western region with the early settlers , and was familiar with every part of it .
Pardonably proud of it , too .
The old gentleman also told us a touching Indian legend or two -- but not very powerful ones .
'Do you still travel with it ? '
We asked him to tell it .
He dropped out of his conversational vein and back into his lecture-gait without an effort , and rolled on as follows --
'A little distance above Lake City is a famous point known as Maiden's Rock , which is not only a picturesque spot , but is full of romantic interest from the event which gave it its name , Not many years ago this locality was a favorite resort for the Sioux Indians on account of the fine fishing and hunting to be had there , and large numbers of them were always to be found in this locality .
Among the families which used to resort here , was one belonging to the tribe of Wabasha .
We-no-na ( first-born ) was the name of a maiden who had plighted her troth to a lover belonging to the same band .
But her stern parents had promised her hand to another , a famous warrior , and insisted on her wedding him .
The day was fixed by her parents , to her great grief .
She appeared to accede to the proposal and accompany them to the rock , for the purpose of gathering flowers for the feast .
On reaching the rock , We-no-na ran to its summit and standing on its edge upbraided her parents who were below , for their cruelty , and then singing a death-dirge , threw herself from the precipice and dashed them in pieces on the rock below . '
I was glad to hear the lecturer 's description of the scenery , for it assisted my appreciation of what I saw of it , and enabled me to imagine such of it as we lost by the intrusion of night .
I have found the book .
The lecturer was right .
There are several legends in it which confirm what he said .
I will offer two of them -- 'The Undying Head , ' and 'Peboan and Seegwun , an Allegory of the Seasons . '
The latter is used in Hiawatha ; but it is worth reading in the original form , if only that one may see how effective a genuine poem can be without the helps and graces of poetic measure and rhythm --
He has a custom-house , and is building a costly capitol to replace the one recently burned -- for he is the capital of the State .
He has churches without end ; and not the cheap poor kind , but the kind that the rich Protestant puts up , the kind that the poor Irish 'hired-girl ' delights to erect .
What a passion for building majestic churches the Irish hired-girl has .
It is a fine thing for our architecture but too often we enjoy her stately fanes without giving her a grateful thought .
In fact , instead of reflecting that 'every brick and every stone in this beautiful edifice represents an ache or a pain , and a handful of sweat , and hours of heavy fatigue , contributed by the back and forehead and bones of poverty , ' it is our habit to forget these things entirely , and merely glorify the mighty temple itself , without vouchsafing one praiseful thought to its humble builder , whose rich heart and withered purse it symbolizes .
It is a very wonderful town indeed , and is not finished yet .
All the streets are obstructed with building material , and this is being compacted into houses as fast as possible , to make room for more -- for other people are anxious to build , as soon as they can get the use of the streets to pile up their bricks and stuff in .
Every spring , for perhaps a century , or as long as there has been a nation of red men , an island in the middle of White-bear Lake has been visited by a band of Indians for the purpose of making maple sugar .
Tradition says that many springs ago , while upon this island , a young warrior loved and wooed the daughter of his chief , and it is said , also , the maiden loved the warrior .
He had again and again been refused her hand by her parents , the old chief alleging that he was no brave , and his old consort called him a woman !
In order to save coal , as it was impossible to get that fuel at any point to be touched during the expedition , a look-out was kept for a wood-pile .
On rounding a point a pirogue , skilfully paddled by a youth , shot out , and in its bow was a girl of fifteen , of fair face , beautiful black eyes , and demure manners .
The boy asked for a paper , which was thrown to him , and the couple pushed their tiny craft out into the swell of the boat .
At each place we stop there are always three , four , or more dug-outs arriving , bringing information of stock in other places in need .
Notwithstanding the fact that a great many had driven a part of their stock to the hills some time ago , there yet remains a large quantity , which General York , who is working with indomitable energy , will get landed in the pine hills by Tuesday .
The flood here is rising about three and a half inches every twenty-four hours , and rains have set in which will increase this .
General York feels now that our efforts ought to be directed towards saving life , as the increase of the water has jeopardized many houses .
We intend to go up the Tensas in a few minutes , and then we will return and go down Black River to take off families .
There is a lack of steam transportation here to meet the emergency .
The General has three boats chartered , with flats in tow , but the demand for these to tow out stock is greater than they can meet with promptness .
All are working night and day , and the 'Susie ' hardly stops for more than an hour anywhere .
The rise has placed Trinity in a dangerous plight , and momentarily it is expected that some of the houses will float off .
Troy is a little higher , yet all are in the water .
Reports have come in that a woman and child have been washed away below here , and two cabins floated off .
Their occupants are the same who refused to come off day before yesterday .
One would not believe the utter passiveness of the people .
The method of improvement proposed by the commission is at once in accord with the results of engineering experience and with observations of nature where meeting our wants .
As in nature the growth of trees and their proneness where undermined to fall across the slope and support the bank secures at some points a fair depth of channel and some degree of permanence , so in the project of the engineer the use of timber and brush and the encouragement of forest growth are the main features .
It is proposed to reduce the width where excessive by brushwood dykes , at first low , but raised higher and higher as the mud of the river settles under their shelter , and finally slope them back at the angle upon which willows will grow freely .
In this work there are many details connected with the forms of these shelter dykes , their arrangements so as to present a series of settling basins , etc.
, a description of which would only complicate the conception .
Through the larger part of the river works of contraction will not be required , but nearly all the banks on the concave side of the beds must be held against the wear of the stream , and much of the opposite banks defended at critical points .
The works having in view this conservative object may be generally designated works of revetment ; and these also will be largely of brushwood , woven in continuous carpets , or twined into wire-netting .
This veneering process has been successfully employed on the Missouri River ; and in some cases they have so covered themselves with sediments , and have become so overgrown with willows , that they may be regarded as permanent .
In securing these mats rubble-stone is to be used in small quantities , and in some instances the dressed slope between high and low river will have to be more or less paved with stone .
It is hardly worth while to consider the projects for relieving the Mississippi River floods by creating new outlets , since these sensational propositions have commended themselves only to unthinking minds , and have no support among engineers .
Were the river bed cast-iron , a resort to openings for surplus waters might be a necessity ; but as the bottom is yielding , and the best form of outlet is a single deep channel , as realizing the least ratio of perimeter to area of cross section , there could not well be a more unphilosophical method of treatment than the multiplication of avenues of escape .
It was perfectly astonishing to hear men who , on other subjects , were of some judgment , utter their opinions upon this .
I never heard of any instance in which the commonsense generally found in national criticism was so overthrown by passion .
I do not speak of the want of justice , and of fair and liberal interpretation : these , perhaps , were hardly to be expected .
Other nations have been called thin-skinned , but the citizens of the Union have , apparently , no skins at all ; they wince if a breeze blows over them , unless it be tempered with adulation .
It was not , therefore , very surprising that the acute and forcible observations of a traveler they knew would be listened to should be received testily .
The extraordinary features of the business were , first , the excess of the rage into which they lashed themselves ; and , secondly , the puerility of the inventions by which they attempted to account for the severity with which they fancied they had been treated .
Captain Hall had certainly excellent opportunities of making himself acquainted with the form of the government and the laws ; and of receiving , moreover , the best oral commentary upon them , in conversation with the most distinguished citizens .
Of these opportunities he made excellent use ; nothing important met his eye which did not receive that sort of analytical attention which an experienced and philosophical traveler alone can give .
This has made his volumes highly interesting and valuable ; but I am deeply persuaded , that were a man of equal penetration to visit the United States with no other means of becoming acquainted with the national character than the ordinary working-day intercourse of life , he would conceive an infinitely lower idea of the moral atmosphere of the country than Captain Hall appears to have done ; and the internal conviction on my mind is strong , that if Captain Hall had not placed a firm restraint on himself , he must have given expression to far deeper indignation than any he has uttered against many points in the American character , with which he shows from other circumstances that he was well acquainted .
His rule appears to have been to state just so much of the truth as would leave on the mind of his readers a correct impression , at the least cost of pain to the sensitive folks he was writing about .
He states his own opinions and feelings , and leaves it to be inferred that he has good grounds for adopting them ; but he spares the Americans the bitterness which a detail of the circumstances would have produced .
Rapidly advancing , they were just about to enter his mouth , when Mudjikewis struck him a tremendous blow on the head , and gave the SAW-SAW-QUAN .
The bear 's limbs doubled under him , and he fell , stunned by the blow .
But before Mudjikewis could renew it , the monster disgorged all the water he had drank , with a force which sent the canoe with great velocity to the opposite shore .
Instantly leaving the canoe , again they fled , and on they went till they were completely exhausted .
The earth again shook , and soon they saw the monster hard after them .
Their spirits drooped , and they felt discouraged .
The leader exerted himself , by actions and words , to cheer them up ; and once more he asked them if they thought of nothing , or could do nothing for their rescue ; and , as before , all were silent .
'Then , ' he said , 'this is the last time I can apply to my guardian spirit .
Now , if we do not succeed , our fates are decided . '
He ran forward , invoking his spirit with great earnestness , and gave the yell .
'We shall soon arrive , ' said he to his brothers , 'at the place where my last guardian spirit dwells .
In him I place great confidence .
Do not , do not be afraid , or your limbs will be fear-bound .
We shall soon reach his lodge .
Run , run , ' he cried .
Having spent so much time and traversed so vast a country in their flight , the young men gave up the idea of ever returning to their own country , and game being plenty , they determined to remain where they now were .
One day they moved off some distance from the lodge for the purpose of hunting , having left the wampum with the woman .
They were very successful , and amused themselves , as all young men do when alone , by talking and jesting with each other .
One of them spoke and said , 'We have all this sport to ourselves ; let us go and ask our sister if she will not let us bring the head to this place , as it is still alive .
It may be pleased to hear us talk , and be in our company .
In the meantime take food to our sister . '
They went and requested the head .
She told them to take it , and they took it to their hunting-grounds , and tried to amuse it , but only at times did they see its eyes beam with pleasure .
One day , while busy in their encampment , they were unexpectedly attacked by unknown Indians .
The skirmish was long contested and bloody ; many of their foes were slain , but still they were thirty to one .
The young men fought desperately till they were all killed .
The attacking party then retreated to a height of ground , to muster their men , and to count the number of missing and slain .
One of their young men had stayed away , and , in endeavoring to overtake them , came to the place where the head was hung up .
Seeing that alone retain animation , he eyed it for some time with fear and surprise .
However , he took it down and opened the sack , and was much pleased to see the beautiful feathers , one of which he placed on his head .
'Look , you ugly thing , and see your paints on the faces of warriors . '
Meantime , for several days , the sister had been waiting for the young men to bring back the head ; till , at last , getting impatient , she went in search of it .
The young men she found lying within short distances of each other , dead , and covered with wounds .
Various other bodies lay scattered in different directions around them .
She searched for the head and sack , but they were nowhere to be found .
She raised her voice and wept , and blackened her face .
Then she walked in different directions , till she came to the place from whence the head had been taken .
Then she found the magic bow and arrows , where the young men , ignorant of their qualities , had left them .
She thought to herself that she would find her brother 's head , and came to a piece of rising ground , and there saw some of his paints and feathers .
These she carefully put up , and hung upon the branch of a tree till her return .
`` If you knew this elephant , you could not ask .
He would take what they had . ''
General quantity at a meal -- say about -- ''
`` And he drinks -- ''
As to quantity ? ''
`` Put it down five to fifteen barrels -- his thirst varies ; his other appetites do not . ''
`` Alaric ; summon Captain Burns . ''
`` Detail Detectives Moses , Dakin , Murphy , Rogers , Tupper , Higgins , and Bartholomew to shadow the thieves . ''
`` Yes , sir . ''
`` Let me be informed at once if any clues should be found footprints of the animal , or anything of that kind . ''
`` Get an order commanding the harbor police to patrol the frontages vigilantly . ''
`` Yes , sir . ''
`` Yes , sir . ''
`` Yes , sir . ''
Daffy and McFadden are the boldest scoundrels in the profession ; the chief has reasons for believing that they are the men who stole the stove out of the detective headquarters on a bitter night last winter -- in consequence of which the chief and every detective present were in the hands of the physicians before morning , some with frozen feet , others with frozen fingers , ears , and other members .
`` Darley 's one of the best men on the force , '' said the inspector .
`` We shall hear from him again before long . ''
CONEY POINT , PA. , 8.45 A.M. Gas office broken open here during night and three month ; unpaid gas bills taken .
Have got a clue and am away .
`` Send them north at once .
Let them concentrate along the line of the Berkley road north of Ironville . ''
`` Yes , sir . ''
I could have shed tears , this havoc so distressed me .
But the inspector only said :
Yet further troublous news was in store for us .
The telegraph brought this :
So interrupted the clicking telegraphic instrument .
Before I could make a comment upon this extraordinary episode , the following despatch carried my thoughts into another and very distressing channel :
The next day the same .
About three weeks after the elephant 's disappearance I was about to say , one morning , that I should have to strike my colors and retire , when the great detective arrested the thought by proposing one more superb and masterly move .
This was to compromise with the robbers .
The fertility of this man's invention exceeded anything I have ever seen , and I have had a wide intercourse with the world 's finest minds .
He said he was confident he could compromise for one hundred thousand dollars and recover the elephant .
I said I believed I could scrape the amount together , but what would become of the poor detectives who had worked so faithfully ?
YE OWLD FOOL : brick Duffys bin ded 2 yere .
CHIEF BAT , -- Red McFadden is hung and in heving 18 month .
Any Ass but a detective know that .
At eleven the next night I brought one hundred thousand dollars in bank-notes and put them into the chief 's hands , and shortly afterward he took his leave , with the brave old undimmed confidence in his eye .
An almost intolerable hour dragged to a close ; then I heard his welcome tread , and rose gasping and tottered to meet him .
How his fine eyes flamed with triumph !
`` We 've compromised !
The jokers will sing a different tune to-morrow !
He took a lighted candle and strode down into the vast vaulted basement where sixty detectives always slept , and where a score were now playing cards to while the time .
I followed close after him .
He walked swiftly down to the dim and remote end of the place , and just as I succumbed to the pangs of suffocation and was swooning away he stumbled and fell over the outlying members of a mighty object , and I heard him exclaim as he went down :
The Bay of Gisborne -- Taking in Passengers by the Yard Arm -- The Green Ballarat Fly -- False Teeth -- From Napier to Hastings by the Ballarat Fly Train -- Kauri Trees -- A Case of Mental Telegraphy
God Vishnu , 108 Names -- Change of Titles or Hunting for an Heir -- Bombay as a Kaleidoscope -- The Native 's Man Servant -- Servants ' Recommendations -- How Manuel got his Name and his English -- Satan -- A Visit from God
India the Most Extraordinary Country on Earth -- Nothing Forgotten -- The Land of Wonders -- Annual Statistics Everywhere about Violence -- Tiger vs. Man -- A Handsome Fight -- Annual Man Killing and Tiger Killing -- Other Animals -- Snakes -- Insurance and Snake Tables -- The Cobra Bite -- Muzaffurpore -- Dinapore -- A Train that Stopped for Gossip -- Six Hours for Thirty-five Miles -- A Rupee to the Engineer -- Ninety Miles an Hour -- Again to Benares , the Piety Hiv -- To Lucknow
When I was a youth I used to take all kinds of pledges , and do my best to keep them , but I never could , because I did n't strike at the root of the habit -- the desire ; I generally broke down within the month .
Once I tried limiting a habit .
That worked tolerably well for a while .
I pledged myself to smoke but one cigar a day .
I kept the cigar waiting until bedtime , then I had a luxurious time with it .
But desire persecuted me every day and all day long ; so , within the week I found myself hunting for larger cigars than I had been used to smoke ; then larger ones still , and still larger ones .
Within the fortnight I was getting cigars made for me -- on a yet larger pattern .
They still grew and grew in size .
Within the month my cigar had grown to such proportions that I could have used it as a crutch .
It now seemed to me that a one-cigar limit was no real protection to a person , so I knocked my pledge on the head and resumed my liberty .
In the beginning he had asked the company to throw almonds at him during the two hours , he to remember how many each gentleman had thrown ; but none were thrown , for the Viceroy said that the test would be a sufficiently severe strain without adding that burden to it .
`` Mr. President , I -- I am embarrassed .
`` It looks like an accident , his coming at such a time ; but let no one profane it with such a name ; he was sent -- sent from on high . ''
`` It 's per-fectly wonderful . ''
But Honolulu has grown wealthy since then , and of course wealth has introduced changes ; some of the old simplicities have disappeared .
Here is a modern house , as pictured by Mrs. Krout :
`` The lanai is the favorite reception room , and here at any social function the musical program is given and cakes and ices are served ; here morning callers are received , or gay riding parties , the ladies in pretty divided skirts , worn for convenience in riding astride , -- the universal mode adopted by Europeans and Americans , as well as by the natives .
Chase,102 Mrs. D.,57 Mortimer , 105 The Surgeon , 92 Miss C.,105 Mrs. T.,9 Clemens , 101 Taylor,92 Taylor,109 Davies,95 Miss C. , 108 Mortimer,55 Thomas,102 Roper,76 Clemens , 111 Miss C.,89 Coomber , 106 Chase,98
Sure enough , it has happened .
Yesterday it was September 8 , Sunday ; to-day , per the bulletin-board at the head of the companionway , it is September 10 , Tuesday .
There is something uncanny about it .
In fact , nearly unthinkable , and wholly unrealizable , when one comes to consider it .
While we were crossing the 180th meridian it was Sunday in the stern of the ship where my family were , and Tuesday in the bow where I was .
They were there eating the half of a fresh apple on the 8th , and I was at the same time eating the other half of it on the 10th -- and I could notice how stale it was , already .
The family were the same age that they were when I had left them five minutes before , but I was a day older now than I was then .
The day they were living in stretched behind them half way round the globe , across the Pacific Ocean and America and Europe ; the day I was living in stretched in front of me around the other half to meet it .
They were stupendous days for bulk and stretch ; apparently much larger days than we had ever been in before .
All previous days had been but shrunk-up little things by comparison .
The difference in temperature between the two days was very marked , their day being hotter than mine because it was closer to the equator .
It consists of four large stars and one little one .
The little one is out of line and further damages the shape .
It should have been placed at the intersection of the stem and the cross-bar .
If you do not draw an imaginary line from star to star it does not suggest a cross -- nor anything in particular .
In these past few days we are plowing through a mighty Milky Way of islands .
They are so thick on the map that one would hardly expect to find room between them for a canoe ; yet we seldom glimpse one .
Once we saw the dim bulk of a couple of them , far away , spectral and dreamy things ; members of the Horne-Alofa and Fortuna .
On the larger one are two rival native kings -- and they have a time together .
They are Catholics ; so are their people .
The missionaries there are French priests .
`` Suddenly we heard the sound of firing , followed by yells from the natives on shore , and then we saw the recruiter-boat push out with a seemingly diminished crew .
The mate 's boat pulled quickly up , took her in tow , and presently brought her alongside , all her own crew being more or less hurt .
It seems the natives had called them into the place on pretence of friendship .
A crowd gathered about the stern of the boat , and several fellows even got into her .
All of a sudden our men were attacked with clubs and tomahawks .
The recruiter escaped the first blows aimed at him , making play with his fists until he had an opportunity to draw his revolver .
'Tom Sayers , ' a Mare man , received a tomahawk blow on the head which laid the scalp open but did not penetrate his skull , fortunately .
'Bobby Towns , ' another Mare boatman , had both his thumbs cut in warding off blows , one of them being so nearly severed from the hand that the doctors had to finish the operation .
Lihu , a Lifu boy , the recruiter 's special attendant , was cut and pricked in various places , but nowhere seriously .
Jack , an unlucky Tanna recruit , who had been engaged to act as boatman , received an arrow through his forearm , the head of which -- apiece of bone seven or eight inches long -- was still in the limb , protruding from both sides , when the boats returned .
The recruiter himself would have got off scot-free had not an arrow pinned one of his fingers to the loom of the steering-oar just as they were getting off .
The fight had been short but sharp .
The enemy lost two men , both shot dead . ''
For just one moment we have a seeming flash of comprehension of , the Kanaka 's reason for exiling himself : he goes away to acquire civilization .
Yes , he was naked and not ashamed , now he is clothed and knows how to be ashamed ; he was unenlightened ; now he has a Waterbury watch ; he was unrefined , now he has jewelry , and something to make him smell good ; he was a nobody , a provincial , now he has been to far countries and can show off .
`` Admitting that the foregoing description is the average one , the average sequel is this : The cuffs and collars , if used at all , are carried off by youngsters , who fasten them round the leg , just below the knee , as ornaments .
The Waterbury , broken and dirty , finds its way to the trader , who gives a trifle for it ; or the inside is taken out , the wheels strung on a thread and hung round the neck .
Knives , axes , calico , and handkerchiefs are divided among friends , and there is hardly one of these apiece .
The boxes , the keys often lost on the road home , can be bought for 2s .
They are to be seen rotting outside in almost any shore village on Tanna .
( I speak of what I have seen . )
A returned Kanaka has been furiously angry with me because I would not buy his trousers , which he declared were just my fit .
He sold them afterwards to one of my Aniwan teachers for 9d .
worth of tobacco -- a pair of trousers that probably cost him 8s .
A coat or shirt is handy for cold weather .
The white handkerchiefs , the 'senet ' ( perfumery ) , the umbrella , and perhaps the hat , are kept .
The boots have to take their chance , if they do not happen to fit the copra trader .
'Senet ' on the hair , streaks of paint on the face , a dirty white handkerchief round the neck , strips of turtle shell in the ears , a belt , a sheath and knife , and an umbrella constitute the rig of returned Kanaka at home the day after landing . ''
`` For a long time we were allowed to apprehend and detain all deserters who had signed the agreement on board ship , but the 'cast-iron ' regulations of the Act of 1884 put a stop to that , allowing the Kanaka to sign the agreement for three years ' service , travel about in the ship in receipt of the regular rations , cadge all he could , and leave when he thought fit , so long as he did not extend his pleasure trip to Queensland . ''
In the afternoon we sighted Suva , the capital of the group , and threaded our way into the secluded little harbor -- a placid basin of brilliant blue and green water tucked snugly in among the sheltering hills .
A few ships rode at anchor in it -- one of them a sailing vessel flying the American flag ; and they said she came from Duluth !
There 's a journey !
Duluth is several thousand miles from the sea , and yet she is entitled to the proud name of Mistress of the Commercial Marine of the United States of America .
There is only one free , independent , unsubsidized American ship sailing the foreign seas , and Duluth owns it .
All by itself that ship is the American fleet .
All by itself it causes the American name and power to be respected in the far regions of the globe .
All by itself it certifies to the world that the most populous civilized nation , in the earth has a just pride in her stupendous stretch of sea-front , and is determined to assert and maintain her rightful place as one of the Great Maritime Powers of the Planet .
All by itself it is making foreign eyes familiar with a Flag which they have not seen before for forty years , outside of the museum .
For what Duluth has done , in building , equipping , and maintaining at her sole expense the American Foreign Commercial Fleet , and in thus rescuing the American name from shame and lifting it high for the homage of the nations , we owe her a debt of gratitude which our hearts shall confess with quickened beats whenever her name is named henceforth .
Many national toasts will die in the lapse of time , but while the flag flies and the Republic survives , they who live under their shelter will still drink this one , standing and uncovered : Health and prosperity to Thee , O Duluth , American Queen of the Alien Seas !
In old times the Fijians were fierce fighters ; they were very religious , and worshiped idols ; the big chiefs were proud and haughty , and they were men of great style in many ways ; all chiefs had several wives , the biggest chiefs sometimes had as many as fifty ; when a chief was dead and ready for burial , four or five of his wives were strangled and put into the grave with him .
In 1804 twenty-seven British convicts escaped from Australia to Fiji , and brought guns and ammunition with them .
Consider what a power they were , armed like that , and what an opportunity they had .
If they had been energetic men and sober , and had had brains and known how to use them , they could have achieved the sovereignty of the archipelago ( -- ) twenty-seven kings and each with eight or nine islands under his scepter .
But nothing came of this chance .
They lived worthless lives of sin and luxury , and died without honor -- in most cases by violence .
Only one of them had any ambition ; he was an Irishman named Connor .
He tried to raise a family of fifty children , and scored forty-eight .
He died lamenting his failure .
It was a foolish sort of avarice .
Many a father would have been rich enough with forty .
The missionary taught these exacting savages many valuable things , and got from them one -- a very dainty and poetical idea : Those wild and ignorant poor children of Nature believed that the flowers , after they perish , rise on the winds and float away to the fair fields of heaven , and flourish there forever in immortal beauty !
We sailed again , refreshed .
His special interest was the fauna of Australasia , and his knowledge of the matter was as exhaustive as it was accurate .
I already knew a good deal about the rabbits in Australasia and their marvelous fecundity , but in my talks with him I found that my estimate of the great hindrance and obstruction inflicted by the rabbit pest upon traffic and travel was far short of the facts .
He told me that the first pair of rabbits imported into Australasia bred so wonderfully that within six months rabbits were so thick in the land that people had to dig trenches through them to get from town to town .
`` It lived the tranquil and luxurious life of a creature of independent means .
Of things actually necessary to its existence and its happiness not a detail was wanting .
When it wished to walk , it scrambled along the tree-trunk ; it mused in the shade of the leaves by day , it slept in their shelter by night ; when it wanted the refreshment of a swim , it had it ; it ate leaves when it wanted a vegetable diet , it dug under the bark for worms and grubs ; when it wanted fish it caught them , when it wanted eggs it laid them .
If the grubs gave out in one tree it swam to another ; and as for fish , the very opulence of the supply was an embarrassment .
And finally , when it was thirsty it smacked its chops in gratitude over a blend that would have slain a crocodile .
`` When at last , after thirteen months of travel and research in all the Zones it went aground on a mountain-summit , it strode ashore , saying in its heart , 'Let them that come after me invent theories and dream dreams about the Survival of the Fittest if they like , but I am the first that has done it !
`` This wonderful creature dates back like the kangaroo and many other Australian hydrocephalous invertebrates , to an age long anterior to the advent of man upon the earth ; they date back , indeed , to a time when a causeway hundreds of miles wide , and thousands of miles long , joined Australia to Africa , and the animals of the two countries were alike , and all belonged to that remote geological epoch known to science as the Old Red Grindstone Post-Pleosaurian .
Later the causeway sank under the sea ; subterranean convulsions lifted the African continent a thousand feet higher than it was before , but Australia kept her old level .
In Africa 's new climate the animals necessarily began to develop and shade off into new forms and families and species , but the animals of Australia as necessarily remained stationary , and have so remained until this day .
In the course of some millions of years the African Ornithorhynchus developed and developed and developed , and sluffed off detail after detail of its make-up until at last the creature became wholly disintegrated and scattered .
Whenever you see a bird or a beast or a seal or an otter in Africa you know that he is merely a sorry surviving fragment of that sublime original of whom I have been speaking -- that creature which was everything in general and nothing in particular -- the opulently endowed 'e pluribus unum ' of the animal world .
`` And fishy fin where should be paw , And beaver-trowel tail , And snout of beast equip 'd with teeth Where gills ought to prevail .
`` Come , Kangaroo , the good and true Foreshortened as to legs , And body tapered like a churn , And sack marsupial , i ' fegs ,
Perhaps no poet is a conscious plagiarist ; but there seems to be warrant for suspecting that there is no poet who is not at one time or another an unconscious one .
The above verses are indeed beautiful , and , in a way , touching ; but there is a haunting something about them which unavoidably suggests the Sweet Singer of Michigan .
It can hardly be doubted that the author had read the works of that poet and been impressed by them .
It is not apparent that he has borrowed from them any word or yet any phrase , but the style and swing and mastery and melody of the Sweet Singer all are there .
Compare this Invocation with `` Frank Dutton '' -- particularly stanzas first and seventeenth -- and I think the reader will feel convinced that he who wrote the one had read the other :
Sept. 15 -- Night .
Close to Australia now .
Sydney 50 miles distant .
It was porpoises -- porpoises aglow with phosphorescent light .
They presently collected in a wild and magnificent jumble under the bows , and there they played for an hour , leaping and frollicking and carrying on , turning summersaults in front of the stem or across it and never getting hit , never making a miscalculation , though the stem missed them only about an inch , as a rule .
They were porpoises of the ordinary length -- eight or ten feet -- but every twist of their bodies sent a long procession of united and glowing curves astern .
That fiery jumble was an enchanting thing to look at , and we stayed out the performance ; one can not have such a show as that twice in a lifetime .
The porpoise is the kitten of the sea ; he never has a serious thought , he cares for nothing but fun and play .
But I think I never saw him at his winsomest until that night .
It was near a center of civilization , and he could have been drinking .
Of course I made an apology ; and asked him to convey it to his friend .
He was right about Sydney being half of it .
It would be beautiful without Sydney , but not above half as beautiful as it is now , with Sydney added .
It is shaped somewhat like an oak-leaf -- a roomy sheet of lovely blue water , with narrow off-shoots of water running up into the country on both sides between long fingers of land , high wooden ridges with sides sloped like graves .
Handsome villas are perched here and there on these ridges , snuggling amongst the foliage , and one catches alluring glimpses of them as the ship swims by toward the city .
The city clothes a cluster of hills and a ruffle of neighboring ridges with its undulating masses of masonry , and out of these masses spring towers and spires and other architectural dignities and grandeurs that break the flowing lines and give picturesqueness to the general effect .
If the climates of the world were determined by parallels of latitude , then we could know a place 's climate by its position on the map ; and so we should know that the climate of Sydney was the counterpart of the climate of Columbia , S. C. , and of Little Rock , Arkansas , since Sydney is about the same distance south of the equator that those other towns are north of-it -- thirty-four degrees .
But no , climate disregards the parallels of latitude .
In Arkansas they have a winter ; in Sydney they have the name of it , but not the thing itself .
I have seen the ice in the Mississippi floating past the mouth of the Arkansas river ; and at Memphis , but a little way above , the Mississippi has been frozen over , from bank to bank .
But they have never had a cold spell in Sydney which brought the mercury down to freezing point .
Once in a mid-winter day there , in the month of July , the mercury went down to 36 deg.
, and that remains the memorable `` cold day '' in the history of the town .
No doubt Little Rock has seen it below zero .
Once , in Sydney , in mid-summer , about New Year 's Day , the mercury went up to 106 deg .
in the shade , and that is Sydney 's memorable hot day .
That would about tally with Little Rock 's hottest day also , I imagine .
My Sydney figures are taken from a government report , and are trustworthy .
In the matter of summer weather Arkansas has no advantage over Sydney , perhaps , but when it comes to winter weather , that is another affair .
You could cut up an Arkansas winter into a hundred Sydney winters and have enough left for Arkansas and the poor .
This stupendous blank is hot , not to say torrid ; a part of it is fertile , the rest is desert ; it is not liberally watered ; it has no towns .
One has only to cross the mountains of New South Wales and descend into the westward-lying regions to find that he has left the choice climate behind him , and found a new one of a quite different character .
In fact , he would not know by the thermometer that he was not in the blistering Plains of India .
Captain Sturt , the great explorer , gives us a sample of the heat .
And probably a wagon .
I was mistaken ; I have not seen a proper duststorm .
To my mind the exterior aspects and character of Australia are fascinating things to look at and think about , they are so strange , so weird , so new , so uncommonplace , such a startling and interesting contrast to the other sections of the planet , the sections that are known to us all , familiar to us all .
In the matter of particulars -- a detail here , a detail there -- we have had the choice climate of New South Wales' seacoast ; we have had the Australian heat as furnished by Captain Sturt ; we have had the wonderful dust-storm ; and we have considered the phenomenon of an almost empty hot wilderness half as big as the United States , with a narrow belt of civilization , population , and good climate around it .
English law was hard-hearted in those days .
For trifling offenses which in our day would be punished by a small fine or a few days ' confinement , men , women , and boys were sent to this other end of the earth to serve terms of seven and fourteen years ; and for serious crimes they were transported for life .
Children were sent to the penal colonies for seven years for stealing a rabbit !
`` We can not quit the promising town of Dubbo without testifying , in warm praise , to the kind-hearted and hospitable usages of its inhabitants .
Sydney , though well deserving the character it bears of its kindly treatment of strangers , possesses a little formality and reserve .
In Dubbo , on the contrary , though the same congenial manners prevail , there is a pleasing degree of respectful familiarity which gives the town a homely comfort not often met with elsewhere .
In laying on one side our pen we feel contented in having been able , though so late in this work , to bestow a panegyric , however unpretentious , on a town which , though possessing no picturesque natural surroundings , nor interesting architectural productions , has yet a body of citizens whose hearts can not but obtain for their town a reputation for benevolence and kind-heartedness . ''
I wonder what soured him on Sydney .
It seems strange that a pleasing degree of three or four fingers of respectful familiarity should fill a man up and give him the panegyrics so bad .
For he has them , the worst way -- any one can see that .
A man who is perfectly at himself does not throw cold detraction at people 's architectural productions and picturesque surroundings , and let on that what he prefers is a Dubbonese dust-storm and a pleasing degree of respectful familiarity .
No , these are old , old symptoms ; and when they appear we know that the man has got the panegyrics .
Sydney has a population of 400,000 .
When a stranger from America steps ashore there , the first thing that strikes him is that the place is eight or nine times as large as he was expecting it to be ; and the next thing that strikes him is that it is an English city with American trimmings .
Later on , in Melbourne , he will find the American trimmings still more in evidence ; there , even the architecture will often suggest America ; a photograph of its stateliest business street might be passed upon him for a picture of the finest street in a large American city .
I was told that the most of the fine residences were the city residences of squatters .
The name seemed out of focus somehow .
When the explanation came , it offered a new instance of the curious changes which words , as well as animals , undergo through change of habitat and climate .
With us , when you speak of a squatter you are always supposed to be speaking of a poor man , but in Australia when you speak of a squatter you are supposed to be speaking of a millionaire ; in America the word indicates the possessor of a few acres and a doubtful title , in Australia it indicates a man whose landfront is as long as a railroad , and whose title has been perfected in one way or another ; in America the word indicates a man who owns a dozen head of live stock , in Australia a man who owns anywhere from fifty thousand up to half a million head ; in America the word indicates a man who is obscure and not important , in Australia a man who is prominent and of the first importance ; in America you take off your hat to no squatter , in Australia you do ; in America if your uncle is a squatter you keep it dark , in Australia you advertise it ; in America if your friend is a squatter nothing comes of it , but with a squatter for your friend in Australia you may sup with kings if there are any around .
In Australia it takes about two acres and a half of pastureland ( some people say twice as many ) , to support a sheep ; and when the squatter has half a million sheep his private domain is about as large as Rhode Island , to speak in general terms .
His annual wool crop may be worth a quarter or a half million dollars .
He will live in a palace in Melbourne or Sydney or some other of the large cities , and make occasional trips to his sheep-kingdom several hundred miles away in the great plains to look after his battalions of riders and shepherds and other hands .
He has a commodious dwelling out there , and if he approve of you he will invite you to spend a week in it , and will make you at home and comfortable , and let you see the great industry in all its details , and feed you and slake you and smoke you with the best that money can buy .
He told some of the legends , and said that they were implicitly believed by all classes of Hindoos , including those of high social position and intelligence ; and he said that this universal credulity was a great hindrance to the missionary in his work .
Then he said something like this :
`` A good old Hindoo gentleman told me where my trouble lay .
He said 'We Hindoos recognize a god by the work of his hands -- we accept no other testimony .
Apparently , this is also the rule with you Christians .
And we know when a man has his power from a god by the fact that he does things which he could not do , as a man , with the mere powers of a man .
Plainly , this is the Christian 's way also , of knowing when a man is working by a god 's power and not by his own .
You saw that there was a supernatural property in the hair of Samson ; for you perceived that when his hair was gone he was as other men .
It is our way , as I have said .
There are many nations in the world , and each group of nations has its own gods , and will pay no worship to the gods of the others .
Each group believes its own gods to be strongest , and it will not exchange them except for gods that shall be proven to be their superiors in power .
Man is but a weak creature , and needs the help of gods -- he can not do without it .
Shall he place his fate in the hands of weak gods when there may be stronger ones to be found ?
That would be foolish .
No , if he hear of gods that are stronger than his own , he should not turn a deaf ear , for it is not a light matter that is at stake .
How then shall he determine which gods are the stronger , his own or those that preside over the concerns of other nations ?
By comparing the known works of his own gods with the works of those others ; there is no other way .
Now , when we make this comparison , we are not drawn towards the gods of any other nation .
Our gods are shown by their works to be the strongest , the most powerful .
The Christians have but few gods , and they are new -- new , and not strong ; as it seems to us .
They will increase in number , it is true , for this has happened with all gods , but that time is far away , many ages and decades of ages away , for gods multiply slowly , as is meet for beings to whom a thousand years is but a single moment .
Our own gods have been born millions of years apart .
The process is slow , the gathering of strength and power is similarly slow .
In the slow lapse of the ages the steadily accumulating power of our gods has at last become prodigious .
We have a thousand proofs of this in the colossal character of their personal acts and the acts of ordinary men to whom they have given supernatural qualities .
To your Samson was given supernatural power , and when he broke the withes , and slew the thousands with the jawbone of an ass , and carried away the gate 's of the city upon his shoulders , you were amazed -- and also awed , for you recognized the divine source of his strength .
But it could not profit to place these things before your Hindoo congregation and invite their wonder ; for they would compare them with the deed done by Hanuman , when our gods infused their divine strength into his muscles ; and they would be indifferent to them -- as you saw .
In the old , old times , ages and ages gone by , when our god Rama was warring with the demon god of Ceylon , Rama bethought him to bridge the sea and connect Ceylon with India , so that his armies might pass easily over ; and he sent his general , Hanuman , inspired like your own Samson with divine strength , to bring the materials for the bridge .
In two days Hanuman strode fifteen hundred miles , to the Himalayas , and took upon his shoulder a range of those lofty mountains two hundred miles long , and started with it toward Ceylon .
It was in the night ; and , as he passed along the plain , the people of Govardhun heard the thunder of his tread and felt the earth rocking under it , and they ran out , and there , with their snowy summits piled to heaven , they saw the Himalayas passing by .
And as this huge continent swept along overshadowing the earth , upon its slopes they discerned the twinkling lights of a thousand sleeping villages , and it was as if the constellations were filing in procession through the sky .
While they were looking , Hanuman stumbled , and a small ridge of red sandstone twenty miles long was jolted loose and fell .
Half of its length has wasted away in the course of the ages , but the other ten miles of it remain in the plain by Govardhun to this day as proof of the might of the inspiration of our gods .
You must know , yourself , that Hanuman could not have carried those mountains to Ceylon except by the strength of the gods .
You know that it was not done by his own strength , therefore , you know that it was done by the strength of the gods , just as you know that Samson carried the gates by the divine strength and not by his own .
I think you must concede two things : First , That in carrying the gates of the city upon his shoulders , Samson did not establish the superiority of his gods over ours ; secondly , That his feat is not supported by any but verbal evidence , while Hanuman 's is not only supported by verbal evidence , but this evidence is confirmed , established , proven , by visible , tangible evidence , which is the strongest of all testimony .
We have the sandstone ridge , and while it remains we can not doubt , and shall not .
Have you the gates ? '
There are four specialties attainable in the way of social pleasure .
If you enter your name on the Visitor 's Book at Government House you will receive an invitation to the next ball that takes place there , if nothing can be proven against you .
And it will be very pleasant ; for you will see everybody except the Governor , and add a number of acquaintances and several friends to your list .
The Governor will be in England .
The continent has four or five governors , and I do not know how many it takes to govern the outlying archipelago ; but anyway you will not see them .
When they are appointed they come out from England and get inaugurated , and give a ball , and help pray for rain , and get aboard ship and go back home .
And so the Lieutenant-Governor has to do all the work .
I was in Australasia three months and a half , and saw only one Governor .
The others were at home .
Thus the Governor 's functions are much more limited than are a Governor's functions with us .
And therefore more fatiguing .
He is the apparent head of the State , he is the real head of Society .
He represents culture , refinement , elevated sentiment , polite life , religion ; and by his example he propagates these , and they spread and flourish and bear good fruit .
He creates the fashion , and leads it .
His ball is the ball of balls , and his countenance makes the horse-race thrive .
Third in the list of special pleasures is the tour of the harbor in a fine steam pleasure-launch .
Your richer friends own boats of this kind , and they will invite you , and the joys of the trip will make a long day seem short .
The shark is the swiftest fish that swims .
The speed of the fastest steamer afloat is poor compared to his .
And he is a great gad-about , and roams far and wide in the oceans , and visits the shores of all of them , ultimately , in the course of his restless excursions .
I have a tale to tell now , which has not as yet been in print .
In 1870 a young stranger arrived in Sydney , and set about finding something to do ; but he knew no one , and brought no recommendations , and the result was that he got no employment .
He had aimed high , at first , but as time and his money wasted away he grew less and less exacting , until at last he was willing to serve in the humblest capacities if so he might get bread and shelter .
But luck was still against him ; he could find no opening of any sort .
Finally his money was all gone .
He walked the streets all day , thinking ; he walked them all night , thinking , thinking , and growing hungrier and hungrier .
At dawn he found himself well away from the town and drifting aimlessly along the harbor shore .
As he was passing by a nodding shark-fisher the man looked up and said -- --
`` All right , what will you give ? ''
`` What use is he ?
Do n't you know that we can go and report him to Government , and you 'll get a clean solid eighty shillings bounty ?
Hard cash , you know .
What do you think about it now ? ''
`` He wo n't go , sir .
I 've tried . ''
The sundowner was shown in .
The broker said to himself , `` No , he 's not crazy ; that is easy to see ; so he must be the other thing . ''
`` Two and a half million sterling -- maybe a little more . ''
`` I shall make two hundred thousand pounds out of it in sixty days . ''
`` My news is only ten days old . ''
We took the train at Sydney at about four in the afternoon .
It was American in one way , for we had a most rational sleeping car ; also the car was clean and fine and new -- nothing about it to suggest the rolling stock of the continent of Europe .
But our baggage was weighed , and extra weight charged for .
Any detail of railroading that is not troublesome can not honorably be described as continental .
All the pleasant morning we slid smoothly along over the plains , through thin -- not thick -- forests of great melancholy gum trees , with trunks rugged with curled sheets of flaking bark -- erysipelas convalescents , so to speak , shedding their dead skins .
And all along were tiny cabins , built sometimes of wood , sometimes of gray-blue corrugated iron ; and the doorsteps and fences were clogged with children -- rugged little simply-clad chaps that looked as if they had been imported from the banks of the Mississippi without breaking bulk .
We saw birds , but not a kangaroo , not an emu , not an ornithorhynchus , not a lecturer , not a native .
Indeed , the land seemed quite destitute of game .
But I have misused the word native .
In Australia it is applied to Australian-born whites only .
I should have said that we saw no Aboriginals -- no `` blackfellows . ''
And to this day I have never seen one .
In the great museums you will find all the other curiosities , but in the curio of chiefest interest to the stranger all of them are lacking .
We have at home an abundance of museums , and not an American Indian in them .
It is clearly an absurdity , but it never struck me before .
These invitations were always for a long time ahead ; if we were in Europe , three months ahead ; if we were in America , six to twelve months ahead .
They always named the exact date and train for the beginning and also for the end of the visit .
In America we have no annual supreme day ; no day whose approach makes the whole nation glad .
We have the Fourth of July , and Christmas , and Thanksgiving .
Neither of them can claim the primacy ; neither of them can arouse an enthusiasm which comes near to being universal .
Eight grown Americans out of ten dread the coming of the Fourth , with its pandemonium and its perils , and they rejoice when it is gone -- if still alive .
The approach of Christmas brings harassment and dread to many excellent people .
They have to buy a cart-load of presents , and they never know what to buy to hit the various tastes ; they put in three weeks of hard and anxious work , and when Christmas morning comes they are so dissatisfied with the result , and so disappointed that they want to sit down and cry .
Then they give thanks that Christmas comes but once a year .
The observance of Thanksgiving Day -- as a function -- has become general of late years .
The Thankfulness is not so general .
Two-thirds of the nation have always had hard luck and a hard time during the year , and this has a calming effect upon their enthusiasm .
`` Hello , Mark ! ''
`` Say -- Mark !
-- is he dead ? ''
-- a reference to a passage in some book of mine , though I did not detect , at that time , that that was its source .
And I did n't detect it afterward in Melbourne , when I came on the stage for the first time , and the same question was dropped down upon me from the dizzy height of the gallery .
It is always difficult to answer a sudden inquiry like that , when you have come unprepared and do n't know what it means .
I will remark here -- if it is not an indecorum -- that the welcome which an American lecturer gets from a British colonial audience is a thing which will move him to his deepest deeps , and veil his sight and break his voice .
And from Winnipeg to Africa , experience will teach him nothing ; he will never learn to expect it , it will catch him as a surprise each time .
The war-cloud hanging black over England and America made no trouble for me .
I was a prospective prisoner of war , but at dinners , suppers , on the platform , and elsewhere , there was never anything to remind me of it .
This was hospitality of the right metal , and would have been prominently lacking in some countries , in the circumstances .
And what was the origin of this majestic city and its efflorescence of palatial town houses and country seats ?
Its first brick was laid and its first house built by a passing convict .
Australian history is almost always picturesque ; indeed , it is so curious and strange , that it is itself the chiefest novelty the country has to offer , and so it pushes the other novelties into second and third place .
It does not read like history , but like the most beautiful lies .
And all of a fresh new sort , no mouldy old stale ones .
It is full of surprises , and adventures , and incongruities , and contradictions , and incredibilities ; but they are all true , they all happened .
In round numbers the 4,000,000 buy and sell about $ 600,000,000 worth of goods a year .
It is claimed that about half of this represents commodities of Australasian production .
The products exported annually by India are worth a trifle over $ 500,000,000 .
Now , here are some faith-straining figures :
Australasian production ( 4,000,000 population ) , $ 300,000,000 .
There are trustworthy statistics furnished by Sir Richard Temple and others , which show that the individual Indian 's whole annual product , both for export and home use , is worth in gold only $ 7.50 ; or , $ 37.50 for the family-aggregate .
Ciphered out on a like ratio of multiplication , the Australasian family 's aggregate production would be nearly $ 1,600 .
Truly , nothing is so astonishing as figures , if they once get started .
It is easier to stay out than get out .
-- Pudd'nhead Wilson 's New Calendar .
Oh , it did .
It 's not so sad a case .
He is modest , and he left out some of the particulars .
The lad reached South Australia just in time to help discover the Burra-Burra copper mines .
They turned out L700,000 in the first three years .
Up to now they have yielded L20,000,000 .
He has had his share .
Before that boy had been in the country two years he could have gone home and bought a village ; he could go now and buy a city , I think .
No , there is nothing very pathetic about his case .
He and his copper arrived at just a handy time to save South Australia .
It had got mashed pretty flat under the collapse of a land boom a while before . ''
There it is again ; picturesque history -- Australia 's specialty .
In 1829 South Australia had n't a white man in it .
In 1836 the British Parliament erected it -- still a solitude -- into a Province , and gave it a governor and other governmental machinery .
Speculators took hold , now , and inaugurated a vast land scheme , and invited immigration , encouraging it with lurid promises of sudden wealth .
It was well worked in London ; and bishops , statesmen , and all sorts of people made a rush for the land company 's shares .
Immigrants soon began to pour into the region of Adelaide and select town lots and farms in the sand and the mangrove swamps by the sea .
The crowds continued to come , prices of land rose high , then higher and still higher , everybody was prosperous and happy , the boom swelled into gigantic proportions .
A village of sheet iron huts and clapboard sheds sprang up in the sand , and in these wigwams fashion made display ; richly-dressed ladies played on costly pianos , London swells in evening dress and patent-leather boots were abundant , and this fine society drank champagne , and in other ways conducted itself in this capital of humble sheds as it had been accustomed to do in the aristocratic quarters of the metropolis of the world .
The provincial government put up expensive buildings for its own use , and a palace with gardens for the use of its governor .
The governor had a guard , and maintained a court .
Roads , wharves , and hospitals were built .
All this on credit , on paper , on wind , on inflated and fictitious values -- on the boom 's moonshine , in fact .
This went on handsomely during four or five years .
Then all of a sudden came a smash .
Bills for a huge amount drawn by the governor upon the Treasury were dishonored , land company 's credit went up in smoke , a panic followed , values fell with a rush , the frightened immigrants seized their gripsacks and fled to other lands , leaving behind them a good imitation of a solitude , where lately had been a buzzing and populous hive of men .
The item in the above list `` Other religions '' includes the following as returned :
About 64 roads to the other world .
You see how healthy the religious atmosphere is .
Anything can live in it .
Agnostics , Atheists , Freethinkers , Infidels , Mormons , Pagans , Indefinites they are all there .
And all the big sects of the world can do more than merely live in it : they can spread , flourish , prosper .
All except the Spiritualists and the Theosophists .
That is the most curious feature of this curious table .
What is the matter with the specter ?
Why do they puff him away ?
He is a welcome toy everywhere else in the world .
The successor of the sheet-iron hamlet of the mangrove marshes has that other Australian specialty , the Botanical Gardens .
We can not have these paradises .
The best we could do would be to cover a vast acreage under glass and apply steam heat .
But it would be inadequate , the lacks would still be so great : the confined sense , the sense of suffocation , the atmospheric dimness , the sweaty heat -- these would all be there , in place of the Australian openness to the sky , the sunshine and the breeze .
Whatever will grow under glass with us will flourish rampantly out of doors in Australia.
-- [ The greatest heat in Victoria , that there is an authoritative record of , was at Sandhurst , in January , 1862 .
The thermometer then registered 117 degrees in the shade .
In January , 1880 , the heat at Adelaide , South Australia , was 172 degrees in the sun . ]
When the white man came the continent was nearly as poor , in variety of vegetation , as the desert of Sahara ; now it has everything that grows on the earth .
In fact , not Australia only , but all Australasia has levied tribute upon the flora of the rest of the world ; and wherever one goes the results appear , in gardens private and public , in the woodsy walls of the highways , and in even the forests .
If you see a curious or beautiful tree or bush or flower , and ask about it , the people , answering , usually name a foreign country as the place of its origin -- India , Africa , Japan , China , England , America , Java , Sumatra , New Guinea , Polynesia , and so on .
`` Do you remember my introducing you to an earl -- the Earl of C. ? ''
`` Well , it left not the least impression upon him .
What did you talk about ? ''
`` Why , that would interest him ; that ought to have left an impression .
What did he talk about ? ''
`` 'If you could be a little more definite -- a little less vague -- because I am a stranger , and there are many foxes , as you will know even better than I , and unless I know which one it is that you desire to identify , and -- -- '
G. got away from Nauheim just in time to escape being shut in by the quarantine-bars on the frontiers ; and so did we , for we left the next day .
But G. had a great deal of trouble in getting by the Italian custom-house , and we should have fared likewise but for the thoughtfulness of our consul-general in Frankfort .
He introduced me to the Italian consul-general , and I brought away from that consulate a letter which made our way smooth .
It was a dozen lines merely commending me in a general way to the courtesies of servants in his Italian Majesty 's service , but it was more powerful than it looked .
In addition to a raft of ordinary baggage , we had six or eight trunks which were filled exclusively with dutiable stuff -- household goods purchased in Frankfort for use in Florence , where we had taken a house .
I was going to ship these through by express ; but at the last moment an order went throughout Germany forbidding the moving of any parcels by train unless the owner went with them .
This was a bad outlook .
We must take these things along , and the delay sure to be caused by the examination of them in the custom-house might lose us our train .
I imagined all sorts of terrors , and enlarged them steadily as we approached the Italian frontier .
We were six in number , clogged with all that baggage , and I was courier for the party -- the most incapable one they ever employed .
We arrived , and pressed with the crowd into the immense custom-house , and the usual worries began ; everybody crowding to the counter and begging to have his baggage examined first , and all hands clattering and chattering at once .
It seemed to me that I could do nothing ; it would be better to give it all up and go away and leave the baggage .
I could n't speak the language ; I should never accomplish anything .
Just then a tall handsome man in a fine uniform was passing by and I knew he must be the station-master -- and that reminded me of my letter .
I ran to him and put it into his hands .
He took it out of the envelope , and the moment his eye caught the royal coat of arms printed at its top , he took off his cap and made a beautiful bow to me , and said in English :
He plowed through the waiting crowd , I following , to the counter , and he gave orders again , in his emphatic military way :
Chalk all of them . ''
But soon there was an accident .
My overcoat pockets were stuffed with German cigars and linen packages of American smoking tobacco , and a porter was following us around with this overcoat on his arm , and gradually getting it upside down .
Just as I , in the rear of my family , moved by the sentinels at the door , about three hatfuls of the tobacco tumbled out on the floor .
One of the soldiers pounced upon it , gathered it up in his arms , pointed back whence I had come , and marched me ahead of him past that long wall of passengers again -- he chattering and exulting like a devil , they smiling in peaceful joy , and I trying to look as if my pride was not hurt , and as if I did not mind being brought to shame before these pleased people who had so lately envied me .
But at heart I was cruelly humbled .
Speaking of pioneer days in the mighty wilderness of Queensland , Mrs. Praed says :
`` Here is an instance .
A squatter , whose station was surrounded by Blacks , whom he suspected to be hostile and from whom he feared an attack , parleyed with them from his house-door .
He told them it was Christmas-time -- a time at which all men , black or white , feasted ; that there were flour , sugar-plums , good things in plenty in the store , and that he would make for them such a pudding as they had never dreamed of -- a great pudding of which all might eat and be filled .
The Blacks listened and were lost .
The pudding was made and distributed .
Next morning there was howling in the camp , for it had been sweetened with sugar and arsenic ! ''
The white man 's spirit was right , but his method was wrong .
His spirit was the spirit which the civilized white has always exhibited toward the savage , but the use of poison was a departure from custom .
True , it was merely a technical departure , not a real one ; still , it was a departure , and therefore a mistake , in my opinion .
It was better , kinder , swifter , and much more humane than a number of the methods which have been sanctified by custom , but that does not justify its employment .
That is , it does not wholly justify it .
Its unusual nature makes it stand out and attract an amount of attention which it is not entitled to .
It takes hold upon morbid imaginations and they work it up into a sort of exhibition of cruelty , and this smirches the good name of our civilization , whereas one of the old harsher methods would have had no such effect because usage has made those methods familiar to us and innocent .
In many countries we have chained the savage and starved him to death ; and this we do not care for , because custom has inured us to it ; yet a quick death by poison is lovingkindness to it .
In many countries we have burned the savage at the stake ; and this we do not care for , because custom has inured us to it ; yet a quick death is loving-kindness to it .
In more than one country we have hunted the savage and his little children and their mother with dogs and guns through the woods and swamps for an afternoon 's sport , and filled the region with happy laughter over their sprawling and stumbling flight , and their wild supplications for mercy ; but this method we do not mind , because custom has inured us to it ; yet a quick death by poison is lovingkindness to it .
In many countries we have taken the savage 's land from him , and made him our slave , and lashed him every day , and broken his pride , and made death his only friend , and overworked him till he dropped in his tracks ; and this we do not care for , because custom has inured us to it ; yet a quick death by poison is lovingkindness to it .
In the Matabeleland today -- why , there we are confining ourselves to sanctified custom , we Rhodes-Beit millionaires in South Africa and Dukes in London ; and nobody cares , because we are used to the old holy customs , and all we ask is that no notice-inviting new ones shall be intruded upon the attention of our comfortable consciences .
Mrs. Praed says of the poisoner , `` That squatter deserves to have his name handed down to the contempt of posterity . ''
I am sorry to hear her say that .
I myself blame him for one thing , and severely , but I stop there .
I blame him for , the indiscretion of introducing a novelty which was calculated to attract attention to our civilization .
There was no occasion to do that .
It was his duty , and it is every loyal man 's duty to protect that heritage in every way he can ; and the best way to do that is to attract attention elsewhere .
The squatter 's judgment was bad -- that is plain ; but his heart was right .
He is almost the only pioneering representative of civilization in history who has risen above the prejudices of his caste and his heredity and tried to introduce the element of mercy into the superior race 's dealings with the savage .
His name is lost , and it is a pity ; for it deserves to be handed down to posterity with homage and reverence .
Mr. Chauncy once saw `` a little native man '' throw a cricket-ball 119 yards .
This is said to beat the English professional record by thirteen yards .
I should think so !
On board a ship lately I saw a young Oxford athlete run four steps and spring into the air and squirm his hips by a side-twist over a bar that was five and one-half feet high ; but he could not have stood still and cleared a bar that was four feet high .
I know this , because I tried it myself .
All savages draw outline pictures upon bark ; but the resemblances are not close , and expression is usually lacking .
But the Australian aboriginal 's pictures of animals were nicely accurate in form , attitude , carriage ; and he put spirit into them , and expression .
And his pictures of white people and natives were pretty nearly as good as his pictures of the other animals .
He dressed his whites in the fashion of their day , both the ladies and the gentlemen .
As an untaught wielder of the pencil it is not likely that he has his equal among savage people .
Be careless in your dress if you must , but keep a tidy soul .
-- Pudd'nhead Wilson 's New Calendar .
The students work all day in the fields , the nurseries , and the shearing-sheds , learning and doing all the practical work of the business -- three days in a week .
On the other three they study and hear lectures .
They are taught the beginnings of such sciences as bear upon agriculture -- like chemistry , for instance .
We saw the sophomore class in sheep-shearing shear a dozen sheep .
They did it by hand , not with the machine .
The sheep was seized and flung down on his side and held there ; and the students took off his coat with great celerity and adroitness .
Sometimes they clipped off a sample of the sheep , but that is customary with shearers , and they do n't mind it ; they do n't even mind it as much as the sheep .
They dab a splotch of sheep-dip on the place and go right ahead .
Ballarat was a great region for `` nuggets . ''
No such nuggets were found in California as Ballarat produced .
In fact , the Ballarat region has yielded the largest ones known to history .
Two of them weighed about 180 pounds each , and together were worth $ 90,000 .
They were offered to any poor person who would shoulder them and carry them away .
Gold was so plentiful that it made people liberal like that .
No business is so uncertain as surface-mining .
Your claim may be good , and it may be worthless .
It may make you well off in a month ; and then again you may have to dig and slave for half a year , at heavy expense , only to find out at last that the gold is not there in cost-paying quantity , and that your time and your hard work have been thrown away .
It might be wise policy to advance the miner a monthly sum to encourage him to develop the country 's riches ; but to tax him monthly in advance instead -- why , such a thing was never dreamed of in America .
There , neither the claim itself nor its products , howsoever rich or poor , were taxed .
Ballarat is a town of only 40,000 population ; and yet , since it is in Australia , it has every essential of an advanced and enlightened big city .
This is pure matter of course .
I must stop dwelling upon these things .
It is hard to keep from dwelling upon them , though ; for it is difficult to get away from the surprise of it .
I will let the other details go , this time , but I must allow myself to mention that this little town has a park of 326 acres ; a flower garden of 83 acres , with an elaborate and expensive fernery in it and some costly and unusually fine statuary ; and an artificial lake covering 600 acres , equipped with a fleet of 200 shells , small sail boats , and little steam yachts .
His compliment to the local purity of the language is warranted .
It is quite free from impurities ; this is acknowledged far and wide .
As in the German Empire all cultivated people claim to speak Hanovarian German , so in Australasia all cultivated people claim to speak Ballarat English .
Even in England this cult has made considerable progress , and now that it is favored by the two great Universities , the time is not far away when Ballarat English will come into general use among the educated classes of Great Britain at large .
Its great merit is , that it is shorter than ordinary English -- that is , it is more compressed .
At first you have some difficulty in understanding it when it is spoken as rapidly as the orator whom I have quoted speaks it .
An illustration will show what I mean .
When he called and I handed him a chair , he bowed and said :
`` Thank you , '' and he said :
Bendigo was another of the rich strikes of the early days .
It does a great quartz-mining business , now -- that business which , more than any other that I know of , teaches patience , and requires grit and a steady nerve .
The town is full of towering chimney-stacks , and hoisting-works , and looks like a petroleum-city .
Speaking of patience ; for example , one of the local companies went steadily on with its deep borings and searchings without show of gold or a penny of reward for eleven years -- then struck it , and became suddenly rich .
The eleven years ' work had cost $ 55,000 , and the first gold found was a grain the size of a pin's head .
It is kept under locks and bars , as a precious thing , and is reverently shown to the visitor , `` hats off . ''
When I saw it I had not heard its history .
Bendigo has turned out even more gold than Ballarat .
The two together have produced $ 650,000,000 worth -- which is half as much as California produced .
`` You do n't remember me ? ''
`` Do you remember that ? ''
`` It is true .
I was its first President .
I was re-elected annually as long as its meetings were held in my castle -- Corrigan -- which was five years . ''
Then he showed me an album with twenty-three photographs of me in it .
Five of them were of old dates , the others of various later crops ; the list closed with a picture taken by Falk in Sydney a month before .
My first knowledge of that Club dates away back ; all of twenty years , I should say .
It came to me in the form of a courteous letter , written on the note-paper which I have described , and signed `` By order of the President ; C. PEMBROKE , Secretary . ''
It conveyed the fact that the Club had been created in my honor , and added the hope that this token of appreciation of my work would meet with my approval .
I answered , with thanks ; and did what I could to keep my gratification from over-exposure .
These reports came every month .
They were written on foolscap , 600 words to the page , and usually about twenty-five pages in a report -- a good 15,000 words , I should say , -- a solid week 's work .
The reports were absorbingly entertaining , long as they were ; but , unfortunately for me , they did not come alone .
They were always accompanied by a lot of questions about passages and purposes in my books , which the Club wanted answered ; and additionally accompanied every quarter by the Treasurer's report , and the Auditor 's report , and the Committee 's report , and the President 's review , and my opinion of these was always desired ; also suggestions for the good of the Club , if any occurred to me .
By and by I came to dread those things ; and this dread grew and grew and grew ; grew until I got to anticipating them with a cold horror .
For I was an indolent man , and not fond of letter-writing , and whenever these things came I had to put everything by and sit down -- for my own peace of mind -- and dig and dig until I got something out of my head which would answer for a reply .
And I got so , so sick of sitting for photographs .
I sat every year for five years , trying to satisfy that insatiable organization .
Then at last I rose in revolt .
I could endure my oppressions no longer .
I pulled my fortitude together and tore off my chains , and was a free man again , and happy .
From that day I burned the secretary 's fat envelopes the moment they arrived , and by and by they ceased to come .
There are people who can do all fine and heroic things but one !
keep from telling their happinesses to the unhappy .
-- Pudd'nhead Wilson 's New Calendar .
`` Last autumn I was at work one morning at home , when a card came up -- the card of a stranger .
Under the name was printed a line which showed that this visitor was Professor of Theological Engineering in Wellington University , New Zealand .
I was troubled -- troubled , I mean , by the shortness of the notice .
College etiquette required that he be at once invited to dinner by some member of the Faculty -- invited to dine on that day -- not , put off till a subsequent day .
I did not quite know what to do .
College etiquette requires , in the case of a foreign guest , that the dinner-talk shall begin with complimentary references to his country , its great men , its services to civilization , its seats of learning , and things like that ; and of course the host is responsible , and must either begin this talk himself or see that it is done by some one else .
I was in great difficulty ; and the more I searched my memory , the more my trouble grew .
I found that I knew nothing about New Zealand .
I thought I knew where it was , and that was all .
I had an impression that it was close to Australia , or Asia , or somewhere , and that one went over to it on a bridge .
This might turn out to be incorrect ; and even if correct , it would not furnish matter enough for the purpose at the dinner , and I should expose my College to shame before my guest ; he would see that I , a member of the Faculty of the first University in America , was wholly ignorant of his country , and he would go away and tell this , and laugh at it .
The thought of it made my face burn .
`` It is in the official log-book of Yale , to be read and wondered at by future generations -- the account of the Great Blank Day -- the memorable Blank Day -- the day wherein the wheels of culture were stopped , a Sunday silence prevailed all about , and the whole University stood still while the Faculty read-up and qualified itself to sit at meat , without shame , in the presence of the Professor of Theological Engineering from New Zealand :
`` Well , finally somebody happened to notice that the guest was looking dazed , and was n't saying anything .
So they stirred him up , of course .
Then that man came out with a good , honest , eloquent compliment that made the Faculty blush .
He said he was not worthy to sit in the company of men like these ; that he had been silent from admiration ; that he had been silent from another cause also -- silent from shame -- silent from ignorance !
'For , ' said he , 'I , who have lived eighteen years in New Zealand and have served five in a professorship , and ought to know much about that country , perceive , now , that I know almost nothing about it .
I say it with shame , that I have learned fifty times , yes , a hundred times more about New Zealand in these two hours at this table than I ever knew before in all the eighteen years put together .
I was silent because I could not help myself .
What I knew about taxes , and policies , and laws , and revenue , and products , and history , and all that multitude of things , was but general , and ordinary , and vague-unscientific , in a word -- and it would have been insanity to expose it here to the searching glare of your amazingly accurate and all-comprehensive knowledge of those matters , gentlemen .
I beg you to let me sit silent -- as becomes me .
But do not change the subject ; I can at least follow you , in this one ; whereas if you change to one which shall call out the full strength of your mighty erudition , I shall be as one lost .
If you know all this about a remote little inconsequent patch like New Zealand , ah , what would n't you know about any other Subject ! '
The governor warned these unlettered savages by printed proclamation that they must stay in the desolate region officially appointed for them !
The proclamation was a dead letter ; the savages could not read it .
Afterward a picture-proclamation was issued .
It was painted up on boards , and these were nailed to trees in the forest .
Herewith is a photographic reproduction of this fashion-plate .
`` After a frightful journey by Cradle Mountain , and over the lofty plateau of Middlesex Plains , the travelers experienced unwonted misery , and the circumstances called forth the best qualities of the noble little band .
Mr. Robinson wrote afterwards to Mr. Secretary Burnett some details of this passage of horrors .
In that letter , of Oct 2 , 1834 , he states that his Natives were very reluctant to go over the dreadful mountain passes ; that 'for seven successive days we continued traveling over one solid body of snow ; ' that 'the snows were of incredible depth ; ' that 'the Natives were frequently up to their middle in snow . '
But still the ill-clad , ill-fed , diseased , and way-worn men and women were sustained by the cheerful voice of their unconquerable friend , and responded most nobly to his call . ''
Mr. Bonwick says that Robinson 's friendly capture of the Big River tribe remember , it was a whole tribe -- '' was by far the grandest feature of the war , and the crowning glory of his efforts . ''
The word `` war '' was not well chosen , and is misleading .
There was war still , but only the Blacks were conducting it -- the Whites were holding off until Robinson could give his scheme a fair trial .
I think that we are to understand that the friendly capture of that tribe was by far the most important thing , the highest in value , that happened during the whole thirty years of truceless hostilities ; that it was a decisive thing , a peaceful Waterloo , the surrender of the native Napoleon and his dreaded forces , the happy ending of the long strife .
For `` that tribe was the terror of the colony , '' its chief `` the Black Douglas of Bush households . ''
`` We have none . ''
A few minutes passed -- in by-play -- suspense -- discussion among the tribesmen -- Robinson 's tamed squaws ventured to cross the line and begin persuasions upon the wild squaws .
Then the chief stepped back `` to confer with the old women -- the real arbiters of savage war . ''
`` As the fallen gladiator in the arena looks for the signal of life or death from the president of the amphitheatre , so waited our friends in anxious suspense while the conference continued .
In a few minutes , before a word was uttered , the women of the tribe threw up their arms three times .
This was the inviolable sign of peace !
Down fell the spears .
Forward , with a heavy sigh of relief , and upward glance of gratitude , came the friends of peace .
The impulsive natives rushed forth with tears and cries , as each saw in the other 's rank a loved one of the past .
And in memory of the greatest man Australasia ever developed or ever will develop , there is a stately monument to George Augustus Robinson , the Conciliator in -- no , it is to another man , I forget his name .
The aphorism does really seem true : `` Given the Circumstances , the Man will appear . ''
But the man mus n't appear ahead of time , or it will spoil everything .
In Robinson 's case the Moment had been approaching for a quarter of a century -- and meantime the future Conciliator was tranquilly laying bricks in Hobart .
When all other means had failed , the Moment had arrived , and the Bricklayer put down his trowel and came forward .
Earlier he would have been jeered back to his trowel again .
It reminds me of a tale that was told me by a Kentuckian on the train when we were crossing Montana .
He said the tale was current in Louisville years ago .
He thought it had been in print , but could not remember .
At any rate , in substance it was this , as nearly as I can call it back to mind .
It was a great and surprising idea .
It meant travel -- immense travel -- in those days it meant seeing the world ; it was the equivalent of a voyage around it in ours .
At first the other youths thought his mind was affected , but when they found that he was in earnest , the next thing to be thought of was , what sort of opportunity this venture might afford for a practical joke .
Ed could not find words capable of expressing his gratitude and delight .
The three days passed , and the letter was put into his bands .
He started on his trip , still pouring out his thanks while he shook good-bye all around .
And when he was out of sight his comrades let fly their laughter in a storm of happy satisfaction -- and then quieted down , and were less happy , less satisfied .
For the old doubts as to the wisdom of this deception began to intrude again .
`` Now you can start home .
But first we will have some more talk about that tobacco matter .
I know you now .
I know your abilities as well as you know them yourself -- perhaps better .
You understand that tobacco matter ; you understand that I am going to take possession of it , and you also understand the plans which I have matured for doing it .
What I want is a man who knows my mind , and is qualified to represent me in Memphis , and be in supreme command of that important business -- and I appoint you . ''
Your salary will be high -- of course-for you are representing me .
Later you will earn increases of it , and will get them .
You will need a small army of assistants ; choose them yourself -- and carefully .
Take no man for friendship 's sake ; but , all things being equal , take the man you know , take your friend , in preference to the stranger . ''
After some further talk under this head , the Commodore said :
When Ed reached Memphis he rushed down to the wharf in a fever to tell his great news and thank the boys over and over again for thinking to give him the letter to Mr. Vanderbilt .
It happened to be one of those idle times .
Blazing hot noonday , and no sign of life on the wharf .
But as Ed threaded his way among the freight piles , he saw a white linen figure stretched in slumber upon a pile of grain-sacks under an awning , and said to himself , `` That 's one of them , '' and hastened his step ; next , he said , `` It 's Charley -- it 's Fairchild good '' ; and the next moment laid an affectionate hand on the sleeper 's shoulder .
The eyes opened lazily , took one glance , the face blanched , the form whirled itself from the sack-pile , and in an instant Ed was alone and Fairchild was flying for the wharf-boat like the wind !
`` O lord ! ''
and saw a white linen form plunge overboard .
`` Did n't do what ? ''
`` Give you the -- -- ''
`` I -- er -- but have n't you got anything against us ? ''
And to Ed 's eager inquiry as to what made them act as they had been acting , they answered evasively , and pretended that they had put it up as a joke , to see what he would do .
It was the best explanation they could invent at such short notice .
And each said to himself , `` He never delivered that letter , and the joke is on us , if he only knew it or we were dull enough to come out and tell . ''
`` Come right up on the boiler deck and order the drinks -- it 's my treat .
I 'm going to tell you all about it .
And to-night it 's my treat again -- and we 'll have oysters and a time ! ''
`` Gracious , how you scared me .
What 's the matter ? ''
That is well enough , but I did not suppose those snags were 900 feet high .
Still they were a very fine show .
They stood boldly out by themselves , and made a fascinatingly odd spectacle .
But there was nothing about their appearance to suggest the heads of a hydra .
They looked like a row of lofty slabs with their upper ends tapered to the shape of a carving-knife point ; in fact , the early voyager , ignorant of their great height , might have mistaken them for a rusty old rank of piles that had sagged this way and that out of the perpendicular .
The remembrance of this paradise reminds me that it was at Hobart that we struck the head of the procession of Junior Englands .
We were to encounter other sections of it in New Zealand , presently , and others later in Natal .
Wherever the exiled Englishman can find in his new home resemblances to his old one , he is touched to the marrow of his being ; the love that is in his heart inspires his imagination , and these allied forces transfigure those resemblances into authentic duplicates of the revered originals .
It is beautiful , the feeling which works this enchantment , and it compels one 's homage ; compels it , and also compels one 's assent -- compels it always -- even when , as happens sometimes , one does not see the resemblances as clearly as does the exile who is pointing them out .
The resemblances do exist , it is quite true ; and often they cunningly approximate the originals -- but after all , in the matter of certain physical patent rights there is only one England .
Now that I have sampled the globe , I am not in doubt .
There is a beauty of Switzerland , and it is repeated in the glaciers and snowy ranges of many parts of the earth ; there is a beauty of the fiord , and it is repeated in New Zealand and Alaska ; there is a beauty of Hawaii , and it is repeated in ten thousand islands of the Southern seas ; there is a beauty of the prairie and the plain , and it is repeated here and there in the earth ; each of these is worshipful , each is perfect in its way , yet holds no monopoly of its beauty ; but that beauty which is England is alone -- it has no duplicate .
The spirit of wrath -- not the words -- is the sin ; and the spirit of wrath is cursing .
We begin to swear before we can talk .
-- Pudd'nhead Wilson 's New Calendar .
In order to start conversation I asked him something about Maryborough .
He said , in a most pleasant -- even musical voice , but with quiet and cultured decision :
`` Yes , the pillows , too .
And not a good quality of sand .
It packs too hard , and has never been screened .
There is too much gravel in it .
It is like sleeping on nuts . ''
`` There 's no trouble ; you can find it by the stench . ''
`` There are n't any . ''
However , I will tell you what to do .
In Maryborough there 's an American who has lived there half a lifetime ; a fine man , and prosperous and popular .
He will be on the lookout for you ; you wo n't have any trouble .
Sleep in peace ; he will rout you out , and you will make your train .
Where is your manager ? ''
`` Yes -- round trip ; all the way to Sydney . ''
It was Junior England all the way to Christchurch -- in fact , just a garden .
And Christchurch is an English town , with an English-park annex , and a winding English brook just like the Avon -- and named the Avon ; but from a man , not from Shakespeare 's river .
Its grassy banks are bordered by the stateliest and most impressive weeping willows to be found in the world , I suppose .
They continue the line of a great ancestor ; they were grown from sprouts of the willow that sheltered Napoleon 's grave in St. Helena .
It is a settled old community , with all the serenities , the graces , the conveniences , and the comforts of the ideal home-life .
If it had an established Church and social inequality it would be England over again with hardly a lack .
`` A feature of the election was the orderliness and sobriety of the people .
Women were in no way molested . ''
Sailed last night in the Flora , from Lyttelton .
They give no notice of their projected depredation ; you innocently buy tickets for the advertised passenger boat , and when you get down to Lyttelton at midnight , you find that they have substituted the scow .
They have plenty of good boats , but no competition -- and that is the trouble .
It is too late now to make other arrangements if you have engagements ahead .
It is a powerful company , it has a monopoly , and everybody is afraid of it -- including the government 's representative , who stands at the end of the stage-plank to tally the passengers and see that no boat receives a greater number than the law allows her to carry .
This conveniently-blind representative saw the scow receive a number which was far in excess of its privilege , and winked a politic wink and said nothing .
The passengers bore with meekness the cheat which had been put upon them , and made no complaint .
The women and children and some of the men and boys spent the night in that place , for they were too ill to leave it ; but the rest of us got up , by and by , and finished the night on the hurricane-deck .
We soon reached the town of Nelson , and spent the most of the day there , visiting acquaintances and driving with them about the garden -- the whole region is a garden , excepting the scene of the `` Maungatapu Murders , '' of thirty years ago .
That is a wild place -- wild and lonely ; an ideal place for a murder .
It is at the base of a vast , rugged , densely timbered mountain .
In the deep twilight of that forest solitude four desperate rascals -- Burgess , Sullivan , Levy , and Kelley -- ambushed themselves beside the mountain-trail to murder and rob four travelers -- Kempthorne , Mathieu , Dudley , and De Pontius , the latter a New Yorker .
A harmless old laboring man came wandering along , and as his presence was an embarrassment , they choked him , hid him , and then resumed their watch for the four .
They had to wait a while , but eventually everything turned out as they desired .
We sailed in the afternoon late , spent a few hours at New Plymouth , then sailed again and reached Auckland the next day , November 20th , and remained in that fine city several days .
Its situation is commanding , and the sea-view is superb .
There are charming drives all about , and by courtesy of friends we had opportunity to enjoy them .
From the grassy crater-summit of Mount Eden one 's eye ranges over a grand sweep and variety of scenery -- forests clothed in luxuriant foliage , rolling green fields , conflagrations of flowers , receding and dimming stretches of green plain , broken by lofty and symmetrical old craters -- then the blue bays twinkling and sparkling away into the dreamy distances where the mountains loom spiritual in their veils of haze .
The gum is dug up out of the ground ; it has been there for ages .
It is the sap of the Kauri tree .
Dr. Campbell of Auckland told me he sent a cargo of it to England fifty years ago , but nothing came of the venture .
Nobody knew what to do with it ; so it was sold at L5 a ton , to light fires with .
November 26 -- 3 P.M. , sailed .
Vast and beautiful harbor .
Land all about for hours .
Tangariwa , the mountain that `` has the same shape from every point of view . ''
That is the common belief in Auckland .
And so it has -- from every point of view except thirteen .
Large school of whales in the distance .
Nothing could be daintier than the puffs of vapor they spout up , when seen against the pink glory of the sinking sun , or against the dark mass of an island reposing in the deep blue shadow of a storm cloud .
Great Barrier rock standing up out of the sea away to the left .
Sometime ago a ship hit it full speed in a fog -- 20 miles out of her course -- 140 lives lost ; the captain committed suicide without waiting a moment .
He knew that , whether he was to blame or not , the company owning the vessel would discharge him and make a devotion -- to -- passengers ' safety advertisement out of it , and his chance to make a livelihood would be permanently gone .
To-day we reached Gisborne , and anchored in a big bay ; there was a heavy sea on , so we remained on board .
The doctor tells me of several old drunkards , one spiritless loafer , and several far-gone moral wrecks who have been reclaimed by the Salvation Army and have remained staunch people and hard workers these two years .
Wherever one goes , these testimonials to the Army 's efficiency are forthcoming .
This morning we had one of those whizzing green Ballarat flies in the room , with his stunning buzz-saw noise -- the swiftest creature in the world except the lightning-flash .
It is a stupendous force that is stored up in that little body .
If we had it in a ship in the same proportion , we could spin from Liverpool to New York in the space of an hour -- the time it takes to eat luncheon .
The New Zealand express train is called the Ballarat Fly .
Bad teeth in the colonies .
A citizen told me they do n't have teeth filled , but pull them out and put in false ones , and that now and then one sees a young lady with a full set .
I wish I had been born with false teeth and a false liver and false carbuncles .
I should get along better .
Left Napier in the Ballarat Fly the one that goes twice a week .
From Napier to Hastings , twelve miles ; time , fifty-five minutes -- not so far short of thirteen miles an hour .
A perfect summer day ; cool breeze , brilliant sky , rich vegetation .
Two or three times during the afternoon we saw wonderfully dense and beautiful forests , tumultuously piled skyward on the broken highlands -- not the customary roof-like slant of a hillside , where the trees are all the same height .
The noblest of these trees were of the Kauri breed , we were told -- the timber that is now furnishing the wood-paving for Europe , and is the best of all wood for that purpose .
Sometimes these towering upheavals of forestry were festooned and garlanded with vine-cables , and sometimes the masses of undergrowth were cocooned in another sort of vine of a delicate cobwebby texture -- they call it the `` supplejack , '' I think .
Tree ferns everywhere -- a stem fifteen feet high , with a graceful chalice of fern-fronds sprouting from its top -- a lovely forest ornament .
And there was a ten-foot reed with a flowing suit of what looked like yellow hair hanging from its upper end .
I do not know its name , but if there is such a thing as a scalp-plant , this is it .
A romantic gorge , with a brook flowing in its bottom , approaching Palmerston North .
WAUGANUI , December 3 .
A pleasant trip , yesterday , per Ballarat Fly .
I do not know the distance , but it must have been well along toward fifty miles .
The Fly could have spun it out to eight hours and not discommoded me ; for where there is comfort , and no need for hurry , speed is of no value -- at least to me ; and nothing that goes on wheels can be more comfortable , more satisfactory , than the New Zealand trains .
Outside of America there are no cars that are so rationally devised .
When you add the constant presence of charming scenery and the nearly constant absence of dust -- well , if one is not content then , he ought to get out and walk .
That would change his spirit , perhaps ?
At the end of an hour you would find him waiting humbly beside the track , and glad to be taken aboard again .
The Maoris had the tabu ; and had it on a Polynesian scale of comprehensiveness and elaboration .
Some of its features could have been importations from India and Judea .
Neither the Maori nor the Hindoo of common degree could cook by a fire that a person of higher caste had used , nor could the high Maori or high Hindoo employ fire that had served a man of low grade ; if a low-grade Maori or Hindoo drank from a vessel belonging to a high-grade man , the vessel was defiled , and had to be destroyed .
There were other resemblances between Maori tabu and Hindoo caste-custom .
A couple of curious war-monuments here at Wanganui .
One is in honor of white men `` who fell in defence of law and order against fanaticism and barbarism . ''
We Americans are English in blood , English in speech , English in religion , English in the essentials of our governmental system , English in the essentials of our civilization ; and so , let us hope , for the honor of the blend , for the honor of the blood , for the honor of the race , that that word got there through lack of heedfulness , and will not be suffered to remain .
If you carve it at Thermopylae , or where Winkelried died , or upon Bunker Hill monument , and read it again `` who fell in defence of law and order against fanaticism '' you will perceive what the word means , and how mischosen it is .
Calling it Fanaticism can not degrade it ; nothing can degrade it .
Even though it be a political mistake , and a thousand times a political mistake , that does not affect it ; it is honorabl -- always honorable , always noble -- and privileged to hold its head up and look the nations in the face .
It is right to praise these brave white men who fell in the Maori war -- they deserve it ; but the presence of that word detracts from the dignity of their cause and their deeds , and makes them appear to have spilt their blood in a conflict with ignoble men , men not worthy of that costly sacrifice .
But the men were worthy .
It was no shame to fight them .
They fought for their homes , they fought for their country ; they bravely fought and bravely fell ; and it would take nothing from the honor of the brave Englishmen who lie under the monument , but add to it , to say that they died in defense of English laws and English homes against men worthy of the sacrifice -- the Maori patriots .
The sturdy Maoris made the settlement of the country by the whites rather difficult .
Not at first -- but later .
At first they welcomed the whites , and were eager to trade with them -- particularly for muskets ; for their pastime was internecine war , and they greatly preferred the white man's weapons to their own .
War was their pastime -- I use the word advisedly .
They often met and slaughtered each other just for a lark , and when there was no quarrel .
The author of `` Old New Zealand '' mentions a case where a victorious army could have followed up its advantage and exterminated the opposing army , but declined to do it ; explaining naively that `` if we did that , there could n't be any more fighting . ''
In another battle one army sent word that it was out of ammunition , and would be obliged to stop unless the opposing army would send some .
It was sent , and the fight went on .
Three days of paradise .
Warm and sunny and smooth ; the sea a luminous Mediterranean blue .
One lolls in a long chair all day under deck-awnings , and reads and smokes , in measureless content .
One does not read prose at such a time , but poetry .
I have been reading the poems of Mrs. Julia A. Moore , again , and I find in them the same grace and melody that attracted me when they were first published , twenty years ago , and have held me in happy bonds ever since .
if his mother could have seen her son , For she loved him , her darling son ; If she could heard his dying prayer , It would ease her heart till she met him there .
Fellow of 30 with four valises ; a slim creature , with teeth which made his mouth look like a neglected churchyard .
He had solidified hair -- solidified with pomatum ; it was all one shell .
He smoked the most extraordinary cigarettes -- made of some kind of manure , apparently .
These and his hair made him smell like the very nation .
He had a low-cut vest on , which exposed a deal of frayed and broken and unclean shirtfront .
Showy studs , of imitation gold -- they had made black disks on the linen .
Oversized sleeve buttons of imitation gold , the copper base showing through .
Ponderous watch-chain of imitation gold .
I judge that he could n't tell the time by it , for he asked Smythe what time it was , once .
He wore a coat which had been gay when it was young ; 5-o'clock-tea-trousers of a light tint , and marvelously soiled ; yellow mustache with a dashing upward whirl at the ends ; foxy shoes , imitation patent leather .
He was a novelty -- an imitation dude .
He would have been a real one if he could have afforded it .
But he was satisfied with himself .
You could see it in his expression , and in all his attitudes and movements .
He was living in a dude dreamland where all his squalid shams were genuine , and himself a sincerity .
It disarmed criticism , it mollified spite , to see him so enjoy his imitation languors , and arts , and airs , and his studied daintinesses of gesture and misbegotten refinements .
It was plain to me that he was imagining himself the Prince of Wales , and was doing everything the way he thought the Prince would do it .
For bringing his four valises aboard and stowing them in the nettings , he gave his porter four cents , and lightly apologized for the smallness of the gratuity -- just with the condescendingest little royal air in the world .
He stretched himself out on the front seat and rested his pomatum-cake on the middle arm , and stuck his feet out of the window , and began to pose as the Prince and work his dreams and languors for exhibition ; and he would indolently watch the blue films curling up from his cigarette , and inhale the stench , and look so grateful ; and would flip the ash away with the daintiest gesture , unintentionally displaying his brass ring in the most intentional way ; why , it was as good as being in Marlborough House itself to see him do it so like .
The Kooringa buffalo pants in the sun , The Kondoparinga lies gaping for breath , The Kongorong Camaum to the shadow has won , But the Goomeroo sinks in the slumber of death ;
Paramatta and Binnum are gone to their rest In the vale of Tapanni Taroom , Kawakawa , Deniliquin -- all that was best In the earth are but graves and a tomb !
January 4 , 1896 .
Christmas in Melbourne , New Year 's Day in Adelaide , and saw most of the friends again in both places .
Lying here at anchor all day -- Albany ( King George 's Sound ) , Western Australia .
It is a perfectly landlocked harbor , or roadstead -- spacious to look at , but not deep water .
Desolate-looking rocks and scarred hills .
Plenty of ships arriving now , rushing to the new gold-fields .
The papers are full of wonderful tales of the sort always to be heard in connection with new gold diggings .
A sample : a youth staked out a claim and tried to sell half for L5 ; no takers ; he stuck to it fourteen days , starving , then struck it rich and sold out for L10,000 .
About sunset , strong breeze blowing , got up the anchor .
We were in a small deep puddle , with a narrow channel leading out of it , minutely buoyed , to the sea .
Alert , gentle , smiling , winning young brown creature as ever was .
Beautiful shining black hair combed back like a woman 's , and knotted at the back of his head -- tortoise-shell comb in it , sign that he is a Singhalese ; slender , shapely form ; jacket ; under it is a beltless and flowing white cotton gown -- from neck straight to heel ; he and his outfit quite unmasculine .
It was an embarrassment to undress before him .
The drive through the town and out to the Galle Face by the seashore , what a dream it was of tropical splendors of bloom and blossom , and Oriental conflagrations of costume !
The walking groups of men , women , boys , girls , babies -- each individual was a flame , each group a house afire for color .
And such stunning colors , such intensely vivid colors , such rich and exquisite minglings and fusings of rainbows and lightnings !
And all harmonious , all in perfect taste ; never a discordant note ; never a color on any person swearing at another color on him or failing to harmonize faultlessly with the colors of any group the wearer might join .
The stuffs were silk -- thin , soft , delicate , clinging ; and , as a rule , each piece a solid color : a splendid green , a splendid blue , a splendid yellow , a splendid purple , a splendid ruby , deep , and rich with smouldering fires -- they swept continuously by in crowds and legions and multitudes , glowing , flashing , burning , radiant ; and every five seconds came a burst of blinding red that made a body catch his breath , and filled his heart with joy .
And then , the unimaginable grace of those costumes !
Sometimes a woman 's whole dress was but a scarf wound about her person and her head , sometimes a man 's was but a turban and a careless rag or two -- in both cases generous areas of polished dark skin showing -- but always the arrangement compelled the homage of the eye and made the heart sing for gladness .
I can see it to this day , that radiant panorama , that wilderness of rich color , that incomparable dissolving-view of harmonious tints , and lithe half-covered forms , and beautiful brown faces , and gracious and graceful gestures and attitudes and movements , free , unstudied , barren of stiffness and restraint , and --
Out of a missionary school came marching , two and two , sixteen prim and pious little Christian black girls , Europeanly clothed -- dressed , to the last detail , as they would have been dressed on a summer Sunday in an English or American village .
Those clothes -- oh , they were unspeakably ugly !
Ugly , barbarous , destitute of taste , destitute of grace , repulsive as a shroud .
I looked at my womenfolk 's clothes -- just full-grown duplicates of the outrages disguising those poor little abused creatures -- and was ashamed to be seen in the street with them .
Then I looked at my own clothes , and was ashamed to be seen in the street with myself .
I suppose he has no enemies among men .
The whites and Mohammedans never seemed to molest him ; and the Hindoos , because of their religion , never take the life of any creature , but spare even the snakes and tigers and fleas and rats .
If I sat on one end of the balcony , the crows would gather on the railing at the other end and talk about me ; and edge closer , little by little , till I could almost reach them ; and they would sit there , in the most unabashed way , and talk about my clothes , and my hair , and my complexion , and probable character and vocation and politics , and how I came to be in India , and what I had been doing , and how many days I had got for it , and how I had happened to go unhanged so long , and when would it probably come off , and might there be more of my sort where I came from , and when would they be hanged , -- and so on , and so on , until I could not longer endure the embarrassment of it ; then I would shoo them away , and they would circle around in the air a little while , laughing and deriding and mocking , and presently settle on the rail and do it all over again .
They were very sociable when there was anything to eat -- oppressively so .
With a little encouragement they would come in and light on the table and help me eat my breakfast ; and once when I was in the other room and they found themselves alone , they carried off everything they could lift ; and they were particular to choose things which they could make no use of after they got them .
In India their number is beyond estimate , and their noise is in proportion .
I suppose they cost the country more than the government does ; yet that is not a light matter .
Still , they pay ; their company pays ; it would sadden the land to take their cheerful voice out of it .
As I was saying , the Bearer 's recommendations were all from American tourists ; and St. Peter would have admitted him to the fields of the blest on them -- I mean if he is as unfamiliar with our people and our ways as I suppose he is .
According to these recommendations , Manuel X. was supreme in all the arts connected with his complex trade ; and these manifold arts were mentioned -- and praised-in detail .
His English was spoken of in terms of warm admiration -- admiration verging upon rapture .
I took pleased note of that , and hoped that some of it might be true .
All this haltingly , and with difficulty .
Then he had an inspiration , and began to pour out a flood of words that I could make nothing of ; so I said :
`` Not Hindostani , master -- English .
Always I speaking English sometimes when I talking every day all the time at you . ''
`` Let me see if I can make a selection out of it -- for business uses , I mean ; we will keep the rest for Sundays .
Give it to me in installments . ''
But there did not seem to be any short ones , except Mousa -- which suggested mouse .
It was out of character ; it was too soft , too quiet , too conservative ; it did n't fit his splendid style .
I considered , and said --
It is a land of surprises -- India !
I had had my ambitions -- I had hoped , and almost expected , to be read by kings and presidents and emperors -- but I had never looked so high as That .
It would be false modesty to pretend that I was not inordinately pleased .
I was much more pleased than I should have been with a compliment from a man .
Few of us can stand prosperity .
Another man 's , I mean .
-- Pudd'nhead Wilson 's New Calendar .
The dog was an impressive figure to me , representing as he did a mystery whose key is lost .
He was humble , and apparently depressed ; and he let his head droop pensively , and looked as if he might be trying to call back to his mind what it was that he had used to symbolize ages ago when he began his function .
There was another impressive thing close at hand , but I was not privileged to see it .
That was the sacred fire -- a fire which is supposed to have been burning without interruption for more than two centuries ; and so , living by the same heat that was imparted to it so long ago .
And thence we went to Mr. Premchand Roychand 's bungalow , in Lovelane , Byculla , where an Indian prince was to receive a deputation of the Jain community who desired to congratulate him upon a high honor lately conferred upon him by his sovereign , Victoria , Empress of India .
She had made him a knight of the order of the Star of India .
It would seem that even the grandest Indian prince is glad to add the modest title `` Sir '' to his ancient native grandeurs , and is willing to do valuable service to win it .
He will remit taxes liberally , and will spend money freely upon the betterment of the condition of his subjects , if there is a knighthood to be gotten by it .
And he will also do good work and a deal of it to get a gun added to the salute allowed him by the British Government .
Every year the Empress distributes knighthoods and adds guns for public services done by native princes .
The salute of a small prince is three or four guns ; princes of greater consequence have salutes that run higher and higher , gun by gun , -- oh , clear away up to eleven ; possibly more , but I did not hear of any above eleven-gun princes .
I was told that when a four-gun prince gets a gun added , he is pretty troublesome for a while , till the novelty wears off , for he likes the music , and keeps hunting up pretexts to get himself saluted .
It may be that supremely grand folk , like the Nyzam of Hyderabad and the Gaikwar of Baroda , have more than eleven guns , but I do n't know .
Grayish skin , with purple areas .
Elderly man -- a drinker .
Boiled-cauliflower nose in a flabby face veined with purple crinklings .
His face a ghastly white .
The ceremonies were not tedious .
The prince strode to his throne with the port and majesty -- and the sternness -- of a Julius Caesar coming to receive and receipt for a back-country kingdom and have it over and get out , and no fooling .
There was a throne for the young prince , too , and the two sat there , side by side , with their officers grouped at either hand and most accurately and creditably reproducing the pictures which one sees in the books -- pictures which people in the prince 's line of business have been furnishing ever since Solomon received the Queen of Sheba and showed her his things .
The chief of the Jain delegation read his paper of congratulations , then pushed it into a beautifully engraved silver cylinder , which was delivered with ceremony into the prince's hands and at once delivered by him without ceremony into the hands of an officer .
I will copy the address here .
It is interesting , as showing what an Indian prince 's subject may have opportunity to thank him for in these days of modern English rule , as contrasted with what his ancestor would have given them opportunity to thank him for a century and a half ago -- the days of freedom unhampered by English interference .
A century and a half ago an address of thanks could have been put into small space .
It would have thanked the prince --
For not slaughtering too many of his people upon mere caprice ;
For not betraying the subject secretly , for a bribe , into the hands of bands of professional Thugs , to be murdered and robbed in the prince 's back lot .
That was nearly a century and a quarter ago .
An article in one of the chief journals of India ( the Pioneer ) shows that in some respects the native of to-day is just what his ancestor was then .
Here are niceties of so subtle and delicate a sort that they lift their breed of rascality to a place among the fine arts , and almost entitle it to respect :
There is the Plague , the Black Death : India invented it ; India is the cradle of that mighty birth .
How long ago that was nobody knows -- centuries , it is supposed .
One of the chiefest wonders connected with it was the success with which it kept its secret .
The English trader did business in India two hundred years and more before he ever heard of it ; and yet it was assassinating its thousands all around him every year , the whole time .
The natives traveled third class , and at marvelously cheap rates .
They were packed and crammed into cars that held each about fifty ; and it was said that often a Brahmin of the highest caste was thus brought into personal touch , and consequent defilement , with persons of the lowest castes -- no doubt a very shocking thing if a body could understand it and properly appreciate it .
Yes , a Brahmin who did n't own a rupee and could n't borrow one , might have to touch elbows with a rich hereditary lord of inferior caste , inheritor of an ancient title a couple of yards long , and he would just have to stand it ; for if either of the two was allowed to go in the cars where the sacred white people were , it probably would n't be the august poor Brahmin .
There was an immense string of those third-class cars , for the natives travel by hordes ; and a weary hard night of it the occupants would have , no doubt .
Imagine a file of elephants marching through such a crevice of a street and scraping the paint off both sides of it with their hides .
How big they must look , and how little they must make the houses look ; and when the elephants are in their glittering court costume , what a contrast they must make with the humble and sordid surroundings .
And when a mad elephant goes raging through , belting right and left with his trunk , how do these swarms of people get out of the way ?
I suppose it is a thing which happens now and then in the mad season ( for elephants have a mad season ) .
By and by to the elephant stables , and I took a ride ; but it was by request -- I did not ask for it , and did n't want it ; but I took it , because otherwise they would have thought I was afraid , which I was .
The elephant kneels down , by command -- one end of him at a time -- and you climb the ladder and get into the howdah , and then he gets up , one end at a time , just as a ship gets up over a wave ; and after that , as he strides monstrously about , his motion is much like a ship 's motion .
The mahout bores into the back of his head with a great iron prod and you wonder at his temerity and at the elephant 's patience , and you think that perhaps the patience will not last ; but it does , and nothing happens .
The mahout talks to the elephant in a low voice all the time , and the elephant seems to understand it all and to be pleased with it ; and he obeys every order in the most contented and docile way .
Among these twenty-five elephants were two which were larger than any I had ever seen before , and if I had thought I could learn to not be afraid , I would have taken one of them while the police were not looking .
The prince is an educated gentleman .
His culture is European .
He has been in Europe five times .
People say that this is costly amusement for him , since in crossing the sea he must sometimes be obliged to drink water from vessels that are more or less public , and thus damage his caste .
To get it purified again he must make pilgrimage to some renowned Hindoo temples and contribute a fortune or two to them .
His people are like the other Hindoos , profoundly religious ; and they could not be content with a master who was impure .
In the swirl and tumult of the hotel lobby I ran across Mr. Daly's comedian , the late James Lewis , of beloved memory , and I casually mentioned that I was going to call upon Mr. Daly in the evening at 8 .
He looked surprised , and said he reckoned not .
For answer I handed him Mr. Daly 's note .
Its substance was : `` Come to my private den , over the theater , where we can not be interrupted .
And come by the back way , not the front .
642 Sixth Avenue is a cigar shop ; pass through it and you are in a paved court , with high buildings all around ; enter the second door on the left , and come up stairs . ''
`` Because you wo n't .
Or if you do you can draw on me for a hundred dollars ; for you will be the first man that has accomplished it in twenty-five years .
I ca n't think what Mr. Daly can have been absorbed in .
He has forgotten a most important detail , and he will feel humiliated in the morning when he finds that you tried to get in and could n't . ''
I was a little disconcerted , and my easy confidence suffered a shrinkage .
The man stood as motionless as Gibraltar , and kept his unblinking eye upon me .
It was very embarrassing , very humiliating .
I stammered at a false start or two ; then -- --
`` I have just run down from -- -- ''
`` But he asked me to come . ''
For a moment I fancied there would be a change in the atmosphere , now ; but this idea was premature .
The big man was examining the note searchingly under the gas-jet .
A glance showed me that he had it upside down -- disheartening evidence that he could not read .
`` I mane , why wud n't he put his naime to ut ? ''
I do n't remember ut .
What is it ye want to see him about ? ''
`` It is n't I that want to see him , he wants to see me . ''
`` I 'll ask ye again .
Are ye in the show business yerself ? ''
The weather did change then .
I said , with modesty :
`` That is all right , '' I said , `` collect it of Jimmy Lewis . ''
The Report was made in 1839 by Major Sleeman , of the Indian Service , and was printed in Calcutta in 1840 .
It is a clumsy , great , fat , poor sample of the printer 's art , but good enough for a government printing-office in that old day and in that remote region , perhaps .
To Major Sleeman was given the general superintendence of the giant task of ridding India of Thuggee , and he and his seventeen assistants accomplished it .
It was the Augean Stables over again .
Captain Vallancey , writing in a Madras journal in those old times , makes this remark :
`` Between Jokur and Dholeea met a sepoy of the shepherd caste ; killed him in the jungle .
`` In the morning , beyond the Thapa , fell in with 3 Marwarie travelers ; murdered them .
`` Came on to Khurgore Bateesa in Indore , divided spoil , and dispersed .
`` Next day the fakeer joined again ; made him leave at Mana .
Beyond there , fell in with two Kahars and a sepoy , and came on towards the place selected for the murder .
When near it , the fakeer came again .
Losing all patience with him , gave Mithoo , one of the gang , 5 rupees ( $ 2.50 ) to murder him , and take the sin upon himself .
All four were strangled , including the fakeer .
Surprised to find among the fakeer 's effects 30 pounds of coral , 350 strings of small pearls , 15 strings of large pearls , and a gilt necklace . ''
It it curious , the little effect that time has upon a really interesting circumstance .
This one , so old , so long ago gone down into oblivion , reads with the same freshness and charm that attach to the news in the morning paper ; one 's spirits go up , then down , then up again , following the chances which the fakeer is running ; now you hope , now you despair , now you hope again ; and at last everything comes out right , and you feel a great wave of personal satisfaction go weltering through you , and without thinking , you put out your hand to pat Mithoo on the back , when -- puff !
the whole thing has vanished away , there is nothing there ; Mithoo and all the crowd have been dust and ashes and forgotten , oh , so many , many , many lagging years !
And then comes a sense of injury : you don't know whether Mithoo got the swag , along with the sin , or had to divide up the swag and keep all the sin himself .
There is no literary art about a government report .
It stops a story right in the most interesting place .
`` After murdering 4 sepoys , going on toward Indore , met 4 strolling players , and persuaded them to come with us , on the pretense that we would see their performance at the next stage .
Murdered them at a temple near Bhopal . ''
There were thousands of Thugs roving over India constantly , during many generations .
They made Thuggee a hereditary vocation and taught it to their sons and to their son 's sons .
Boys were in full membership as early as 16 years of age ; veterans were still at work at 70 .
What was the fascination , what was the impulse ?
Apparently , it was partly piety , largely gain , and there is reason to suspect that the sport afforded was the chiefest fascination of all .
Meadows Taylor makes a Thug in one of his books claim that the pleasure of killing men was the white man's beast-hunting instinct enlarged , refined , ennobled .
I will quote the passage :
Simple rules for saving money : To save half , when you are fired by an eager impulse to contribute to a charity , wait , and count forty .
To save three-quarters , count sixty .
To save it all , count sixty-five .
-- Pudd'nhead Wilson 's New Calendar .
And here is another case-related by the terrible Futty Khan , a man with a tremendous record , to be re-mentioned by and by :
Every now and then in this big book one comes across that pathetic remark : `` we tried to get him to sit down but he would not . ''
It tells the whole story .
Some accident had awakened the suspicion in him that these smooth friends who had been petting and coddling him and making him feel so safe and so fortunate after his forlorn and lonely wanderings were the dreaded Thugs ; and now their ghastly invitation to `` sit and rest '' had confirmed its truth .
He knew there was no help for him , and that he was looking his last upon earthly things , but `` he would not sit . ''
No , not that -- it was too awful to think of !
`` We passed through to Kurnaul , where we found a former Thug named Junooa , an old comrade of ours , who had turned religious mendicant and become a disciple and holy .
He came to us in the serai and weeping with joy returned to his old trade . ''
Ramzam was taken into a great native grandee 's service and given authority over five villages .
`` My authority extended over these people to summons them to my presence , to make them stand or sit .
I dressed well , rode my pony , and had two sepoys , a scribe and a village guard to attend me .
During three years I used to pay each village a monthly visit , and no one suspected that I was a Thug !
The chief man used to wait on me to transact business , and as I passed along , old and young made their salaam to me . ''
And yet during that very three years he got leave of absence `` to attend a wedding , '' and instead went off on a Thugging lark with six other Thugs and hunted the highway for fifteen days !
-- with satisfactory results .
Afterwards he held a great office under a Rajah .
There he had ten miles of country under his command and a military guard of fifteen men , with authority to call out 2,000 more upon occasion .
But the British got on his track , and they crowded him so that he had to give himself up .
See what a figure he was when he was gotten up for style and had all his things on : `` I was fully armed -- a sword , shield , pistols , a matchlock musket and a flint gun , for I was fond of being thus arrayed , and when so armed feared not though forty men stood before me . ''
Another example of family affection .
A little while previously to the capture of Feringhea 's family , the British officer had captured Feringhea 's foster-brother , leader of a gang of ten , and had tried the eleven and condemned them to be hanged .
Feringhea 's captured family arrived at the jail the day before the execution was to take place .
The foster-brother , Jhurhoo , entreated to be allowed to see the aged mother and the others .
The prayer was granted , and this is what took place -- it is the British officer who speaks :
`` In the morning , just before going to the scaffold , the interview took place before me .
He fell at the old woman 's feet and begged that she would relieve him from the obligations of the milk with which she had nourished him from infancy , as he was about to die before he could fulfill any of them .
She placed her hands on his head , and he knelt , and she said she forgave him all , and bid him die like a man . ''
And there is another very curious thing .
The bands of Thugs had private graveyards .
They did not like to kill and bury at random , here and there and everywhere .
They preferred to wait , and toll the victims along , and get to one of their regular burying-places ( 'bheels ' ) if they could .
In the little kingdom of Oude , which was about half as big as Ireland and about as big as the State of Maine , they had two hundred and seventy-four 'bheels ' .
They were scattered along fourteen hundred miles of road , at an average of only five miles apart , and the British government traced out and located each and every one of them and set them down on the map .
There is one very striking thing which I wish to call attention to .
You have surmised from the listed callings followed by the victims of the Thugs that nobody could travel the Indian roads unprotected and live to get through ; that the Thugs respected no quality , no vocation , no religion , nobody ; that they killed every unarmed man that came in their way .
That is wholly true -- with one reservation .
In all the long file of Thug confessions an English traveler is mentioned but once -- and this is what the Thug says of the circumstance :
The train started before he could finish .
Mr. Smythe 's opportunity was come .
His bedding , on the shelf , at once changed places with the bedding -- a stranger 's -- that was occupying the sofa that was opposite to mine .
About ten o'clock we stopped somewhere , and a large Englishman of official military bearing stepped in .
We pretended to be asleep .
The lamps were covered , but there was light enough for us to note his look of surprise .
He stood there , grand and fine , peering down at Smythe , and wondering in silence at the situation .
After a bit he said : --
`` So you did n't stop off , after all ? ''
Major Sleeman still tried to shake her purpose .
He promised to build her a fine house among the temples of her ancestors upon the bank of the river and make handsome provision for her out of rent-free lands if she would consent to live ; and if she would n't he would allow no stone or brick to ever mark the place where she died .
But she only smiled and said , `` My pulse has long ceased to beat , my spirit has departed ; I shall suffer nothing in the burning ; and if you wish proof , order some fire and you shall see this arm consumed without giving me any pain . ''
The office of midwife was hereditary in the family of the basket-maker .
It belonged to his wife .
She might not be competent , but the office was hers , anyway .
Her pay was not high -- 25 cents for a boy , and half as much for a girl .
The girl was not desired , because she would be a disastrous expense by and by .
As soon as she should be old enough to begin to wear clothes for propriety 's sake , it would be a disgrace to the family if she were not married ; and to marry her meant financial ruin ; for by custom the father must spend upon feasting and wedding-display everything he had and all he could borrow -- in fact , reduce himself to a condition of poverty which he might never more recover from .
In some parts of India the village keeps in its pay three other servants : an astrologer to tell the villager when he may plant his crop , or make a journey , or marry a wife , or strangle a child , or borrow a dog , or climb a tree , or catch a rat , or swindle a neighbor , without offending the alert and solicitous heavens ; and what his dream means , if he has had one and was not bright enough to interpret it himself by the details of his dinner ; the two other established servants were the tiger-persuader and the hailstorm discourager .
The one kept away the tigers if he could , and collected the wages anyway , and the other kept off the hailstorms , or explained why he failed .
He charged the same for explaining a failure that he did for scoring a success .
A man is an idiot who ca n't earn a living in India .
They certainly do seem to have the whip-hand ; it would be difficult to imagine a more impregnable position .
`` The vested rights described in the text are so fully recognized in practice that they are frequently the subject of sale or mortgage . ''
It appears from Sleeman that in India the occupation of elephant-driver is confined to Mohammedans .
I wonder why that is .
The water-carrier ( 'bheestie ' ) is a Mohammedan , but it is said that the reason of that is , that the Hindoo 's religion does not allow him to touch the skin of dead kine , and that is what the water-sack is made of ; it would defile him .
And it does n't allow him to eat meat ; the animal that furnished the meat was murdered , and to take any creature 's life is a sin .
It is a good and gentle religion , but inconvenient .
A great Indian river , at low water , suggests the familiar anatomical picture of a skinned human body , the intricate mesh of interwoven muscles and tendons to stand for water-channels , and the archipelagoes of fat and flesh inclosed by them to stand for the sandbars .
Somewhere on this journey we passed such a river , and on a later journey we saw in the Sutlej the duplicate of that river .
Curious rivers they are ; low shores a dizzy distance apart , with nothing between but an enormous acreage of sand-flats with sluggish little veins of water dribbling around amongst them ; Saharas of sand , smallpox-pitted with footprints punctured in belts as straight as the equator clear from the one shore to the other ( barring the channel-interruptions ) -- a dry-shod ferry , you see .
Long railway bridges are required for this sort of rivers , and India has them .
You approach Allahabad by a very long one .
It was now carrying us across the bed of the Jumna , a bed which did not seem to have been slept in for one while or more .
It was n't all river-bed -- most of it was overflow ground .
Allahabad means `` City of God . ''
I get this from the books .
From a printed curiosity -- a letter written by one of those brave and confident Hindoo strugglers with the English tongue , called a `` babu '' -- I got a more compressed translation : `` Godville . ''
It is perfectly correct , but that is the most that can be said for it .
Why , it was the very thing .
From the lofty ramparts one has a fine view of the sacred rivers .
They join at that point -- the pale blue Jumna , apparently clean and clear , and the muddy Ganges , dull yellow and not clean .
On a long curved spit between the rivers , towns of tents were visible , with a multitude of fluttering pennons , and a mighty swarm of pilgrims .
It was a troublesome place to get down to , and not a quiet place when you arrived ; but it was interesting .
There was a world of activity and turmoil and noise , partly religious , partly commercial ; for the Mohammedans were there to curse and sell , and the Hindoos to buy and pray .
It is a fair as well as a religious festival .
Crowds were bathing , praying , and drinking the purifying waters , and many sick pilgrims had come long journeys in palanquins to be healed of their maladies by a bath ; or if that might not be , then to die on the blessed banks and so make sure of heaven .
There were fakeers in plenty , with their bodies dusted over with ashes and their long hair caked together with cow-dung ; for the cow is holy and so is the rest of it ; so holy that the good Hindoo peasant frescoes the walls of his hut with this refuse , and also constructs ornamental figures out of it for the gracing of his dirt floor .
There were seated families , fearfully and wonderfully painted , who by attitude and grouping represented the families of certain great gods .
There was a holy man who sat naked by the day and by the week on a cluster of iron spikes , and did not seem to mind it ; and another holy man , who stood all day holding his withered arms motionless aloft , and was said to have been doing it for years .
All of these performers have a cloth on the ground beside them for the reception of contributions , and even the poorest of the people give a trifle and hope that the sacrifice will be blessed to him .
At last came a procession of naked holy people marching by and chanting , and I wrenched myself away .
In Benares there are many Mohammedan mosques .
There are Hindoo temples without number -- these quaintly shaped and elaborately sculptured little stone jugs crowd all the lanes .
The Ganges itself and every individual drop of water in it are temples .
Religion , then , is the business of Benares , just as gold-production is the business of Johannesburg .
Other industries count for nothing as compared with the vast and all-absorbing rush and drive and boom of the town 's specialty .
Benares is the sacredest of sacred cities .
The moment you step across the sharply-defined line which separates it from the rest of the globe , you stand upon ineffably and unspeakably holy ground .
Mr. Parker says : `` It is impossible to convey any adequate idea of the intense feelings of veneration and affection with which the pious Hindoo regards 'Holy Kashi' ( Benares ) . ''
And then he gives you this vivid and moving picture :
It makes our own religious enthusiasm seem pale and cold .
Inasmuch as the life of religion is in the heart , not the head , Mr. Parker 's touching picture seems to promise a sort of indefinite postponement of that funeral .
At sunrise you must go down to the Ganges and bathe , pray , and drink some of the water .
This is for your general purification .
At the Kedar Ghat you will find a long flight of stone steps leading down to the river .
Half way down is a tank filled with sewage .
Drink as much of it as you want .
It is for fever .
Well of the Knowledge of Salvation .
It is close to the Golden Temple .
There you will see , sculptured out of a single piece of black marble , a bull which is much larger than any living bull you have ever seen , and yet is not a good likeness after all .
And there also you will see a very uncommon thing -- an image of Shiva .
You have seen his lingam fifty thousand times already , but this is Shiva himself , and said to be a good likeness .
It has three eyes .
He is the only god in the firm that has three .
`` The well is covered by a fine canopy of stone supported by forty pillars , '' and around it you will find what you have already seen at almost every shrine you have visited in Benares , a mob of devout and eager pilgrims .
The sacred water is being ladled out to them ; with it comes to them the knowledge , clear , thrilling , absolute , that they are saved ; and you can see by their faces that there is one happiness in this world which is supreme , and to which no other joy is comparable .
You receive your water , you make your deposit , and now what more would you have ?
Gold , diamonds , power , fame ?
All in a single moment these things have withered to dirt , dust , ashes .
The world has nothing to give you now .
For you it is bankrupt .
I do not claim that the pilgrims do their acts of worship in the order and sequence above charted out in this Itinerary of mine , but I think logic suggests that they ought to do so .
Instead of a helter-skelter worship , we then have a definite starting-place , and a march which carries the pilgrim steadily forward by reasoned and logical progression to a definite goal .
Thus , his Ganges bath in the early morning gives him an appetite ; he kisses the cow-tails , and that removes it .
It is now business hours , and longings for material prosperity rise in his mind , and he goes and pours water over Shiva 's symbol ; this insures the prosperity , but also brings on a rain , which gives him a fever .
Then he drinks the sewage at the Kedar Ghat to cure the fever ; it cures the fever but gives him the smallpox .
He wishes to know how it is going to turn out ; he goes to the Dandpan Temple and looks down the well .
A clouded sun shows him that death is near .
Logically his best course for the present , since he can not tell at what moment he may die , is to secure a happy hereafter ; this he does , through the agency of the Great Fate .
He is safe , now , for heaven ; his next move will naturally be to keep out of it as long as he can .
Therefore he goes to the Briddhkal Temple and secures Youth and long life by bathing in a puddle of leper-pus which would kill a microbe .
Logically , Youth has re-equipped him for sin and with the disposition to commit it ; he will naturally go to the fane which is consecrated to the Fulfillment of Desires , and make arrangements .
Logically , he will now go to the Well of the Earring from time to time to unload and freshen up for further banned enjoyments .
But first and last and all the time he is human , and therefore in his reflective intervals he will always be speculating in `` futures . ''
He will make the Great Pilgrimage around the city and so make his salvation absolutely sure ; he will also have record made of it , so that it may remain absolutely sure and not be forgotten or repudiated in the confusion of the Final Settlement .
Logically , also , he will wish to have satisfying and tranquilizing personal knowledge that that salvation is secure ; therefore he goes to the Well of the Knowledge of Salvation , adds that completing detail , and then goes about his affairs serene and content ; serene and content , for he is now royally endowed with an advantage which no religion in this world could give him but his own ; for henceforth he may commit as many million sins as he wants to and nothing can come of it .
Wrinkles should merely indicate where smiles have been .
-- Pudd'nhead Wilson 's New Calendar .
They do not burn fakeers -- those revered mendicants .
They are so holy that they can get to their place without that sacrament , provided they be consigned to the consecrating river .
We saw one carried to mid-stream and thrown overboard .
He was sandwiched between two great slabs of stone .
The most conspicuous feature of Benares is the pair of slender white minarets which tower like masts from the great Mosque of Aurangzeb .
They seem to be always in sight , from everywhere , those airy , graceful , inspiring things .
But masts is not the right word , for masts have a perceptible taper , while these minarets have not .
They are 142 feet high , and only 8 1/2 feet in diameter at the base , and 7 1/2 at the summit -- scarcely any taper at all .
These are the proportions of a candle ; and fair and fairylike candles these are .
Will be , anyway , some day , when the Christians inherit them and top them with the electric light .
There is a great view from up there -- a wonderful view .
A large gray monkey was part of it , and damaged it .
A monkey has no judgment .
This one was skipping about the upper great heights of the mosque -- skipping across empty yawning intervals which were almost too wide for him , and which he only just barely cleared , each time , by the skin of his teeth .
He got me so nervous that I could n't look at the view .
I could n't look at anything but him .
Every time he went sailing over one of those abysses my breath stood still , and when he grabbed for the perch he was going for , I grabbed too , in sympathy .
And he was perfectly indifferent , perfectly unconcerned , and I did all the panting myself .
He came within an ace of losing his life a dozen times , and I was so troubled about him that I would have shot him if I had had anything to do it with .
But I strongly recommend the view .
There is more monkey than view , and there is always going to be more monkey while that idiot survives , but what view you get is superb .
All Benares , the river , and the region round about are spread before you .
Take a gun , and look at the view .
The next thing I saw was more reposeful .
It was a new kind of art .
It was a picture painted on water .
It was done by a native .
He sprinkled fine dust of various colors on the still surface of a basin of water , and out of these sprinklings a dainty and pretty picture gradually grew , a picture which a breath could destroy .
Somehow it was impressive , after so much browsing among massive and battered and decaying fanes that rest upon ruins , and those ruins upon still other ruins , and those upon still others again .
It was a sermon , an allegory , a symbol of Instability .
Those creations in stone were only a kind of water pictures , after all .
The lieutenants imprisoned the Rajah in his own fort .
It was beautiful , the pluckiness of it , the impudence of it .
The arrest enraged the Rajah 's people , and all Benares came storming about the place and threatening vengeance .
And yet , but for an accident , nothing important would have resulted , perhaps .
The mob found out a most strange thing , an almost incredible thing -- that this handful of soldiers had come on this hardy errand with empty guns and no ammunition .
This has been attributed to thoughtlessness , but it could hardly have been that , for in such large emergencies as this , intelligent people do think .
It must have been indifference , an over-confidence born of the proved submissiveness of the native character , when confronted by even one or two stern Britons in their war paint .
But , however that may be , it was a fatal discovery that the mob had made .
They were full of courage , now , and they broke into the fort and massacred the helpless soldiers and their officers .
Hastings escaped from Benares by night and got safely away , leaving the principality in a state of wild insurrection ; but he was back again within the month , and quieted it down in his prompt and virile way , and took the Rajah 's throne away from him and gave it to another man .
He was a capable kind of person was Warren Hastings .
This was the only time he was ever out of ammunition .
Some of his acts have left stains upon his name which can never be washed away , but he saved to England the Indian Empire , and that was the best service that was ever done to the Indians themselves , those wretched heirs of a hundred centuries of pitiless oppression and abuse .
True irreverence is disrespect for another man 's god .
-- Pudd'nhead Wilson 's New Calendar .
The Hindoo Scriptures point out how this state is to be reached , but it is only once in a thousand years , perhaps , that candidate accomplishes it .
This one has traversed the course required , stage by stage , from the beginning to the end , and now has nothing left to do but wait for the call which shall release him from a world in which he has now no part nor lot .
First , he passed through the student stage , and became learned in the holy books .
Next he became citizen , householder , husband , and father .
That was the required second stage .
Then -- like John Bunyan's Christian he bade perpetual good-bye to his family , as required , and went wandering away .
He went far into the desert and served a term as hermit .
Next , he became a beggar , `` in accordance with the rites laid down in the Scriptures , '' and wandered about India eating the bread of mendicancy .
A quarter of a century ago he reached the stage of purity .
This needs no garment ; its symbol is nudity ; he discarded the waist-cloth which he had previously worn .
He could resume it now if he chose , for neither that nor any other contact can defile him ; but he does not choose .
Do not undervalue the headache .
While it is at its sharpest it seems a bad investment ; but when relief begins , the unexpired remainder is worth $ 4 a minute .
-- Pudd'nhead Wilson 's New Calendar .
But he would be mistaken .
Ochterlony was a man , not a battle .
And he did good and honorable service , too ; as good and honorable service as has been done in India by seventy-five or a hundred other Englishmen of courage , rectitude , and distinguished capacity .
For India has been a fertile breeding-ground of such men , and remains so ; great men , both in war and in the civil service , and as modest as great .
But they have no monuments , and were not expecting any .
Ochterlony could not have been expecting one , and it is not at all likely that he desired one -- certainly not until Clive and Hastings should be supplied .
Every day Clive and Hastings lean on the battlements of heaven and look down and wonder which of the two the monument is for ; and they fret and worry because they can not find out , and so the peace of heaven is spoiled for them and lost .
But not for Ochterlony .
Ochterlony is not troubled .
He does n't suspect that it is his monument .
Heaven is sweet and peaceful to him .
There is a sort of unfairness about it all .
The average man is profoundly ignorant of countries that lie remote from his own .
When they are mentioned in his presence one or two facts and maybe a couple of names rise like torches in his mind , lighting up an inch or two of it and leaving the rest all dark .
The mention of Egypt suggests some Biblical facts and the Pyramids-nothing more .
The mention of South Africa suggests Kimberly and the diamonds and there an end .
Formerly the mention , to a Hindoo , of America suggested a name -- George Washington -- with that his familiarity with our country was exhausted .
Latterly his familiarity with it has doubled in bulk ; so that when America is mentioned now , two torches flare up in the dark caverns of his mind and he says , `` Ah , the country of the great man Washington ; and of the Holy City -- Chicago . ''
For he knows about the Congress of Religion , and this has enabled him to get an erroneous impression of Chicago .
`` Passing St. Etienne , 2:15 P.M. On a distant ridge inland , a tall openwork structure commandingly situated , with a statue of the Virgin standing on it .
All down this river , wherever there is a crag there is a statue of the Virgin on it .
I believe I have seen a hundred of them .
And yet , in many respects , the peasantry seem to be mere pagans , and destitute of any considerable degree of civilization .
`` At last a vigorous fellow of thirty-five arrived , dry and comfortable , smoking his pipe under his big umbrella in an open donkey-cart-husband , son , and grandson of those women !
He stood up in the cart , sheltering himself , and began to superintend , issuing his orders in a masterly tone of command , and showing temper when they were not obeyed swiftly enough .
It was there that I had my first tiger hunt .
We were presently away again , and the train began to climb the mountains .
In one place seven wild elephants crossed the track , but two of them got away before I could overtake them .
The railway journey up the mountain is forty miles , and it takes eight hours to make it .
It is so wild and interesting and exciting and enchanting that it ought to take a week .
As for the vegetation , it is a museum .
The jungle seemed to contain samples of every rare and curious tree and bush that we had ever seen or heard of .
It is from that museum , I think , that the globe must have been supplied with the trees and vines and shrubs that it holds precious .
Up there we found a fairly comfortable hotel , the property of an indiscriminate and incoherent landlord , who looks after nothing , but leaves everything to his army of Indian servants .
No , he does look after the bill -- to be just to him -- and the tourist can not do better than follow his example .
I was told by a resident that the summit of Kinchinjunga is often hidden in the clouds , and that sometimes a tourist has waited twenty-two days and then been obliged to go away without a sight of it .
And yet went not disappointed ; for when he got his hotel bill he recognized that he was now seeing the highest thing in the Himalayas .
But this is probably a lie .
But after all , there was but small danger -- for me .
What there was , was for Mr. Pugh , inspector of a division of the Indian police , in whose company and protection we had come from Calcutta .
He had seen long service as an artillery officer , was less nervous than I was , and so he was to go ahead of us in a pilot hand-car , with a Ghurka and another native ; and the plan was that when we should see his car jump over a precipice we must put on our break [ sp . ]
and send for another pilot .
It was a good arrangement .
Also Mr. Barnard , chief engineer of the mountain-division of the road , was to take personal charge of our car , and he had been down the mountain in it many a time .
The scenery was grand and varied and beautiful , and there was no hurry ; we could always stop and examine it .
There was abundance of time .
We did not need to hamper the train ; if it wanted the road , we could switch off and let it go by , then overtake it and pass it later .
We stopped at one place to see the Gladstone Cliff , a great crag which the ages and the weather have sculptured into a recognizable portrait of the venerable statesman .
Mr. Gladstone is a stockholder in the road , and Nature began this portrait ten thousand years ago , with the idea of having the compliment ready in time for the event .
I am bringing some nightingales , too , and some cue-owls .
I got them in Italy .
The song of the nightingale is the deadliest known to ornithology .
That demoniacal shriek can kill at thirty yards .
The note of the cue-owl is infinitely soft and sweet -- soft and sweet as the whisper of a flute .
But penetrating -- oh , beyond belief ; it can bore through boiler-iron .
It is a lingering note , and comes in triplets , on the one unchanging key : hoo-o-o , hoo-o-o , hoo-o-o ; then a silence of fifteen seconds , then the triplet again ; and so on , all night .
At first it is divine ; then less so ; then trying ; then distressing ; then excruciating ; then agonizing , and at the end of two hours the listener is a maniac .
As strikingly uniform as are the statistics of suicide , they are not any more so than are those of the tiger 's annual output of slaughtered human beings in India .
The government 's work is quite uniform , too ; it about doubles the tiger 's average .
In six years the tiger killed 5,000 persons , minus 50 ; in the same six years 10,000 tigers were killed , minus 400 .
But when it comes to killing cattle , the lord of the jungle is not interested .
He kills but 100 in six years -- horses of hunters , no doubt -- but in the same six the tiger kills more than 84,000 , the leopard 100,000 , the bear 4,000 , the wolf 70,000 , the hyena more than 13,000 , other wild beasts 27,000 , and the snakes 19,000 , a grand total of more than 300,000 ; an average of 50,000 head per year .
We struck out westward or northwestward from Calcutta on an itinerary of a zig-zag sort , which would in the course of time carry us across India to its northwestern corner and the border of Afghanistan .
The first part of the trip carried us through a great region which was an endless garden -- miles and miles of the beautiful flower from whose juices comes the opium , and at Muzaffurpore we were in the midst of the indigo culture ; thence by a branch road to the Ganges at a point near Dinapore , and by a train which would have missed the connection by a week but for the thoughtfulness of some British officers who were along , and who knew the ways of trains that are run by natives without white supervision .
This train stopped at every village ; for no purpose connected with business , apparently .
We put out nothing , we took nothing aboard .
The train bands stepped ashore and gossiped with friends a quarter of an hour , then pulled out and repeated this at the succeeding villages .
We had thirty-five miles to go and six hours to do it in , but it was plain that we were not going to make it .
It was then that the English officers said it was now necessary to turn this gravel train into an express .
So they gave the engine-driver a rupee and told him to fly .
It was a simple remedy .
After that we made ninety miles an hour .
We crossed the Ganges just at dawn , made our connection , and went to Benares , where we stayed twenty-four hours and inspected that strange and fascinating piety-hive again ; then left for Lucknow , a city which is perhaps the most conspicuous of the many monuments of British fortitude and valor that are scattered about the earth .
`` But there was a spectacle to witness which might excuse much .
Those who , straight from the contested field , wandered sobbing through the rooms of the ladies ' house , saw what it were well could the outraged earth have straightway hidden .
The inner apartment was ankle-deep in blood .
The plaster was scored with sword-cuts ; not high up as where men have fought , but low down , and about the corners , as if a creature had crouched to avoid the blow .
Strips of dresses , vainly tied around the handles of the doors , signified the contrivance to which feminine despair had resorted as a means of keeping out the murderers .
Broken combs were there , and the frills of children 's trousers , and torn cuffs and pinafores , and little round hats , and one or two shoes with burst latchets , and one or two daguerreotype cases with cracked glasses .
An officer picked up a few curls , preserved in a bit of cardboard , and marked 'Ned 's hair , with love ' ; but around were strewn locks , some near a yard in length , dissevered , not as a keepsake , by quite other scissors . ''
Six weeks after the beginning of the siege more than one-half of the original force of white soldiers was dead , and close upon three-fifths of the original native force .
But the fighting went on just the same .
The enemy mined , the English counter-mined , and , turn about , they blew up each other 's posts .
The Residency grounds were honey-combed with the enemy 's tunnels .
Deadly courtesies were constantly exchanged -- sorties by the English in the night ; rushes by the enemy in the night -- rushes whose purpose was to breach the walls or scale them ; rushes which cost heavily , and always failed .
The fighting and starving and dying by bullets and disease went steadily on .
Both sides fought with energy and industry .
Captain Birch puts this striking incident in evidence .
He is speaking of the third month of the siege :
On the 17th he took the former mess-house of the 32d regiment -- a fortified building , and very strong .
`` A most exciting , anxious day , '' writes Lady Inglis in her diary .
`` About 4 P.M. , two strange officers walked through our yard , leading their horses '' -- and by that sign she knew that communication was established between the forces , that the relief was real , this time , and that the long siege of Lucknow was ended .
There were but few trees in the plain at that time , and from the Residency the progress of the march , step by step , victory by victory , could be noted ; the ascending clouds of battle-smoke marked the way to the eye , and the thunder of the guns marked it to the ear .
The Residency ruins are draped with flowering vines , and are impressive and beautiful .
They and the grounds are sacred now , and will suffer no neglect nor be profaned by any sordid or commercial use while the British remain masters of India .
Within the grounds are buried the dead who gave up their lives there in the long siege .
After a fashion , I was able to imagine the fiery storm that raged night and day over the place during so many months , and after a fashion I could imagine the men moving through it , but I could not satisfactorily place the 200 women , and I could do nothing at all with the 250 children .
I knew by Lady Inglis ' diary that the children carried on their small affairs very much as if blood and carnage and the crash and thunder of a siege were natural and proper features of nursery life , and I tried to realize it ; but when her little Johnny came rushing , all excitement , through the din and smoke , shouting , `` Oh , mamma , the white hen has laid an egg ! ''
I saw that I could not do it .
Johnny 's place was under the bed .
I could imagine him there , because I could imagine myself there ; and I think I should not have been interested in a hen that was laying an egg ; my interest would have been with the parties that were laying the bombshells .
I sat at dinner with one of those children in the Club's Indian palace , and I knew that all through the siege he was perfecting his teething and learning to talk ; and while to me he was the most impressive object in Lucknow after the Residency ruins , I was not able to imagine what his life had been during that tempestuous infancy of his , nor what sort of a curious surprise it must have been to him to be marched suddenly out into a strange dumb world where there was n't any noise , and nothing going on .
He was only forty-one when I saw him , a strangely youthful link to connect the present with so ancient an episode as the Great Mutiny .
`` The work of inlaying with stones and gems is found in the highest perfection in the Taj . ''
`` The mausoleum stands on a raised marble platform at each of whose corners rises a tall and slender minaret of graceful proportions and of exquisite beauty .
Beyond the platform stretch the two wings , one of which is itself a mosque of great architectural merit .
In the center of the whole design the mausoleum occupies a square of 186 feet , with the angles deeply truncated so as to form an unequal octagon .
The main feature in this central pile is the great dome , which swells upward to nearly two-thirds of a sphere and tapers at its extremity into a pointed spire crowned by a crescent .
Beneath it an enclosure of marble trellis-work surrounds the tomb of the princess and of her husband , the Emperor .
Each corner of the mausoleum is covered by a similar though much smaller dome erected on a pediment pierced with graceful Saracenic arches .
Light is admitted into the interior through a double screen of pierced marble , which tempers the glare of an Indian sky while its whiteness prevents the mellow effect from degenerating into gloom .
The internal decorations consist of inlaid work in precious stones , such as agate , jasper , etc.
, with which every squandril or salient point in the architecture is richly fretted .
Brown and violet marble is also freely employed in wreaths , scrolls , and lintels to relieve the monotony of white wall .
In regard to color and design , the interior of the Taj may rank first in the world for purely decorative workmanship ; while the perfect symmetry of its exterior , once seen can never be forgotten , nor the aerial grace of its domes , rising like marble bubbles into the clear sky .
The Taj represents the most highly elaborated stage of ornamentation reached by the Indo-Mohammedan builders , the stage in which the architect ends and the jeweler begins .
In its magnificent gateway the diagonal ornamentation at the corners , which satisfied the designers of the gateways of Itimad-ud-doulah and Sikandra mausoleums is superseded by fine marble cables , in bold twists , strong and handsome .
The triangular insertions of white marble and large flowers have in like manner given place to fine inlaid work .
Firm perpendicular lines in black marble with well proportioned panels of the same material are effectively used in the interior of the gateway .
On its top the Hindu brackets and monolithic architraves of Sikandra are replaced by Moorish carped arches , usually single blocks of red sandstone , in the Kiosks and pavilions which adorn the roof .
From the pillared pavilions a magnificent view is obtained of the Taj gardens below , with the noble Jumna river at their farther end , and the city and fort of Agra in the distance .
From this beautiful and splendid gateway one passes up a straight alley shaded by evergreen trees cooled by a broad shallow piece of water running along the middle of the path to the Taj itself .
The Taj is entirely of marble and gems .
The red sandstone of the other Mohammedan buildings has entirely disappeared , or rather the red sandstone which used to form the thickness of the walls , is in the Taj itself overlaid completely with white marble , and the white marble is itself inlaid with precious stones arranged in lovely patterns of flowers .
A feeling of purity impresses itself on the eye and the mind from the absence of the coarser material which forms so invariable a material in Agra architecture .
The lower wall and panels are covered with tulips , oleanders , and fullblown lilies , in flat carving on the white marble ; and although the inlaid work of flowers done in gems is very brilliant when looked at closely , there is on the whole but little color , and the all-prevailing sentiment is one of whiteness , silence , and calm .
The whiteness is broken only by the fine color of the inlaid gems , by lines in black marble , and by delicately written inscriptions , also in black , from the Koran .
Under the dome of the vast mausoleum a high and beautiful screen of open tracery in white marble rises around the two tombs , or rather cenotaphs of the emperor and his princess ; and in this marvel of marble the carving has advanced from the old geometrical patterns to a trellis-work of flowers and foliage , handled with great freedom and spirit .
The two cenotaphs in the center of the exquisite enclosure have no carving except the plain Kalamdan or oblong pen-box on the tomb of Emperor Shah Jehan .
But both cenotaphs are inlaid with flowers made of costly gems , and with the ever graceful oleander scroll . ''
All of these details are true .
But , taken together , they state a falsehood -- to you .
You can not add them up correctly .
Those writers know the values of their words and phrases , but to you the words and phrases convey other and uncertain values .
To those writers their phrases have values which I think I am now acquainted with ; and for the help of the reader I will here repeat certain of those words and phrases , and follow them with numerals which shall represent those values -- then we shall see the difference between a writer 's ciphering and a mistaken reader 's --
But the reader -- always helped by his imagination -- would put the figures in a row one after the other , and get this sum , which would tell him a noble big lie :
You must put in the commas yourself ; I have to go on with my work .
Often , the surest way to convey misinformation is to tell the strict truth .
The describers of the Taj have used the word gem in its strictest sense -- its scientific sense .
In that sense it is a mild word , and promises but little to the eye -- nothing bright , nothing brilliant , nothing sparkling , nothing splendid in the way of color .
It accurately describes the sober and unobtrusive gem-work of the Taj ; that is , to the very highly-educated one person in a thousand ; but it most falsely describes it to the 999 .
But the 999 are the people who ought to be especially taken care of , and to them it does not mean quiet-colored designs wrought in carnelians , or agates , or such things ; they know the word in its wide and ordinary sense only , and so to them it means diamonds and rubies and opals and their kindred , and the moment their eyes fall upon it in print they see a vision of glorious colors clothed in fire .
We wandered contentedly around here and there in India ; to Lahore , among other places , where the Lieutenant-Governor lent me an elephant .
This hospitality stands out in my experiences in a stately isolation .
It was a fine elephant , affable , gentlemanly , educated , and I was not afraid of it .
I even rode it with confidence through the crowded lanes of the native city , where it scared all the horses out of their senses , and where children were always just escaping its feet .
It took the middle of the road in a fine independent way , and left it to the world to get out of the way or take the consequences .
I am used to being afraid of collisions when I ride or drive , but when one is on top of an elephant that feeling is absent .
I could have ridden in comfort through a regiment of runaway teams .
I could easily learn to prefer an elephant to any other vehicle , partly because of that immunity from collisions , and partly because of the fine view one has from up there , and partly because of the dignity one feels in that high place , and partly because one can look in at the windows and see what is going on privately among the family .
The Lahore horses were used to elephants , but they were rapturously afraid of them just the same .
Perhaps the better they know the elephant the more they respect him in that peculiar way .
In our own case -- we are not afraid of dynamite till we get acquainted with it .
We had a refreshing rest , there in Delhi , in a great old mansion which possessed historical interest .
It was built by a rich Englishman who had become orientalized -- so much so that he had a zenana .
But he was a broadminded man , and remained so .
To please his harem he built a mosque ; to please himself he built an English church .
That kind of a man will arrive , somewhere .
In the Mutiny days the mansion was the British general 's headquarters .
It stands in a great garden -- oriental fashion -- and about it are many noble trees .
The trees harbor monkeys ; and they are monkeys of a watchful and enterprising sort , and not much troubled with fear .
They invade the house whenever they get a chance , and carry off everything they do n't want .
One morning the master of the house was in his bath , and the window was open .
Near it stood a pot of yellow paint and a brush .
Some monkeys appeared in the window ; to scare them away , the gentleman threw his sponge at them .
They did not scare at all ; they jumped into the room and threw yellow paint all over him from the brush , and drove him out ; then they painted the walls and the floor and the tank and the windows and the furniture yellow , and were in the dressing-room painting that when help arrived and routed them .
Two of these creatures came into my room in the early morning , through a window whose shutters I had left open , and when I woke one of them was before the glass brushing his hair , and the other one had my note-book , and was reading a page of humorous notes and crying .
I did not mind the one with the hair-brush , but the conduct of the other one hurt me ; it hurts me yet .
I threw something at him , and that was wrong , for my host had told me that the monkeys were best left alone .
They threw everything at me that they could lift , and then went into the bathroom to get some more things , and I shut the door on them .
He was a born boss , and loved to command , and to jaw and dispute with inferiors and harry them and bullyrag them .
He was fine at the railway station -- yes , he was at his finest there .
He would shoulder and plunge and paw his violent way through the packed multitude of natives with nineteen coolies at his tail , each bearing a trifle of luggage -- one a trunk , another a parasol , another a shawl , another a fan , and so on ; one article to each , and the longer the procession , the better he was suited -- and he was sure to make for some engaged sleeper and begin to hurl the owner 's things out of it , swearing that it was ours and that there had been a mistake .
Arrived at our own sleeper , he would undo the bedding-bundles and make the beds and put everything to rights and shipshape in two minutes ; then put his head out at a window and have a restful good time abusing his gang of coolies and disputing their bill until we arrived and made him pay them and stop his noise .
And , sure enough , there in the whirling midst of fifteen hundred wondering people we would find that little scrap of a creature gesticulating like a spider with the colic , his black eyes snapping , his fez-tassel dancing , his jaws pouring out floods of billingsgate upon his gang of beseeching and astonished coolies .
Only one short week later he fell again .
And oh , sorrow !
not in a hotel this time , but in an English gentleman 's private house .
And in Agra , of all places .
So he had to go .
When I told him , he said patiently , `` Wair good , '' and made his parting salute , and went out from us to return no more forever .
I would rather have lost a hundred angels than that one poor lovely devil .
What style he used to put on , in a swell hotel or in a private house -- snow-white muslin from his chin to his bare feet , a crimson sash embroidered with gold thread around his waist , and on his head a great sea-green turban like to the turban of the Grand Turk .
For color , and picturesqueness , and novelty , and outlandishness , and sustained interest and fascination , it was the most satisfying show I had ever seen , and I suppose I shall not have the privilege of looking upon its like again .
`` The education that we give makes the boys a little less clownish in their manners , and more intelligent when spoken to by strangers .
On the other hand , it has made them less contented with their lot in life , and less willing to work with their hands .
The form which discontent takes in this country is not of a healthy kind ; for , the Natives of India consider that the only occupation worthy of an educated man is that of a writership in some office , and especially in a Government office .
The village schoolboy goes back to the plow with the greatest reluctance ; and the town schoolboy carries the same discontent and inefficiency into his father 's workshop .
Sometimes these ex-students positively refuse at first to work ; and more than once parents have openly expressed their regret that they ever allowed their sons to be inveigled to school . ''
At the break of day I rises from my own bed and finish my daily duty , then I employ myself till 8 o'clock , after which I employ myself to bathe , then take for my body some sweet meat , and just at 9 1/2 I came to school to attend my class duty , then at 2 1/2 P. M. I return from school and engage myself to do my natural duty , then , I engage for a quarter to take my tiffin , then I study till 5 P. M. , after which I began to play anything which comes in my head .
After 8 1/2 , half pass to eight we are began to sleep , before sleeping I told a constable just 11 o ' he came and rose us from half pass eleven we began to read still morning . ''
What is the meaning of 'Ich Dien ' ?
`` What is the meaning of a Sheriff ? ''
The man with whom the accusative persons are placed is called Sheriff .
To me this is cloudy , but I was never well up in geometry .
That was the only effort made among the five students who appeared for examination in geometry ; the other four wailed and surrendered without a fight .
They are piteous wails , too , wails of despair ; and one of them is an eloquent reproach ; it comes from a poor fellow who has been laden beyond his strength by a stupid teacher , and is eloquent in spite of the poverty of its English .
The poor chap finds himself required to explain riddles which even Sir Isaac Newton was not able to understand :
Sir which Sir Isaac Newton and other experienced mathematicians can not understand I being third of Entrance Class can understand these which is too impossible to imagine .
And my examiner also has put very tiresome and very heavy propositions to prove . ''
`` The Indian wars were very desecrating to the country .
`` Captain John Smith has been styled the father of his country .
His life was saved by his daughter Pochahantas .
`` Beowulf wrote the Scriptures .
We will finish with a couple of samples of `` literature , '' one from America , the other from India .
The first is a Brooklyn public-school boy 's attempt to turn a few verses of the `` Lady of the Lake '' into prose .
You will have to concede that he did it :
`` I went ashore at Naples one voyage when I was in that trade , and stood around helping my passengers , for I could speak a little Italian .
Two or three times , at intervals , the officer asked me if I had anything dutiable about me , and seemed more and more put out and disappointed every time I told him no .
Finally a passenger whom I had helped through asked me to come out and take something .
I thanked him , but excused myself , saying I had taken a whisky just before I came ashore .
`` It was a fatal admission .
The officer at once made me pay sixpence import-duty on the whisky-just from ship to shore , you see ; and he fined me L5 for not declaring the goods , another L5 for falsely denying that I had anything dutiable about me , also L5 for concealing the goods , and L50 for smuggling , which is the maximum penalty for unlawfully bringing in goods under the value of sevenpence ha'penny .
Altogether , sixty-five pounds sixpence for a little thing like that . ''
Lots of pets on board -- birds and things .
In these far countries the white people do seem to run remarkably to pets .
Our host in Cawnpore had a fine collection of birds -- the finest we saw in a private house in India .
And in Colombo , Dr. Murray 's great compound and commodious bungalow were well populated with domesticated company from the woods : frisky little squirrels ; a Ceylon mina walking sociably about the house ; a small green parrot that whistled a single urgent note of call without motion of its beak ; also chuckled ; a monkey in a cage on the back veranda , and some more out in the trees ; also a number of beautiful macaws in the trees ; and various and sundry birds and animals of breeds not known to me .
Yet a cat would have liked that place .
It turns out that the astronomical apprentice worked off a section of the Milky Way on me for the Magellan Clouds .
A man of more experience in the business showed one of them to me last night .
It was small and faint and delicate , and looked like the ghost of a bunch of white smoke left floating in the sky by an exploded bombshell .
A native pointed out a handsome swarthy man of grave and dignified bearing , and said in an awed tone , `` That is so-and-so ; has held office of one sort or another under this government for 37 years -- he is known all over this whole island and in the other countries of the world perhaps -- who knows ?
One thing is certain ; you can speak his name anywhere in this whole island , and you will find not one grown person that has not heard it .
It is a wonderful thing to be so celebrated ; yet look at him ; it makes no change in him ; he does not even seem to know it . ''
`` There is not much trade in books .
The newspapers educate and entertain the people .
They have two pages of large-print reading-matter-one of them English , the other French .
The English page is a translation of the French one .
The typography is super-extra primitive -- in this quality it has not its equal anywhere .
There is no proof-reader now ; he is dead .
One is never pestered by a beggar or a peddler in this town , so far as I can see .
This is pleasantly different from India .
There is a tremendous point there .
It can be put into the form of a maxim : Get your formalities right -- never mind about the moralities .
The signs of the times show plainly enough what is going to happen .
All the savage lands in the world are going to be brought under subjection to the Christian governments of Europe .
I am not sorry , but glad .
This coming fate might have been a calamity to those savage peoples two hundred years ago ; but now it will in some cases be a benefaction .
The sooner the seizure is consummated , the better for the savages .
The monkeys live in the dense forests on the flanks of the toy mountains , and they flock down nights and raid the sugar-fields .
Also on other estates they come down and destroy a sort of bean-crop -- just for fun , apparently -- tear off the pods and throw them down .
What there is of Mauritius is beautiful .
You have undulating wide expanses of sugar-cane -- a fine , fresh green and very pleasant to the eye ; and everywhere else you have a ragged luxuriance of tropic vegetation of vivid greens of varying shades , a wild tangle of underbrush , with graceful tall palms lifting their crippled plumes high above it ; and you have stretches of shady dense forest with limpid streams frolicking through them , continually glimpsed and lost and glimpsed again in the pleasantest hide-and-seek fashion ; and you have some tiny mountains , some quaint and picturesque groups of toy peaks , and a dainty little vest-pocket Matterhorn ; and here and there and now and then a strip of sea with a white ruffle of surf breaks into the view .
The South African winter is just beginning now , but nobody but an expert can tell it from summer .
However , I am tired of summer ; we have had it unbroken for eleven months .
We spent the afternoon on shore , Delagoa Bay .
A small town -- no sights .
Three 'rickshas , but we could n't get them -- apparently private .
These Portuguese are a rich brown , like some of the Indians .
Some of the blacks have the long horse heads and very long chins of the negroes of the picture books ; but most of them are exactly like the negroes of our Southern States round faces , flat noses , good-natured , and easy laughers .
This was Barnum 's purchase of Shakespeare 's birthplace , a quarter of a century ago .
The Second Class Passenger was in Jamrach 's employ at the time and knew Barnum well .
He said the thing began in this way .
One morning Barnum and Jamrach were in Jamrach 's little private snuggery back of the wilderness of caged monkeys and snakes and other commonplaces of Jamrach 's stock in trade , refreshing themselves after an arduous stroke of business , Jamrach with something orthodox , Barnum with something heterodox -- for Barnum was a teetotaler .
The stroke of business was in the elephant line .
Jamrach had contracted to deliver to Barnum in New York 18 elephants for $ 360,000 in time for the next season 's opening .
Then it occurred to Mr. Barnum that he needed a `` card . ''
Jamrach said he would have to think of something else -- Jumbo could n't be had ; the Zoo would n't part with that elephant .
Barnum said he was willing to pay a fortune for Jumbo if he could get him .
Jamrach said it was no use to think about it ; that Jumbo was as popular as the Prince of Wales and the Zoo would n't dare to sell him ; all England would be outraged at the idea ; Jumbo was an English institution ; he was part of the national glory ; one might as well think of buying the Nelson monument .
Barnum spoke up with vivacity and said :
Comfortable , good table , good service of natives and Madrasis .
Curious jumble of modern and ancient city and village , primitiveness and the other thing .
Electric bells , but they do n't ring .
Asked why they did n't , the watchman in the office said he thought they must be out of order ; he thought so because some of them rang , but most of them did n't .
Would n't it be a good idea to put them in order ?
He hesitated -- like one who is n't quite sure -- then conceded the point .
A bang on the door at 6 .
Did I want my boots cleaned ?
Fifteen minutes later another bang .
Did we want coffee ?
Fifteen later , bang again , my wife 's bath ready ; 15 later , my bath ready .
Two other bangs ; I forget what they were about .
Then lots of shouting back and forth , among the servants just as in an Indian hotel .
At 4 P.M. it was unpleasantly warm .
Half-hour after sunset one needed a spring overcoat ; by 8 a winter one .
Sturdy plump creatures are the women .
They comb their wool up to a peak and keep it in position by stiffening it with brown-red clay -- half of this tower colored , denotes engagement ; the whole of it colored denotes marriage .
None but heathen Zulus on the police ; Christian ones not allowed .
Not many birds here , and they have no music -- and the flowers not much smell , they grow so fast .
Everything neat and trim and clean like the town .
The loveliest trees and the greatest variety I have ever seen anywhere , except approaching Darjeeling .
Have not heard anyone call Natal the garden of South Africa , but that is what it probably is .
It was when Bishop of Natal that Colenso raised such a storm in the religious world .
The concerns of religion are a vital matter here yet .
A vigilant eye is kept upon Sunday .
Museums and other dangerous resorts are not allowed to be open .
You may sail on the Bay , but it is wicked to play cricket .
For a while a Sunday concert was tolerated , upon condition that it must be admission free and the money taken by collection .
But the collection was alarmingly large and that stopped the matter .
They are particular about babies .
A clergyman would not bury a child according to the sacred rites because it had not been baptized .
The Hindoo is more liberal .
He burns no child under three , holding that it does not need purifying .
It all seems strange , incredible , impossible .
But La Trappe knew the race .
He knew the powerful attraction of unattractiveness ; he knew that no life could be imagined , howsoever comfortless and forbidding , but somebody would want to try it .
Also , they issued a Manifesto , whose very first note is a bugle-blast of loyalty : `` We want the establishment of this Republic as a true Republic . ''
Could anything be clearer than the Uitlander 's statement of the grievances and oppressions under which they were suffering ?
Could anything be more legal and citizen-like and law-respecting than their attitude as expressed by their Manifesto ?
Those things were perfectly clear , perfectly comprehensible .
Those latter days were days of bitter worry and trouble for the harassed Reformers .
They have to swear allegiance to the Boer government , and distribute cavalry horses to the rebels .
In preparing for armed revolution and in talking revolution , were the Reformers `` bluffing , '' or were they in earnest ?
If they were in earnest , they were taking great risks -- as has been already pointed out .
A gentleman of high position told me in Johannesburg that he had in his possession a printed document proclaiming a new government and naming its president -- one of the Reform leaders .
He said that this proclamation had been ready for issue , but was suppressed when the raid collapsed .
Perhaps I misunderstood him .
Indeed , I must have misunderstood him , for I have not seen mention of this large incident in print anywhere .
This scheme could hardly have succeeded .
With an army of Boers at their gates and 50,000 riotous blacks in their midst , the odds against success would have been too heavy -- even if the whole town had been armed .
With only 2,500 rifles in the place , they stood really no chance .
Boer loss , 8 killed , 9 wounded -- 17 .
Boer loss , 1 killed , 5 wounded .
The Boer farmers and British soldiers fought 4 battles , and the Boers won them all .
Result of the 4 , in killed and wounded :
Total , 133 , out of the original 530 .
It is just 25 per cent.
-- [ However , I judge that the total was really 150 ; for the number of wounded carried to Krugersdorp hospital was 53 ; not 30 , as Mr. Garrett reports it .
The lady whose guest I was in Krugersdorp gave me the figures .
She was head nurse from the beginning of hostilities ( Jan. 1 ) until the professional nurses arrived , Jan. 8th .
Of the 53 , `` Three or four were Boers '' ; I quote her words . ]
-- This is a large improvement upon the precedents established at Bronkhorst , Laing 's Nek , Ingogo , and Amajuba , and seems to indicate that Boer marksmanship is not so good now as it was in those days .
But there is one detail in which the Raid-episode exactly repeats history .
By surrender at Bronkhorst , the whole British force disappeared from the theater of war ; this was the case with Jameson 's force .
Under date of another South African town I find the note which is creditable to the Boers :
The reduction of the population by Rhodesian methods to the desired limit is a return to the old-time slow-misery and lingering-death system of a discredited time and a crude `` civilization . ''
We humanely reduce an overplus of dogs by swift chloroform ; the Boer humanely reduced an overplus of blacks by swift suffocation ; the nameless but right-hearted Australian pioneer humanely reduced his overplus of aboriginal neighbors by a sweetened swift death concealed in a poisoned pudding .
All these are admirable , and worthy of praise ; you and I would rather suffer either of these deaths thirty times over in thirty successive days than linger out one of the Rhodesian twenty-year deaths , with its daily burden of insult , humiliation , and forced labor for a man whose entire race the victim hates .
Rhodesia is a happy name for that land of piracy and pillage , and puts the right stain upon it .
Their clothes were very interesting .
For ugliness of shapes , and for miracles of ugly colors inharmoniously associated , they were a record .
The effect was nearly as exciting and interesting as that produced by the brilliant and beautiful clothes and perfect taste always on view at the Indian railway stations .
One man had corduroy trousers of a faded chewing gum tint .
And they were new -- showing that this tint did not come by calamity , but was intentional ; the very ugliest color I have ever seen .
A gaunt , shackly country lout six feet high , in battered gray slouched hat with wide brim , and old resin-colored breeches , had on a hideous brand-new woolen coat which was imitation tiger skin -- wavy broad stripes of dazzling yellow and deep brown .
I thought he ought to be hanged , and asked the station-master if it could be arranged .
He said no ; and not only that , but said it rudely ; said it with a quite unnecessary show of feeling .
Then he muttered something about my being a jackass , and walked away and pointed me out to people , and did everything he could to turn public sentiment against me .
It is what one gets for trying to do good .
The Kimberley diamond deposits were discovered about 1869 , I think .
When everything is taken into consideration , the wonder is that they were not discovered five thousand years ago and made familiar to the African world for the rest of time .
For this reason the first diamonds were found on the surface of the ground .
They were smooth and limpid , and in the sunlight they vomited fire .
They were the very things which an African savage of any era would value above every other thing in the world excepting a glass bead .
For two or three centuries we have been buying his lands , his cattle , his neighbor , and any other thing he had for sale , for glass beads and so it is strange that he was indifferent to the diamonds -- for he must have picked them up many and many a time .
It would not occur to him to try to sell them to whites , of course , since the whites already had plenty of glass beads , and more fashionably shaped , too , than these ; but one would think that the poorer sort of black , who could not afford real glass , would have been humbly content to decorate himself with the imitation , and that presently the white trader would notice the things , and dimly suspect , and carry some of them home , and find out what they were , and at once empty a multitude of fortune-hunters into Africa .
There are many strange things in human history ; one of the strangest is that the sparkling diamonds laid there so long without exciting any one 's interest .
The revelation came at last by accident .
In a Boer 's hut out in the wide solitude of the plains , a traveling stranger noticed a child playing with a bright object , and was told it was a piece of glass which had been found in the veldt .
The stranger bought it for a trifle and carried it away ; and being without honor , made another stranger believe it was a diamond , and so got $ 125 out of him for it , and was as pleased with himself as if he had done a righteous thing .
In Paris the wronged stranger sold it to a pawnshop for $ 10,000 , who sold it to a countess for $ 90,000 , who sold it to a brewer for $ 800,000 , who traded it to a king for a dukedom and a pedigree , and the king `` put it up the spout . ''
-- [ handwritten note : `` From the Greek meaning 'pawned it . '
-- I know these particulars to be correct .
The Kimberley crater is roomy enough to admit the Roman Coliseum ; the bottom of the crater has not been reached , and no one can tell how far down in the bowels of the earth it goes .
Originally , it was a perpendicular hole packed solidly full of blue rock or cement , and scattered through that blue mass , like raisins in a pudding , were the diamonds .
As deep down in the earth as the blue stuff extends , so deep will the diamonds be found .
In our day the mines are worked upon scientific principles , under the guidance of the ablest mining-engineering talent procurable in America .
There are elaborate works for reducing the blue rock and passing it through one process after another until every diamond it contains has been hunted down and secured .
I watched the `` concentrators '' at work big tanks containing mud and water and invisible diamonds -- and was told that each could stir and churn and properly treat 300 car-loads of mud per day 1,600 pounds to the car-load -- and reduce it to 3 car-loads of slush .
I saw the 3 carloads of slush taken to the `` pulsators '' and there reduced to a quarter of a load of nice clean dark-colored sand .
Then I followed it to the sorting tables and saw the men deftly and swiftly spread it out and brush it about and seize the diamonds as they showed up .
I assisted , and once I found a diamond half as large as an almond .
It is an exciting kind of fishing , and you feel a fine thrill of pleasure every time you detect the glow of one of those limpid pebbles through the veil of dark sand .
I would like to spend my Saturday holidays in that charming sport every now and then .
Of course there are disappointments .
Sometimes you find a diamond which is not a diamond ; it is only a quartz crystal or some such worthless thing .
The expert can generally distinguish it from the precious stone which it is counterfeiting ; but if he is in doubt he lays it on a flatiron and hits it with a sledgehammer .
If it is a diamond it holds its own ; if it is anything else , it is reduced to powder .
I liked that experiment very much , and did not tire of repetitions of it .
It was full of enjoyable apprehensions , unmarred by any personal sense of risk .
The De Beers concern treats 8,000 carloads -- about 6,000 tons -- of blue rock per day , and the result is three pounds of diamonds .
Value , uncut , $ 50,000 to $ 70,000 .
After cutting , they will weigh considerably less than a pound , but will be worth four or five times as much as they were before .
All the plain around that region is spread over , a foot deep , with blue rock , placed there by the Company , and looks like a plowed field .
Exposure for a length of time make the rock easier to work than it is when it comes out of the mine .
If mining should cease now , the supply of rock spread over those fields would furnish the usual 8,000 car-loads per day to the separating works during three years .
The fields are fenced and watched ; and at night they are under the constant inspection of lofty electric searchlight .
They contain fifty or sixty million dollars' worth ' of diamonds , and there is an abundance of enterprising thieves around .
The deep mining is done by natives .
There are many hundreds of them .
They live in quarters built around the inside of a great compound .
They are a jolly and good-natured lot , and accommodating .
They performed a war-dance for us , which was the wildest exhibition I have ever seen .
They are not allowed outside of the compound during their term of service three months , I think it is , as a rule .
They go down the shaft , stand their watch , come up again , are searched , and go to bed or to their amusements in the compound ; and this routine they repeat , day in and day out .
It is thought that they do not now steal many diamonds successfully .
They used to swallow them , and find other ways of concealing them , but the white man found ways of beating their various games .
One man cut his leg and shoved a diamond into the wound , but even that project did not succeed .
When they find a fine large diamond they are more likely to report it than to steal it , for in the former case they get a reward , and in the latter they are quite apt to merely get into trouble .
Some years ago , in a mine not owned by the De Beers , a black found what has been claimed to be the largest diamond known to the world 's history ; and , as a reward he was released from service and given a blanket , a horse , and five hundred dollars .
It made him a Vanderbilt .
He could buy four wives , and have money left .
Four wives are an ample support for a native .
With four wives he is wholly independent , and need never do a stroke of work again .
Those are truly wonderful diamonds , whether they exist or not ; and yet they are of but little importance by comparison with the one wherewith the Boer wagoner chocked his wheel on that steep grade as heretofore referred to .
In Kimberley I had some conversation with the man who saw the Boer do that -- an incident which had occurred twenty-seven or twenty-eight years before I had my talk with him .
He assured me that that diamond 's value could have been over a billion dollars , but not under it .
I believed him , because he had devoted twenty-seven years to hunting for it , and was in a position to know .
A fitting and interesting finish to an examination of the tedious and laborious and costly processes whereby the diamonds are gotten out of the deeps of the earth and freed from the base stuffs which imprison them is the visit to the De Beers offices in the town of Kimberley , where the result of each day 's mining is brought every day , and , weighed , assorted , valued , and deposited in safes against shipping-day .
An unknown and unaccredited person can not get into that place ; and it seemed apparent from the generous supply of warning and protective and prohibitory signs that were posted all about , that not even the known and accredited can steal diamonds there without inconvenience .
What is the secret of his formidable supremacy ?
One says it is his prodigious wealth -- a wealth whose drippings in salaries and in other ways support multitudes and make them his interested and loyal vassals ; another says it is his personal magnetism and his persuasive tongue , and that these hypnotize and make happy slaves of all that drift within the circle of their influence ; another says it is his majestic ideas , his vast schemes for the territorial aggrandizement of England , his patriotic and unselfish ambition to spread her beneficent protection and her just rule over the pagan wastes of Africa and make luminous the African darkness with the glory of her name ; and another says he wants the earth and wants it for his own , and that the belief that he will get it and let his friends in on the ground floor is the secret that rivets so many eyes upon him and keeps him in the zenith where the view is unobstructed .
One may take his choice .
They are all the same price .
One fact is sure : he keeps his prominence and a vast following , no matter what he does .
He `` deceives '' the Duke of Fife -- it is the Duke 's word -- but that does not destroy the Duke 's loyalty to him .
He tricks the Reformers into immense trouble with his Raid , but the most of them believe he meant well .
He weeps over the harshly-taxed Johannesburgers and makes them his friends ; at the same time he taxes his Charter-settlers 50 per cent.
, and so wins their affection and their confidence that they are squelched with despair at every rumor that the Charter is to be annulled .
He raids and robs and slays and enslaves the Matabele and gets worlds of Charter-Christian applause for it .
He has beguiled England into buying Charter waste paper for Bank of England notes , ton for ton , and the ravished still burn incense to him as the Eventual God of Plenty .
He has done everything he could think of to pull himself down to the ground ; he has done more than enough to pull sixteen common-run great men down ; yet there he stands , to this day , upon his dizzy summit under the dome of the sky , an apparent permanency , the marvel of the time , the mystery of the age , an Archangel with wings to half the world , Satan with a tail to the other half .
`` Well , who do you think ? ''
`` My good slave , you are curiously witless -- no , I mean characteristically so .
In truth , you are always consistent , always yourself , always an ass .
Other wise it must have occurred to you that if you attempted this murder with a sad heart and a heavy conscience , I would droop under the burdening in influence instantly .
Fool , I should have weighed a ton , and could not have budged from the floor ; but instead , you are so cheerfully anxious to kill me that your conscience is as light as a feather ; hence I am away up here out of your reach .
I can almost respect a mere ordinary sort of fool ; but you pah ! ''
`` Out of this !
Quick , or my Conscience will get away ! ''
`` All right , '' said I to myself ; `` so it seems a spirit can be killed , after all ; there will be one spirit lacking in this world , presently , or I lose my guess . ''
Then I said aloud :
`` I do n't like such titles .
I am willing to call you , sir .
That is as far as -- ''
`` We will have no argument about this .
Just obey , that is all .
Go on with your chatter . ''
`` My lad , there was never so pleased a conscience in this world as I was when you made me visible .
It gives me an inconceivable advantage .
Now I can look you straight in the eye , and call you names , and leer at you , jeer at you , sneer at you ; and you know what eloquence there is in visible gesture and expression , more especially when the effect is heightened by audible speech .
I shall always address you henceforth in your o-w-n s-n-i-v-e-l-i-n-g d-r-a-w-l -- baby ! ''
`` Do you do it with the honest intent to improve a man ? ''
`` Ha , ha !
`` But come , now , answer me that question .
Is there any way ? ''
`` This is flattering ; you must be asleep a good part of your time . ''
`` Who helps you ? ''
`` Plenty of them . ''
`` I suppose I ought to have known that without asking .
But no matter , you can describe them .
Tell me about my neighbor Thompson 's conscience , please . ''
`` I have seen her at a distance , but am not acquainted with her .
She lives in the open air altogether , because no door is large enough to admit her . ''
In simple truth , I never had thought of that family a second time !
And now such a splintering pang of guilt shot through me !
I glanced up at my Conscience .
Plainly , my heavy heart was affecting him .
His body was drooping forward ; he seemed about to fall from the bookcase .
`` Oh , do not look so !
Oh , what can the matter be ?
What is it you see ?
Why do you stare so ?
Why do you work your fingers like that ? ''
I was a free man !
I turned upon my poor aunt , who was almost petrified with terror , and shouted :
In conclusion , I wish to state , by way of advertisement , that medical colleges desiring assorted tramps for scientific purposes , either by the gross , by cord measurement , or per ton , will do well to examine the lot in my cellar before purchasing elsewhere , as these were all selected and prepared by myself , and can be had at a low rate , because I wish to clear , out my stock and get ready for the spring trade .
While these young people chat themselves into an acquaintanceship , let us take the liberty of inspecting the sweeter and fairer of the two .
She sat alone , at her graceful ease , in a richly furnished apartment which was manifestly the private parlor of a refined and sensible lady , if signs and symbols may go for anything .
For instance , by a low , comfortable chair stood a dainty , top-heavy workstand , whose summit was a fancifully embroidered shallow basket , with varicolored crewels , and other strings and odds and ends protruding from under the gaping lid and hanging down in negligent profusion .
On the floor lay bright shreds of Turkey red , Prussian blue , and kindred fabrics , bits of ribbon , a spool or two , a pair of scissors , and a roll or so of tinted silken stuffs .
On a luxurious sofa , upholstered with some sort of soft Indian goods wrought in black and gold threads interwebbed with other threads not so pronounced in color , lay a great square of coarse white stuff , upon whose surface a rich bouquet of flowers was growing , under the deft cultivation of the crochet-needle .
The household cat was asleep on this work of art .
In a bay-window stood an easel with an unfinished picture on it , and a palette and brushes on a chair beside it .
There were books everywhere : Robertson 's Sermons , Tennyson , Moody and Sankey , Hawthorne , Rab and His Friends , cook-books , prayer-books , pattern-books -- and books about all kinds of odious and exasperating pottery , of course .
There was a piano , with a deck-load of music , and more in a tender .
There was a great plenty of pictures on the walls , on the shelves of the mantelpiece , and around generally ; where coigns of vantage offered were statuettes , and quaint and pretty gimcracks , and rare and costly specimens of peculiarly devilish china .
The bay-window gave upon a garden that was ablaze with foreign and domestic flowers and flowering shrubs .
She sprang from her chair with such haste that she hardly heard the young man 's answering good-by .
She stood radiant , graceful , beautiful , and gazed , wondering , upon the accusing clock .
Presently her pouting lips parted , and she said :
`` Well , I -- well , nothing in particular .
It 's very lonesome here .
It's asking a great deal , I know , but would you mind talking with me again by and by -- that is , if it will not trouble you too much ? ''
Mr. Burley went up-stairs , intending to go to the small drawing-room , but as he was passing `` Aunt Susan 's '' private parlor , the door of which stood slightly ajar , he heard a joyous laugh which he recognized ; so without knock or announcement he stepped confidently in .
But before he could make his presence known he heard words that harrowed up his soul and chilled his young blood , he heard a voice say :
Then he heard Rosannah Ethelton , whose back was toward him , say :
`` So has yours , dearest ! ''
`` Oh , Alonzo , none that have gone before me knew what love was , none that come after me will ever know what happiness is .
I float in a gorgeous cloud land , a boundless firmament of enchanted and bewildering ecstasy ! ''
Both of these women had tears of joy in their eyes .
The young couple were on their feet in an instant , abashed , and standing like detected dealers in stolen goods awaiting judge Lynch 's doom .
`` Well , '' answered Alonzo , `` if the owner of the music could not miss what was stolen , why should he care ? ''
`` Suppose , '' replied the Reverend , `` suppose that , instead of music that was passing along and being stolen , the burden of the wire was loving endearments of the most private and sacred nature ? ''
The agile step that goes with a happy heart was heard on the stairs , and the Reverend , smiling diabolically , sought sudden refuge behind the heavy folds of the velvet window-curtains .
Alonzo entered and flew to the telephone .
`` I never mentioned any song . ''
`` Alonzo , dear , I have been wrong .
You could not have said so cruel a thing .
It must have been some one who imitated your voice in malice or in jest . ''
During the next two months many things happened .
It had early transpired that Rosannah , poor suffering orphan , had neither returned to her grandmother in Portland , Oregon , nor sent any word to her save a duplicate of the woeful note she had left in the mansion on Telegraph Hill .
Whosoever was sheltering her -- if she was still alive -- had been persuaded not to betray her whereabouts , without doubt ; for all efforts to find trace of her had failed .
`` Twenty-three minutes after twelve , afternoon shall -- ''
`` Yes , Alonzo ?
Oh , how you terrified me !
`` The steamer leaves San Francisco day after tomorrow .
The passage is eight days .
She would be here the 31st of March . ''
I think that all this courteous lying is a sweet and loving art , and should be cultivated .
The highest perfection of politeness is only a beautiful edifice , built , from the base to the dome , of graceful and gilded forms of charitable and unselfish lying .
`` Oh , wake up !
Do n't sleep all day !
Here we are at the Tower , man !
I have talked myself deaf and dumb and blind , and never got a response .
Just look at this magnificent autumn landscape !
Feast your eye on it !
You have traveled ; you have seen boasted landscapes elsewhere .
Come , now , deliver an honest opinion .
What do you say to this ? ''
I sighed wearily ; and murmured : --
`` Have n't we had a royal good time !
But now I remember , you have n't said a word for two hours .
Come , come , out with something ! ''
`` 'You loved him , then !
Oh , you too loved him ! '
I -- whose last moments ? '
Oh , yes -- yes -- yes !
I suppose so , I think so , I do n't know !
Oh , certainly -- I was there -- I was there ! '
My friend 's hopeless eyes rested upon mine a pregnant minute , and then he said impressively : --
Now I come to a sentence in the admiral 's report which he dropped carelessly from his pen , no doubt , and never gave the matter a second thought .
He little imagined what a freight of tragic prophecy it bore !
This is the sentence : --
The time was ripe for this man 's next move .
He began , cautiously at first , to poison the public mind against England .
He took the chief citizens aside , one by one , and conversed with them on this topic .
Presently he grew bolder , and spoke out .
He said the nation owed it to itself , to its honor , to its great traditions , to rise in its might and throw off `` this galling English yoke . ''
Now right on top of this the cabinet reported a national debt amounting to upward of forty-five dollars -- half a dollar to every individual in the nation .
And they proposed to fund something .
They had heard that this was always done in such emergencies .
They proposed duties on exports ; also on imports .
And they wanted to issue bonds ; also paper money , redeemable in yams and cabbages in fifty years .
They said the pay of the army and of the navy and of the whole governmental machine was far in arrears , and unless something was done , and done immediately , national bankruptcy must ensue , and possibly insurrection and revolution .
The emperor at once resolved upon a high-handed measure , and one of a nature never before heard of in Pitcairn 's Island .
He went in state to the church on Sunday morning , with the army at his back , and commanded the minister of the treasury to take up a collection .
`` I freed you from a grinding tyranny ; I lifted you up out of your degradation , and made you a nation among nations ; I gave you a strong , compact , centralized government ; and , more than all , I gave you the blessing of blessings -- unification .
I have done all this , and my reward is hatred , insult , and these bonds .
Take me ; do with me as you will .
I here resign my crown and all my dignities , and gladly do I release myself from their too heavy burden .
For your sake I took them up ; for your sake I lay them down .
The imperial jewel is no more ; now bruise and defile as ye will the useless setting . ''
By a unanimous voice the people condemned the ex-emperor and the social democrat to perpetual banishment from church services , or to perpetual labor as galley-slaves in the whale-boat -- whichever they might prefer .
The next day the nation assembled again , and rehoisted the British flag , reinstated the British tyranny , reduced the nobility to the condition of commoners again , and then straightway turned their diligent attention to the weeding of the ruined and neglected yam patches , and the rehabilitation of the old useful industries and the old healing and solacing pieties .
The ex-emperor restored the lost trespass law , and explained that he had stolen it -- not to injure any one , but to further his political projects .
Therefore the nation gave the late chief magistrate his office again , and also his alienated Property .
I compromised with this man at the end of an intolerable hour .
I bought two double-barreled echoes in good condition , and he threw in another , which he said was not salable because it only spoke German .
He said , `` She was a perfect polyglot once , but somehow her palate got down . ''
Yes -- yes . ''
`` Oh , my goodness !
what do you want to spell it for ? ''
But , good heavens !
if you were at his funeral , he must have been dead , and if he was dead how could he care whether you made a noise or not ?
A. I did n't say he was dead .
Why , have you noticed that ?
( Shaking hands . )
Many a time it has seemed to me like a discrepancy , but somehow I could n't make up my mind .
How quick you notice a thing !
Q. Oh , I see !
He came to life again ?
Then the young man reverently withdrew .
He was very pleasant company , and I was sorry to see him go .
They are very nice .
That young man could have become a good English scholar by taking the right sort of pains , but he was French , and would n't do that .
How different is the case with our people ; they utilize every means that offers .
There are some alleged French Protestants in Paris , and they built a nice little church on one of the great avenues that lead away from the Arch of Triumph , and proposed to listen to the correct thing , preached in the correct way , there , in their precious French tongue , and be happy .
But their little game does not succeed .
Our people are always there ahead of them Sundays , and take up all the room .
When the minister gets up to preach , he finds his house full of devout foreigners , each ready and waiting , with his little book in his hand -- a morocco-bound Testament , apparently .
But only apparently ; it is Mr. Bellows's admirable and exhaustive little French-English dictionary , which in look and binding and size is just like a Testament and those people are there to study French .
The building has been nicknamed `` The Church of the Gratis French Lesson . ''
More than a thousand years ago this small district was a kingdom -- a little bit of a kingdom , a sort of dainty little toy kingdom , as one might say .
It was far removed from the jealousies , strifes , and turmoils of that old warlike day , and so its life was a simple life , its people a gentle and guileless race ; it lay always in a deep dream of peace , a soft Sabbath tranquillity ; there was no malice , there was no envy , there was no ambition , consequently there were no heart-burnings , there was no unhappiness in the land .
`` But let us be sure .
Bring back the thrush ; let them sing together . ''
The next instant the dearest , sweetest , prettiest little peasant-maid of nine years came tripping in , her brown eyes glowing with childish eagerness ; but when she saw that august company and those angry faces she stopped and hung her head and put her poor coarse apron to her eyes .
Nobody gave her welcome , none pitied her .
Presently she looked up timidly through her tears , and said : --
Then the trial of the birds was resumed .
The two birds sang their best , but the scepter lay motionless in the king 's hand .
Hope died slowly out in the breasts of all .
An hour went by ; two hours , still no decision .
The day waned to its close , and the waiting multitudes outside the palace grew crazed with anxiety and apprehension .
The twilight came on , the shadows fell deeper and deeper .
The king and his court could no longer see each other 's faces .
No one spoke -- none called for lights .
The great trial had been made ; it had failed ; each and all wished to hide their faces from the light and cover up their deep trouble in their own hearts .
shouted the king , `` let all the bells make proclamation to the people , for the choice is made and we have not erred .
King , dynasty , and nation are saved .
From henceforth let the nightingale be honored throughout the land forever .
And publish it among all the people that whosoever shall insult a nightingale , or injure it , shall suffer death .
The king hath spoken . ''
It is the sacred bird , and the prophecy is come true .
The gods themselves protected me from error in the choice . ''
He could hardly contain his joy ; he could not word his gratitude .
Every few moments now he thought he caught the sound of approaching succor .
But each time it was a disappointment ; no succor came .
The dull hours drifted on .
Still no help came -- but still the sacred bird sang on .
He began to have misgivings about his choice , but he stifled them .
Toward dawn the bird ceased .
The morning came , and with it thirst and hunger ; but no succor .
The day waxed and waned .
At last the king cursed the nightingale .
Yes , it was high time for a toast-master to recognize the importance of the babies .
Think what is in store for the present crop !
Fifty years from now we shall all be dead , I trust , and then this flag , if it still survive ( and let us hope it may ) , will be floating over a Republic numbering 200,000,000 souls , according to the settled laws of our increase .
Our present schooner of State will have grown into a political leviathan -- a Great Eastern .
The cradled babies of to-day will be on deck .
Let them be well trained , for we are going to leave a big contract on their hands .
Among the three or four million cradles now rocking in the land are some which this nation would preserve for ages as sacred things , if we could know which ones they are .
In one of those cradles the unconscious Farragut of the future is at this moment teething -- think of it !
-- and putting in a world of dead earnest , unarticulated , but perfectly justifiable profanity over it , too .
In another the future renowned astronomer is blinking at the shining Milky Way with but a languid interest -- poor little chap !
-- and wondering what has become of that other one they call the wet-nurse .
In another the future great historian is lying -- and doubtless will continue to lie until his earthly mission is ended .
In another the future President is busying himself with no profounder problem of state than what the mischief has become of his hair so early ; and in a mighty array of other cradles there are now some 60,000 future office-seekers , getting ready to furnish him occasion to grapple with that same old problem a second time .
And in still one more cradle , somewhere under the flag , the future illustrious commander-in-chief of the American armies is so little burdened with his approaching grandeurs and responsibilities as to be giving his whole strategic mind at this moment to trying to find out some way to get his big toe into his mouth -- an achievement which , meaning no disrespect , the illustrious guest of this evening turned his entire attention to some fifty-six years ago ; and if the child is but a prophecy of the man , there are mighty few who will doubt that he succeeded .
[ Being part of a chapter which was crowded out of `` A Tramp Abroad. ''
`` The same is the case in England -- I mean among the educated classes , of course . ''
His gloves were the saddest ruin , but he told me where I could get some like them .
His shoes would hardly hold walnuts without leaking , but he liked to put his feet up on the mantelpiece and contemplate them .
He wore a dim glass breastpin , which he called a `` morphylitic diamond '' -- whatever that may mean -- and said only two of them had ever been found -- the Emperor of China had the other one .
The ark is one hundred and forty feet long ; the dwelling is ninety feet long .
The idea of the Indians is to drop softly and secretly from the arched sapling to the dwelling as the ark creeps along under it at the rate of a mile an hour , and butcher the family .
It will take the ark a minute and a half to pass under .
It will take the ninety foot dwelling a minute to pass under .
Now , then , what did the six Indians do ?
It would take you thirty years to guess , and even then you would have to give it up , I believe .
Therefore , I will tell you what the Indians did .
Their chief , a person of quite extraordinary intellect for a Cooper Indian , warily watched the canal-boat as it squeezed along under him , and when he had got his calculations fined down to exactly the right shade , as he judged , he let go and dropped .
And missed the house !
That is actually what he did .
He missed the house , and landed in the stern of the scow .
It was not much of a fall , yet it knocked him silly .
He lay there unconscious .
If the house had been ninety-seven feet long he would have made the trip .
The fault was Cooper 's , not his .
The error lay in the construction of the house .
Cooper was no architect .
The reader will find some examples of Cooper 's high talent for inaccurate observation in the account of the shooting-match in The Pathfinder .
The color of the paint is not stated -- an important omission , but Cooper deals freely in important omissions .
No , after all , it was not an important omission ; for this nail-head is a hundred yards from the marksmen , and could not be seen by them at that distance , no matter what its color might be .
They made a `` minute '' examination ; but never mind , how could they know that there were two bullets in that hole without digging the latest one out ?
for neither probe nor eyesight could prove the presence of any more than one bullet .
No ; as we shall see .
It is the Pathfinder 's turn now ; he steps out before the ladies , takes aim , and fires .
`` 'No , no , Major , ' said he , confidently , 'that would be a risky declaration .
I did n't load the piece , and ca n't say what was in it ; but if it was lead , you will find the bullet driving down those of the Quartermaster and Jasper , else is not my name Pathfinder . '
We can not imagine such a thing as a veteran Scotch Commander-in-Chief comporting himself in the field like a windy melodramatic actor , but Cooper could .
On one occasion Alice and Cora were being chased by the French through a fog in the neighborhood of their father 's fort :
Cooper 's word-sense was singularly dull .
When a person has a poor ear for music he will flat and sharp right along without knowing it .
He keeps near the tune , but it is not the tune .
When a person has a poor ear for words , the result is a literary flatting and sharping ; you perceive what he is intending to say , but you also perceive that he does n't say it .
He was not a word-musician .
His ear was satisfied with the approximate word .
I will furnish some circumstantial evidence in support of this charge .
My instances are gathered from half a dozen pages of the tale called Deerslayer .
He uses `` verbal , '' for `` oral '' ; `` precision , '' for `` facility '' ; `` phenomena , '' for `` marvels '' ; `` necessary , '' for `` predetermined '' ; `` unsophisticated , '' for `` primitive '' ; `` preparation , '' for `` expectancy '' ; `` rebuked , '' for `` subdued '' ; `` dependent on , '' for `` resulting from '' ; `` fact , '' for `` condition '' ; `` fact , '' for `` conjecture '' ; `` precaution , '' for `` caution '' ; `` explain , '' for `` determine '' ; `` mortified , '' for `` disappointed '' ; `` meretricious , '' for `` factitious '' ; `` materially , '' for `` considerably '' ; `` decreasing , '' for `` deepening '' ; `` increasing , '' for `` disappearing '' ; `` embedded , '' for `` enclosed '' ; `` treacherous ; '' for `` hostile '' ; `` stood , '' for `` stooped '' ; `` softened , '' for `` replaced '' ; `` rejoined , '' for `` remarked '' ; `` situation , '' for `` condition '' ; `` different , '' for `` differing '' ; `` insensible , '' for `` unsentient '' ; `` brevity , '' for `` celerity '' ; `` distrusted , '' for `` suspicious '' ; `` mental imbecility , '' for `` imbecility '' ; `` eyes , '' for `` sight '' ; `` counteracting , '' for `` opposing '' ; `` funeral obsequies , '' for `` obsequies . ''
There have been daring people in the world who claimed that Cooper could write English , but they are all dead now -- all dead but Lounsbury .
I do n't remember that Lounsbury makes the claim in so many words , still he makes it , for he says that Deerslayer is a `` pure work of art . ''
Pure , in that connection , means faultless -- faultless in all details -- and language is a detail .
If Mr. Lounsbury had only compared Cooper 's English with the English which he writes himself -- but it is plain that he did n't ; and so it is likely that he imagines until this day that Cooper 's is as clean and compact as his own .
Now I feel sure , deep down in my heart , that Cooper wrote about the poorest English that exists in our language , and that the English of Deerslayer is the very worst that even Cooper ever wrote .
A work of art ?
It has no invention ; it has no order , system , sequence , or result ; it has no lifelikeness , no thrill , no stir , no seeming of reality ; its characters are confusedly drawn , and by their acts and words they prove that they are not the sort of people the author claims that they are ; its humor is pathetic ; its pathos is funny ; its conversations are -- oh !
indescribable ; its love-scenes odious ; its English a crime against the language .
`` But you have killed them both . ''
CHAPTER III -- GENERAL ALISON TO HIS MOTHER
`` Well , then , that 's a good child -- kiss me .
Now , then , sit up in that chair , and set your eye on that clock .
There -- that 's right .
If you stir -- if you so much as wink -- for four whole minutes , I'll bite you ! ''
Oh , it is wonderful here , aunty dear , just paradise !
Oh , if you could only see it !
everything so wild and lovely ; such grand plains , stretching such miles and miles and miles , all the most delicious velvety sand and sage-brush , and rabbits as big as a dog , and such tall and noble jackassful ears that that is what they name them by ; and such vast mountains , and so rugged and craggy and lofty , with cloud-shawls wrapped around their shoulders , and looking so solemn and awful and satisfied ; and the charming Indians , oh , how you would dote on them , aunty dear , and they would on you , too , and they would let you hold their babies , the way they do me , and they ARE the fattest , and brownest , and sweetest little things , and never cry , and would n't if they had pins sticking in them , which they have n't , because they are poor and ca n't afford it ; and the horses and mules and cattle and dogs -- hundreds and hundreds and hundreds , and not an animal that you ca n't do what you please with , except uncle Thomas , but _I_ do n't mind him , he's lovely ; and oh , if you could hear the bugles : TOO -- TOO -- TOO-TOO -- TOO -- TOO , and so on -- perfectly beautiful !
Do you recognize that one ?
It 's the first toots of the reveille ; it goes , dear me , SO early in the morning !
-- then I and every other soldier on the whole place are up and out in a minute , except uncle Thomas , who is most unaccountably lazy , I do n't know why , but I have talked to him about it , and I reckon it will be better , now .
He has n't any faults much , and is charming and sweet , like Buffalo Bill , and Thunder-Bird , and Mammy Dorcas , and Soldier Boy , and Shekels , and Potter , and Sour-Mash , and -- well , they 're ALL that , just angels , as you may say .
CHAPTER V -- GENERAL ALISON TO MERCEDES
She brushed away her tears , and said with dignity :
`` Who is the Cid ? ''
`` Do they quarrel ? ''
Here are a couple of her expositions which were delivered with tranquil confidence :
`` CHAPLAIN , diminutive of chap .
LASS is masculine , LASSIE is feminine . ''
She still drops a foreign word into her talk now and then , and there is still a subtle foreign flavor or fragrance about even her exactest English -- and long may this abide !
for it has for me a charm that is very pleasant .
Sometimes her English is daintily prim and bookish and captivating .
She has a child 's sweet tooth , but for her health 's sake I try to keep its inspirations under cheek .
She is obedient -- as is proper for a titled and recognized military personage , which she is -- but the chain presses sometimes .
For instance , we were out for a walk , and passed by some bushes that were freighted with wild goose-berries .
Her face brightened and she put her hands together and delivered herself of this speech , most feelingly :
`` Oh , if I was permitted a vice it would be the gourmandise ! ''
Could I resist that ?
I gave her a gooseberry .
You ask about her languages .
They take care of themselves ; they will not get rusty here ; our regiments are not made up of natives alone -- far from it .
And she is picking up Indian tongues diligently .
`` What do you know about it ? ''
`` Have you got more than one ? ''
The first horses were fossils .
They date back two million years . ''
It is marvellous ! ''
I listen -- tell me more . ''
`` Dogmatics is quite beyond me , quite ; so I am not competing .
But on general principles it is my opinion that a colt out of a coyote and a wild-cat is no square dog , but doubtful .
That is my hand , and I stand pat . ''
`` Why , he could be a reptile ; anything that has n't wings is a reptile . ''
Now then , watch me leave a blue streak behind ! ''
`` Did you do as I told you ?
Did you look up the Mexican Plug ? ''
`` Not at first .
He took me for a reptile , and it troubled me , because I did n't know whether it was a compliment or not .
I could n't ask him , because it would look ignorant .
So I did n't say anything , and soon liked him very well indeed .
Was it a compliment , do you think ? ''
`` And it IS fine .
You may be thankful you are one . ''
`` It is beautiful , anybody must grant it ; beautiful , and of a noble sound .
I hope it will not make me proud and stuck-up -- I should not like to be that .
It is much more distinguished and honorable to be a reptile than a dog , do n't you think , Soldier ? ''
`` Stick to the subject , please .
Did it turn out that my suspicions were right ? ''
`` Well , they 'll get him yet , for sure . ''
BB ( saluting ) .
The Seventh could n't beat it !
You do certainly handle your Rangers like an expert , General .
And where are you bound ? ''
`` Guard of honor for you and Thorndike . ''
she shouts to me -- and I went . ''
`` The music frightened them away , but they were hungry , and kept coming back .
And of course they got bolder and bolder , which is their way .
It went on for an hour , then the tired child went to sleep , and it was pitiful to hear her moan and nestle , and I could n't do anything for her .
All the time I was laying for the wolves .
They are in my line ; I have had experience .
At last the boldest one ventured within my lines , and I landed him among his friends with some of his skull still on him , and they did the rest .
In the next hour I got a couple more , and they went the way of the first one , down the throats of the detachment .
That satisfied the survivors , and they went away and left us in peace .
`` It was an hour after sunup that I heard the boys coming , and recognized the hoof-beats of Pomp and Caesar and Jerry , old mates of mine ; and a welcomer sound there could n't ever be .
Oh , I remember -- the raven . ''
`` Yes , sir . ''
`` Woman , this is perfectly unreasonable .
What in the nation DOES she want ? ''
`` Bear me up , Dorcas ; do n't let me faint . ''
`` Andalusian AND Oregonian , Antonio !
Put it that way , and you have my vote .
Being a native up there , I know .
You being Andalusian- born -- ''
`` Can speak with authority for that patch of paradise ?
Well , I can .
This is the correct Andalusian dawn now -- crisp , fresh , dewy , fragrant , pungent -- ''
`` It 's a long time .
Do n't you ever get homesick ? ''
`` They say the child is wild to see Spain . ''
`` I do n't know anything about it , except in a mixed-up , foggy way , Antonio , but I know enough to know it 's grand sport . ''
`` Suddenly , the martial note of a bugle cleaves the hum and murmur -- clear the ring !
`` Sage-Brush , you have been listening ? ''
`` Is the bull-fight a religious service ? ''
`` My father thought not .
He believed we do not have to go there unless we deserve it . ''
It was a prodigious trip , but delightful , of course , through the Rockies and the Black Hills and the mighty sweep of the Great Plains to civilization and the Missouri border -- where the railroading began and the delightfulness ended .
But no one is the worse for the journey ; certainly not Cathy , nor Dorcas , nor Soldier Boy ; and as for me , I am not complaining .
At the point which I had reached in a preceding paragraph of this account , the situation was as follows : two horses lay dying ; the bull had scattered his persecutors for the moment , and stood raging , panting , pawing the dust in clouds over his back , when the man that had been wounded returned to the ring on a remount , a poor blindfolded wreck that yet had something ironically military about his bearing -- and the next moment the bull had ripped him open and his bowls were dragging upon the ground : and the bull was charging his swarm of pests again .
Then came pealing through the air a bugle-call that froze my blood -- '' IT IS I , SOLDIER -- COME ! ''
I turned ; Cathy was flying down through the massed people ; she cleared the parapet at a bound , and sped towards that riderless horse , who staggered forward towards the remembered sound ; but his strength failed , and he fell at her feet , she lavishing kisses upon him and sobbing , the house rising with one impulse , and white with horror !
Before help could reach her the bull was back again --
economy is heaven 's best boon to man . ''
When the loose but gifted Byron lay in his Venetian exile he observed that , if it could be granted him to go back and live his misspent life over again , he would give his lucid and unintoxicated intervals to the composition , not of frivolous rhymes , but of essays upon political economy .
Washington loved this exquisite science ; such names as Baker , Beckwith , Judson , Smith , are imperishably linked with it ; and even imperial Homer , in the ninth book of the Iliad , has said :
Fiat justitia , ruat coelum , Post mortem unum , ante bellum , Hic jacet hoc , ex-parte res , Politicum e-conomico est .
This gentleman 's article is an able one ( as articles go , in the French , where they always tangle up everything to that degree that when you start into a sentence you never know whether you are going to come out alive or not ) .
It is a very good article and the writer says all manner of kind and complimentary things about me -- for which I am sure I thank him with all my heart ; but then why should he go and spoil all his praise by one unlucky experiment ?
What I refer to is this : he says my Jumping Frog is a funny story , but still he ca n't see why it should ever really convulse any one with laughter -- and straightway proceeds to translate it into French in order to prove to his nation that there is nothing so very extravagantly funny about it .
Just there is where my complaint originates .
He has not translated it at all ; he has simply mixed it all up ; it is no more like the Jumping Frog when he gets through with it than I am like a meridian of longitude .
But my mere assertion is not proof ; wherefore I print the French version , that all may see that I do not speak falsely ; furthermore , in order that even the unlettered may know my injury and give me their compassion , I have been at infinite pains and trouble to retranslate this French version back into English ; and to tell the truth I have well-nigh worn myself out at it , having scarcely rested from my work during five days and nights .
I can not speak the French language , but I can translate very well , though not fast , I being self-educated .
I ask the reader to run his eye over the original English version of the Jumping Frog , and then read the French or my retranslation , and kindly take notice how the Frenchman has riddled the grammar .
I think it is the worst I ever saw ; and yet the French are called a polished nation .
If I had a boy that put sentences together as they do , I would polish him to some purpose .
Without further introduction , the Jumping Frog , as I originally wrote it , was as follows [ after it will be found the French version , and after the latter my retranslation from the French ]
`` And he had a little small bull-pup , that to look at him you 'd think he war n't worth a cent but to set around and look ornery and lay for a chance to steal something .
But as soon as money was up on him he was a different dog ; his under-jaw 'd begin to stick out like the fo'castle of a steamboat , and his teeth would uncover and shine like the furnaces .
And a dog might tackle him and bully-rag him , and bite him , and throw him over his shoulder two or three times , and Andrew Jackson -- which was the name of the pup -- Andrew Jackson would never let on but what he was satisfied , and had n't expected nothing else -- and the bets being doubled and doubled on the other side all the time , till the money was all up ; and then all of a sudden he would grab that other dog jest by the j'int of his hind leg and freeze to it -- not chaw , you understand , but only just grip and hang on till they throwed up the sponge , if it was a year .
Smiley always come out winner on that pup , till he harnessed a dog once that did n't have no hind legs , because they 'd been sawed off in a circular saw , and when the thing had gone along far enough , and the money was all up , and he come to make a snatch for his pet holt , he see in a minute how he 'd been imposed on , and how the other dog had him in the door , so to speak , and he 'peared surprised , and then he looked sorter discouraged-like and did n't try no more to win the fight , and so he got shucked out bad .
He give Smiley a look , as much as to say his heart was broke , and it was his fault , for putting up a dog that had n't no hind legs for him to take holt of , which was his main dependence in a fight , and then he limped off a piece and laid down and died .
It was a good pup , was that Andrew Jackson , and would have made a name for hisself if he 'd lived , for the stuff was in him and he had genius -- I know it , because he had n't no opportunities to speak of , and it do n't stand to reason that a dog could make such a fight as he could under them circumstances if he had n't no talent .
It always makes me feel sorry when I think of that last fight of his'n , and the way it turned out .
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ..
One day an individual stranger at the camp him arrested with his box and him said :
Behold , then , the individual , who guards the box , who puts his forty dollars upon those of Smiley , and who attends ( et qui attend ) .
He attended enough long times , reflecting all solely .
And figure you that he takes Daniel , him opens the mouth by force and with a teaspoon him fills with shot of the hunt , even him fills just to the chin , then he him puts by the earth .
Smiley during these times was at slopping in a swamp .
Finally he trapped ( attrape ) a frog , him carried to that individual , and said :
HARTFORD , March , 1875 .
I passed my manuscript over to the chief editor for acceptance , alteration , or destruction .
He glanced at it and his face clouded .
He ran his eye down the pages , and his countenance grew portentous .
It was easy to see that something was wrong .
Presently he sprang up and said :
I never saw a pen scrape and scratch its way so viciously , or plow through another man 's verbs and adjectives so relentlessly .
While he was in the midst of his work , somebody shot at him through the open window , and marred the symmetry of my ear .
`` Well , no matter -- do n't want it this kind of weather .
I know the man that did it .
I 'll get him .
Now , here is the way this stuff ought to be written . ''
The inveterate liars of the Semi-Weekly Earthquake are evidently endeavoring to palm off upon a noble and chivalrous people another of their vile and brutal falsehoods with regard to that most glorious conception of the nineteenth century , the Ballyhack railroad .
The idea that Buzzardville was to be left off at one side originated in their own fulsome brains -- or rather in the settlings which they regard as brains .
They had better swallow this lie if they want to save their abandoned reptile carcasses the cowhiding they so richly deserve .
The chief said , `` That was the Colonel , likely .
I 've been expecting him for two days .
He will be up now right away . ''
`` Right , Sir .
I have a little account to settle with you .
If you are at leisure we will begin . ''
`` I have an article on the 'Encouraging Progress of Moral and Intellectual Development in America ' to finish , but there is no hurry .
They then talked about the elections and the crops while they reloaded , and I fell to tying up my wounds .
But presently they opened fire again with animation , and every shot took effect -- but it is proper to remark that five out of the six fell to my share .
The sixth one mortally wounded the Colonel , who remarked , with fine humor , that he would have to say good morning now , as he had business uptown .
He then inquired the way to the undertaker 's and left .
He said , `` You 'll like this place when you get used to it . ''
After which we parted with mutual regret , and I took apartments at the hospital .
Once this little bad boy stole the key of the pantry , and slipped in there and helped himself to some jam , and filled up the vessel with tar , so that his mother would never know the difference ; but all at once a terrible feeling did n't come over him , and something did n't seem to whisper to him , `` Is it right to disobey my mother ?
Is n't it sinful to do this ?
Where do bad little boys go who gobble up their good kind mother's jam ? ''
and then he did n't kneel down all alone and promise never to be wicked any more , and rise up with a light , happy heart , and go and tell his mother all about it , and beg her forgiveness , and be blessed by her with tears of pride and thankfulness in her eyes .
No ; that is the way with all other bad boys in the books ; but it happened otherwise with this Jim , strangely enough .
He ate that jam , and said it was bully , in his sinful , vulgar way ; and he put in the tar , and said that was bully also , and laughed , and observed `` that the old woman would get up and snort '' when she found it out ; and when she did find it out , he denied knowing anything about it , and she whipped him severely , and he did the crying himself .
Everything about this boy was curious -- everything turned out differently with him from the way it does to the bad Jameses in the books .
Once he stole the teacher 's penknife , and , when he was afraid it would be found out and he would get whipped , he slipped it into George Wilson's cap -- poor Widow Wilson 's son , the moral boy , the good little boy of the village , who always obeyed his mother , and never told an untruth , and was fond of his lessons , and infatuated with Sunday-school .
And when the knife dropped from the cap , and poor George hung his head and blushed , as if in conscious guilt , and the grieved teacher charged the theft upon him , and was just in the very act of bringing the switch down upon his trembling shoulders , a white-haired , improbable justice of the peace did not suddenly appear in their midst , and strike an attitude and say , `` Spare this noble boy -- there stands the cowering culprit !
I was passing the school door at recess , and , unseen myself , I saw the theft committed ! ''
And then Jim did n't get whaled , and the venerable justice did n't read the tearful school a homily , and take George by the hand and say such a boy deserved to be exalted , and then tell him to come and make his home with him , and sweep out the office , and make fires , and run errands , and chop wood , and study law , and help his wife do household labors , and have all the balance of the time to play , and get forty cents a month , and be happy .
No ; it would have happened that way in the books , but didn't happen that way to Jim .
No meddling old clam of a justice dropped in to make trouble , and so the model boy George got thrashed , and Jim was glad of it because , you know , Jim hated moral boys .
Jim said he was `` down on them milksops . ''
Such was the coarse language of this bad , neglected boy .
But the strangest thing that ever happened to Jim was the time he went boating on Sunday , and did n't get drowned , and that other time that he got caught out in the storm when he was fishing on Sunday , and did n't get struck by lightning .
Why , you might look , and look , all through the Sunday-school books from now till next Christmas , and you would never come across anything like this .
Oh , no ; you would find that all the bad boys who go boating on Sunday invariably get drowned ; and all the bad boys who get caught out in storms when they are fishing on Sunday infallibly get struck by lightning .
Boats with bad boys in them always upset on Sunday , and it always storms when bad boys go fishing on the Sabbath .
How this Jim ever escaped is a mystery to me .
One thing that Jacob wanted to do was to find a lame dog that had n't any place to stay , and was hungry and persecuted , and bring him home and pet him and have that dog 's imperishable gratitude .
And at last he found one and was happy ; and he brought him home and fed him , but when he was going to pet him the dog flew at him and tore all the clothes off him except those that were in front , and made a spectacle of him that was
In another moment the guide disappeared behind the deluge , and , bewildered by the thunder , driven helplessly by the wind , and smitten by the arrowy tempest of rain , I followed .
Such a mad storming , roaring , and bellowing of warring wind and water never crazed my ears before .
I bent my head , and seemed to receive the Atlantic on my back .
The world seemed going to destruction .
I could not see anything , the flood poured down savagely .
I raised my head , with open mouth , and the most of the American cataract went down my throat .
If I had sprung a leak now I had been lost .
And at this moment I discovered that the bridge had ceased , and we must trust for a foothold to the slippery and precipitous rocks .
I never was so scared before and survived it .
But we got through at last , and emerged into the open day , where we could stand in front of the laced and frothy and seething world of descending water , and look at it .
When I saw how much of it there was , and how fearfully in earnest it was , I was sorry I had gone behind it .
`` Faix , an ' is it Biddy Malone ye dare to be callin ' names ?
Lave this , or I 'll shy your lean carcass over the cataract , ye sniveling blaggard ! ''
`` Noble Red Men , Braves , Grand Sachems , War Chiefs , Squaws , and High Muck-a-Mucks , the paleface from the land of the setting sun greets you !
You , Beneficent Polecat -- you , Devourer of Mountains -- you , Roaring Thundergust -- you , Bully Boy with a Glass eye -- the paleface from beyond the great waters greets you all !
War and pestilence have thinned your ranks and destroyed your once proud nation .
Poker and seven-up , and a vain modern expense for soap , unknown to your glorious ancestors , have depleted your purses .
Appropriating , in your simplicity , the property of others has gotten you into trouble .
Misrepresenting facts , in your simple innocence , has damaged your reputation with the soulless usurper .
Trading for forty-rod whisky , to enable you to get drunk and happy and tomahawk your families , has played the everlasting mischief with the picturesque pomp of your dress , and here you are , in the broad light of the nineteenth century , gotten up like the ragtag and bobtail of the purlieus of New York .
Recall their mighty deeds !
-- and Red jacket !
and Hole in the Day !
Unfurl yourselves under my banner , noble savages , illustrious guttersnipes -- ''
`` Down wid him ! ''
`` Scoop the blaggard ! ''
`` Burn him ! ''
`` Hang him ! ''
`` Dhround him ! ''
About ninety or a hundred feet from the top , the remains of my vest caught on a projecting rock , and I was almost drowned before I could get loose .
I finally fell , and brought up in a world of white foam at the foot of the Fall , whose celled and bubbly masses towered up several inches above my head .
Of course I got into the eddy .
I sailed round and round in it forty-four times -- chasing a chip and gaining on it -- each round trip a half-mile -- reaching for the same bush on the bank forty-four times , and just exactly missing it by a hair's-breadth every time .
`` It is an awful savage tribe of Indians that do the beadwork and moccasins for Niagara Falls , doctor .
Where are they from ? ''
Was he a mining on the flat -- He done it with a zest ; Was he a leading of the choir -- He done his level best .
If he 'd a reg'lar task to do , He never took no rest ; Or if 't was off-and-on -- the same -- He done his level best .
`` ARTHUR AUGUSTUS . ''
-- No ; you are wrong ; that is the proper way to throw a brickbat or a tomahawk ; but it does n't answer so well for a bouquet ; you will hurt somebody if you keep it up .
Turn your nosegay upside down , take it by the stems , and toss it with an upward sweep .
Did you ever pitch quoits ?
that is the idea .
The practice of recklessly heaving immense solid bouquets , of the general size and weight of prize cabbages , from the dizzy altitude of the galleries , is dangerous and very reprehensible .
Now , night before last , at the Academy of Music , just after Signorina ____ had finished that exquisite melody , `` The Last Rose of Summer , '' one of these floral pile-drivers came cleaving down through the atmosphere of applause , and if she had n't deployed suddenly to the right , it would have driven her into the floor like a shinglenail .
Of course that bouquet was well meant ; but how would you like to have been the target ?
A sincere compliment is always grateful to a lady , so long as you do n't try to knock her down with it .
`` YOUNG MOTHER . ''
-- And so you think a baby is a thing of beauty and a joy forever ?
Well , the idea is pleasing , but not original ; every cow thinks the same of its own calf .
Perhaps the cow may not think it so elegantly , but still she thinks it nevertheless .
I honor the cow for it .
We all honor this touching maternal instinct wherever we find it , be it in the home of luxury or in the humble cow-shed .
But really , madam , when I come to examine the matter in all its bearings , I find that the correctness of your assertion does not assert itself in all cases .
A soiled baby , with a neglected nose , can not be conscientiously regarded as a thing of beauty ; and inasmuch as babyhood spans but three short years , no baby is competent to be a joy `` forever . ''
It pains me thus to demolish two-thirds of your pretty sentiment in a single sentence ; but the position I hold in this chair requires that I shall not permit you to deceive and mislead the public with your plausible figures of speech .
I know a female baby , aged eighteen months , in this city , which can not hold out as a `` joy '' twenty-four hours on a stretch , let alone `` forever . ''
And it possesses some of the most remarkable eccentricities of character and appetite that have ever fallen under my notice .
I will set down here a statement of this infant 's operations ( conceived , planned , and carried out by itself , and without suggestion or assistance from its mother or any one else ) , during a single day ; and what I shall say can be substantiated by the sworn testimony of witnesses .
It commenced by eating one dozen large blue-mass pills , box and all ; then it fell down a flight of stairs , and arose with a blue and purple knot on its forehead , after which it proceeded in quest of further refreshment and amusement .
It found a glass trinket ornamented with brass-work -- smashed up and ate the glass , and then swallowed the brass .
Then it drank about twenty drops of laudanum , and more than a dozen tablespoonfuls of strong spirits of camphor .
The reason why it took no more laudanum was because there was no more to take .
After this it lay down on its back , and shoved five or six inches of a silver-headed whalebone cane down its throat ; got it fast there , and it was all its mother could do to pull the cane out again , without pulling out some of the child with it .
Then , being hungry for glass again , it broke up several wine glasses , and fell to eating and swallowing the fragments , not minding a cut or two .
Then it ate a quantity of butter , pepper , salt , and California matches , actually taking a spoonful of butter , a spoonful of salt , a spoonful of pepper , and three or four lucifer matches at each mouthful .
( I will remark here that this thing of beauty likes painted German lucifers , and eats all she can get of them ; but she prefers California matches , which I regard as a compliment to our home manufactures of more than ordinary value , coming , as it does , from one who is too young to flatter . )
Then she washed her head with soap and water , and afterward ate what soap was left , and drank as much of the suds as she had room for ; after which she sallied forth and took the cow familiarly by the tail , and got kicked heels over head .
At odd times during the day , when this joy forever happened to have nothing particular on hand , she put in the time by climbing up on places , and falling down off them , uniformly damaging her self in the operation .
As young as she is , she speaks many words tolerably distinctly ; and being plainspoken in other respects , blunt and to the point , she opens conversation with all strangers , male or female , with the same formula , `` How do , Jim ? ''
Not being familiar with the ways of children , it is possible that I have been magnifying into matter of surprise things which may not strike any one who is familiar with infancy as being at all astonishing .
However , I can not believe that such is the case , and so I repeat that my report of this baby 's performances is strictly true ; and if any one doubts it , I can produce the child .
I will further engage that she will devour anything that is given her ( reserving to myself only the right to exclude anvils ) , and fall down from any place to which she may be elevated ( merely stipulating that her preference for alighting on her head shall be respected , and , therefore , that the elevation chosen shall be high enough to enable her to accomplish this to her satisfaction ) .
But I find I have wandered from my subject ; so , without further argument , I will reiterate my conviction that not all babies are things of beauty and joys forever .
-- '' I am an enthusiastic student of mathematics , and it is so vexatious to me to find my progress constantly impeded by these mysterious arithmetical technicalities .
Now do tell me what the difference is between geometry and conchology ? ''
In the case of the other method mentioned for raising poultry , your friend takes along a covered vessel with a charcoal fire in it , and you carry a long slender plank .
This is a frosty night , understand .
Arrived at the tree , or fence , or other henroost ( your own if you are an idiot ) , you warm the end of your plank in your friend 's fire vessel , and then raise it aloft and ease it up gently against a slumbering chicken 's foot .
If the subject of your attentions is a true bird , he will infallibly return thanks with a sleepy cluck or two , and step out and take up quarters on the plank , thus becoming so conspicuously accessory before the fact to his own murder as to make it a grave question in our minds as it once was in the mind of Blackstone , whether he is not really and deliberately committing suicide in the second degree .
[ But you enter into a contemplation of these legal refinements subsequently -- not then . ]
The Black Spanish is an exceedingly fine bird and a costly one .
Thirty-five dollars is the usual figure , and fifty a not uncommon price for a specimen .
Even its eggs are worth from a dollar to a dollar and a half apiece , and yet are so unwholesome that the city physician seldom or never orders them for the workhouse .
Still I have once or twice procured as high as a dozen at a time for nothing , in the dark of the moon .
The best way to raise the Black Spanish fowl is to go late in the evening and raise coop and all .
The reason I recommend this method is that , the birds being so valuable , the owners do not permit them to roost around promiscuously , but put them in a coop as strong as a fireproof safe and keep it in the kitchen at night .
The method I speak of is not always a bright and satisfying success , and yet there are so many little articles of VERTU about a kitchen , that if you fail on the coop you can generally bring away something else .
I brought away a nice steel trap one night , worth ninety cents .
[ As related to the author of this book by Mr. McWilliams , a pleasant New York gentleman whom the said author met by chance on a journey . ]
`` Very well , it shall be as you say .
But there is a want of logic in your last remark which -- ''
Presently , however , Mrs. McWilliams said suppose the baby should catch it from Penelope ?
This thought struck a new panic to her heart , and the tribe of us could not get the crib out of the nursery again fast enough to satisfy my wife , though she assisted in her own person and well-nigh pulled the crib to pieces in her frantic hurry .
We moved down-stairs ; but there was no place there to stow the nurse , and Mrs. McWilliams said the nurse 's experience would be an inestimable help .
So we returned , bag and baggage , to our own bedroom once more , and felt a great gladness , like storm-buffeted birds that have found their nest again .
I know ; but there 's something peculiar about his sleep now .
He seems to -- to -- he seems to breathe so regularly .
Oh , this is dreadful . ''
`` You can help me all I want .
I would n't allow anybody to do anything but myself , anyhow , at such a time as this . ''
I said , without intent to hurt , but with heedless choice of words , that I could not see that we had been living such an abandoned life .
Then she began to cry , but suddenly exclaimed :
I was only waiting for you to give me a chance . ''
`` Well do give them to me !
Do n't you know that every moment is precious now ?
But what was the use in sending medicines , when he knows that the disease is incurable ? ''
We now went to bed , placing the crib close to my wife 's pillow .
All this turmoil had worn upon me , and within two minutes I was something more than half asleep .
Mrs. McWilliams roused me :
I turned it on , and presently fell asleep again .
I was aroused once more :
I moved it , but had a collision with the rug and woke up the child .
I dozed off once more , while my wife quieted the sufferer .
But in a little while these words came murmuring remotely through the fog of my drowsiness :
`` Now , Mortimer , I should think you would be ashamed to make a remark like that .
It is a pity if you can not do the few little things I ask of you at such an awful time as this when our child -- ''
`` Mortimer , do n't sit there and catch your death of cold .
Come to bed . ''
I did not finish , because I was interrupted .
I lugged wood up from below for some little time , and then turned in and fell to snoring as only a man can whose strength is all gone and whose soul is worn out .
Just at broad daylight I felt a grip on my shoulder that brought me to my senses suddenly .
My wife was glaring down upon me and gasping .
As soon as she could command her tongue she said :
I was a very smart child at the age of thirteen -- an unusually smart child , I thought at the time .
It was then that I did my first newspaper scribbling , and most unexpectedly to me it stirred up a fine sensation in the community .
It did , indeed , and I was very proud of it , too .
I was a printer 's `` devil , '' and a progressive and aspiring one .
My uncle had me on his paper ( the Weekly Hannibal Journal , two dollars a year in advance -- five hundred subscribers , and they paid in cordwood , cabbages , and unmarketable turnips ) , and on a lucky summer 's day he left town to be gone a week , and asked me if I thought I could edit one issue of the paper judiciously .
did n't I want to try !
Higgins was the editor on the rival paper .
He had lately been jilted , and one night a friend found an open note on the poor fellow 's bed , in which he stated that he could not longer endure life and had drowned himself in Bear Creek .
The friend ran down there and discovered Higgins wading back to shore .
He had concluded he would n't .
The village was full of it for several days , but Higgins did not suspect it .
I thought this was a fine opportunity .
I wrote an elaborately wretched account of the whole matter , and then illustrated it with villainous cuts engraved on the bottoms of wooden type with a jackknife -- one of them a picture of Higgins wading out into the creek in his shirt , with a lantern , sounding the depth of the water with a walking-stick .
I thought it was desperately funny , and was densely unconscious that there was any moral obliquity about such a publication .
Being satisfied with this effort I looked around for other worlds to conquer , and it struck me that it would make good , interesting matter to charge the editor of a neighboring country paper with a piece of gratuitous rascality and `` see him squirm . ''
Then I sat down bewildered and exhausted .
He stretches full length on the sofa awhile ; then draws up to half length ; then gets into a chair , hangs his head back and his arms abroad , and stretches his legs till the rims of his boot-heels rest upon the floor ; by and by sits up and leans forward , with one leg or both over the arm of the chair .
But it is still observable that with all his changes of position , he never assumes the upright or a fraudful affectation of dignity .
From time to time he yawns , and stretches , and scratches himself with a tranquil , mangy enjoyment , and now and then he grunts a kind of stuffy , overfed grunt , which is full of animal contentment .
At rare and long intervals , however , he sighs a sigh that is the eloquent expression of a secret confession , to wit `` I am useless and a nuisance , a cumberer of the earth . ''
The bore and his comrades -- for there are usually from two to four on hand , day and night -- mix into the conversation when men come in to see the editors for a moment on business ; they hold noisy talks among themselves about politics in particular , and all other subjects in general -- even warming up , after a fashion , sometimes , and seeming to take almost a real interest in what they are discussing .
They ruthlessly call an editor from his work with such a remark as : `` Did you see this , Smith , in the Gazette ? ''
and proceed to read the paragraph while the sufferer reins in his impatient pen and listens ; they often loll and sprawl round the office hour after hour , swapping anecdotes and relating personal experiences to each other -- hairbreadth escapes , social encounters with distinguished men , election reminiscences , sketches of odd characters , etc .
And through all those hours they never seem to comprehend that they are robbing the editors of their time , and the public of journalistic excellence in next day's paper .
At other times they drowse , or dreamily pore over exchanges , or droop limp and pensive over the chair-arms for an hour .
Even this solemn silence is small respite to the editor , for the next uncomfortable thing to having people look over his shoulders , perhaps , is to have them sit by in silence and listen to the scratching of his pen .
If a body desires to talk private business with one of the editors , he must call him outside , for no hint milder than blasting-powder or nitroglycerin would be likely to move the bores out of listening-distance .
To have to sit and endure the presence of a bore day after day ; to feel your cheerful spirits begin to sink as his footstep sounds on the stair , and utterly vanish away as his tiresome form enters the door ; to suffer through his anecdotes and die slowly to his reminiscences ; to feel always the fetters of his clogging presence ; to long hopelessly for one single day 's privacy ; to note with a shudder , by and by , that to contemplate his funeral in fancy has ceased to soothe , to imagine him undergoing in strict and fearful detail the tortures of the ancient Inquisition has lost its power to satisfy the heart , and that even to wish him millions and millions and millions of miles in Tophet is able to bring only a fitful gleam of joy ; to have to endure all this , day after day , and week after week , and month after month , is an affliction that transcends any other that men suffer .
Physical pain is pastime to it , and hanging a pleasure excursion .
He started after Sherman with the beef , but when he got to Washington Sherman had gone to Manassas ; so he took the beef and followed him there , but arrived too late ; he followed him to Nashville , and from Nashville to Chattanooga , and from Chattanooga to Atlanta -- but he never could overtake him .
At Atlanta he took a fresh start and followed him clear through his march to the sea .
He arrived too late again by a few days ; but hearing that Sherman was going out in the Quaker City excursion to the Holy Land , he took shipping for Beirut , calculating to head off the other vessel .
When he arrived in Jerusalem with his beef , he learned that Sherman had not sailed in the Quaker City , but had gone to the Plains to fight the Indians .
He returned to America and started for the Rocky Mountains .
After sixty-eight days of arduous travel on the Plains , and when he had got within four miles of Sherman 's headquarters , he was tomahawked and scalped , and the Indians got the beef .
They got all of it but one barrel .
Sherman 's army captured that , and so , even in death , the bold navigator partly fulfilled his contract .
In his will , which he had kept like a journal , he bequeathed the contract to his son Bartholomew W. Bartholomew W. made out the following bill , and then died :
I said , `` Your Royal Highness , on or about the 10th day of October , 1861 , John Wilson Mackenzie of Rotterdam , Chemung County , New Jersey , deceased , contracted with the General Government to General Sherman the sum total of thirty barrels of beef -- ''
I said , `` Your August Excellency , on or about -- ''
`` But , my dear sir -- ''
So I stood there till I had changed four different times .
Then I said to one of the clerks who was reading :
He took them , and for a long time he ransacked his odds and ends .
Finally he found the Northwest Passage , as I regarded it -- he found the long lost record of that beef contract -- he found the rock upon which so many of my ancestors had split before they ever got to it .
I was deeply moved .
And yet I rejoiced -- for I had survived .
I said with emotion , `` Give it me .
The government will settle now . ''
He waved me back , and said there was something yet to be done first .
`` We must have proofs .
Have you got the Indian ? ''
`` You must get the tomahawk .
You must produce the Indian and the tomahawk .
If Mackenzie 's death can be proven by these , you can then go before the commission appointed to audit claims with some show of getting your bill under such headway that your children may possibly live to receive the money and enjoy it .
But that man 's death must be proven .
However , I may as well tell you that the government will never pay that transportation and those traveling expenses of the lamented Mackenzie .
It may possibly pay for the barrel of beef that Sherman 's soldiers captured , if you can get a relief bill through Congress making an appropriation for that purpose ; but it will not pay for the twenty-nine barrels the Indians ate . ''
On or about the 1st day of September , 1813 , the Creek war being then in progress in Florida , the crops , herds , and houses of Mr. George Fisher , a citizen , were destroyed , either by the Indians or by the United States troops in pursuit of them .
By the terms of the law , if the Indians destroyed the property , there was no relief for Fisher ; but if the troops destroyed it , the Government of the United States was debtor to Fisher for the amount involved .
In the course of time Fisher died , and his widow married again .
And by and by , nearly twenty years after that dimly remembered raid upon Fisher 's corn-fields , the widow Fisher 's new husband petitioned Congress for pay for the property , and backed up the petition with many depositions and affidavits which purported to prove that the troops , and not the Indians , destroyed the property ; that the troops , for some inscrutable reason , deliberately burned down `` houses '' ( or cabins ) valued at $ 600 , the same belonging to a peaceable private citizen , and alsodestroyed various other property belonging to the same citizen .
But Congress declined to believe that the troops were such idiots ( after overtaking and scattering a band of Indians proved to have been found destroying Fisher 's property ) as to calmly continue the work of destruction themselves ; and make a complete job of what the Indians had only commenced .
So Congress denied the petition of the heirs of George Fisher in 1832 , and did not pay them a cent .
That was in April , 1848 .
In December , 1848 , the heirs of George Fisher , deceased , came forward and pleaded for a `` revision '' of their bill of damages .
The revision was made , but nothing new could be found in their favor except an error of $ 100 in the former calculation .
However , in order to keep up the spirits of the Fisher family , the Auditor concluded to go back and allow interest from the date of the first petition ( 1832 ) to the date when the bill of damages was awarded .
This sent the Fishers home happy with sixteen years ' interest on $ 8,873 -- the same amounting to $ 8,997.94 .
Total , $ 17,870.94 .
Total , ... ... ... ... .18,104
To interest on $ 22,202 , from July 1813 to November 1860 , 47 years and 4 months , ... ... .63,053.68 To interest on $ 12,750 , from September 1814 to November 1860 , 46 years and 2 months , ..35,317.50
It was in this way that he found out that the great commonwealth of California imposes an unlawful mining-tax upon John the foreigner , and allows Patrick the foreigner to dig gold for nothing -- probably because the degraded Mongol is at no expense for whisky , and the refined Celt can not exist without it .
`` I would n't have missed it for anything .
I adjourned court right on the spot , and we put on our coats and went out and took up a collection for her and her cubs , and sent them over the mountains to their friends .
Ah , she was a spirited wench ! ''
`` WASHINGTON , December 10 , 1867 .
But he worried through , and got well and started a farm .
He fenced it in , and the next day that great storm came on and washed the most of it over to Gibraltar , or around there somewhere .
He only said , in his patient way , that it was gone , and he would n't bother about trying to find out where it went to , though it was his opinion it went to Gibraltar .
Professor Bull Frog ( nephew of the late explorer ) said he believed the ridge was the wall that inclosed the earth .
So he shut up his glass and went into his shell to make a note of the discovery of the world 's end , and the nature of it .
But about this moment those dreadful shriekings were heard again ; again the rumbling and thundering came speeding up out of the night ; and once more a flaming great eye flashed by and lost itself in gloom and distance .
The camp laborers gave themselves up for lost .
The savants were sorely perplexed .
Here was a marvel hard to account for .
They thought and they talked , they talked and they thought .
Finally the learned and aged Lord Grand-Daddy-Longlegs , who had been sitting in deep study , with his slender limbs crossed and his stemmy arms folded , said :
`` But how is this ?
Venus should traverse the sun 's surface , not the earth 's . ''
`` G ( 'ic ! )
Las ' one dropped something . ''
After another day devoted to rest and recovery , the expedition proceeded upon its way .
Some days later it went into camp in a pleasant part of the plain , and the savants sallied forth to see what they might find .
Their reward was at hand .
Professor Bull Frog discovered a strange tree , and called his comrades .
They inspected it with profound interest .
It was very tall and straight , and wholly devoid of bark , limbs , or foliage .
By triangulation Lord Longlegs determined its altitude ; Herr Spider measured its circumference at the base and computed the circumference at its top by a mathematical demonstration based upon the warrant furnished by the uniform degree of its taper upward .
It was considered a very extraordinary find ; and since it was a tree of a hitherto unknown species , Professor Woodlouse gave it a name of a learned sound , being none other than that of Professor Bull Frog translated into the ancient Mastodon language , for it had always been the custom with discoverers to perpetuate their names and honor themselves by this sort of connection with their discoveries .
A week later the expedition camped in the midst of a collection of wonderful curiosities .
These were a sort of vast caverns of stone that rose singly and in bunches out of the plain by the side of the river which they had first seen when they emerged from the forest .
These caverns stood in long , straight rows on opposite sides of broad aisles that were bordered with single ranks of trees .
The summit of each cavern sloped sharply both ways .
Several horizontal rows of great square holes , obstructed by a thin , shiny , transparent substance , pierced the frontage of each cavern .
Inside were caverns within caverns ; and one might ascend and visit these minor compartments by means of curious winding ways consisting of continuous regular terraces raised one above another .
There were many huge , shapeless objects in each compartment which were considered to have been living creatures at one time , though now the thin brown skin was shrunken and loose , and rattled when disturbed .
Spiders were here in great number , and their cobwebs , stretched in all directions and wreathing the great skinny dead together , were a pleasant spectacle , since they inspired with life and wholesome cheer a scene which would otherwise have brought to the mind only a sense of forsakenness and desolation .
Information was sought of these spiders , but in vain .
They were of a different nationality from those with the expedition , and their language seemed but a musical , meaningless jargon .
They were a timid , gentle race , but ignorant , and heathenish worshipers of unknown gods .
The expedition detailed a great detachment of missionaries to teach them the true religion , and in a week 's time a precious work had been wrought among those darkened creatures , not three families being by that time at peace with each other or having a settled belief in any system of religion whatever .
This encouraged the expedition to establish a colony of missionaries there permanently , that the work of grace might go on .
A critical examination of some of the lower strata demonstrated the presence of fossil ants and tumble-bugs ( the latter accompanied by their peculiar goods ) , and with high gratification the fact was enrolled upon the scientific record ; for this was proof that these vulgar laborers belonged to the first and lowest orders of created beings , though at the same time there was something repulsive in the reflection that the perfect and exquisite creature of the modern uppermost order owed its origin to such ignominious beings through the mysterious law of Development of Species .
He observed that certain inscriptions were met with in greater frequency than others .
Such as `` FOR SALE CHEAP '' ; `` BILLIARDS '' ; `` S. T. -- 1860 -- X '' ; `` KENO '' ; `` ALE ON DRAUGHT . ''
Naturally , then , these must be religious maxims .
But this idea was cast aside by and by , as the mystery of the strange alphabet began to clear itself .
In time , the professor was enabled to translate several of the inscriptions with considerable plausibility , though not to the perfect satisfaction of all the scholars .
Still , he made constant and encouraging progress .
Finally a cavern was discovered with these inscriptions upon it :
`` Erect , in a row , were a sort of rigid great figures which struck us instantly as belonging to the long extinct species of reptile called MAN , described in our ancient records .
This was a peculiarly gratifying discovery , because of late times it has become fashionable to regard this creature as a myth and a superstition , a work of the inventive imaginations of our remote ancestors .
But here , indeed , was Man , perfectly preserved , in a fossil state .
And this was his burial place , as already ascertained by the inscription .
And now it began to be suspected that the caverns we had been inspecting had been his ancient haunts in that old time that he roamed the earth -- for upon the breast of each of these tall fossils was an inscription in the character heretofore noticed .
One read , 'CAPTAIN KIDD THE PIRATE ' ; another , 'QUEEN VICTORIA ' ; another , 'ABE LINCOLN ' ; another , 'GEORGE WASHINGTON , ' etc .
This was the first successful and satisfactory translation that had been made of the mysterious character left behind him by extinct man , and it gave Professor Woodlouse such reputation that at once every seat of learning in his native land conferred a degree of the most illustrious grade upon him , and it was believed that if he had been a soldier and had turned his splendid talents to the extermination of a remote tribe of reptiles , the king would have ennobled him and made him rich .
And this , too , was the origin of that school of scientists called Manologists , whose specialty is the deciphering of the ancient records of the extinct bird termed Man .
[ For it is now decided that Man was a bird and not a reptile . ]
But Professor Woodlouse began and remained chief of these , for it was granted that no translations were ever so free from error as his .
Others made mistakes -- he seemed incapable of it .
Many a memorial of the lost race was afterward found , but none ever attained to the renown and veneration achieved by the `` Mayoritish Stone '' it being so called from the word `` Mayor '' in it , which , being translated `` King , '' `` Mayoritish Stone '' was but another way of saying `` King Stone . ''
`` A monument ! ''
`` A monument setup by a Mound Builder !
Aye , so it is !
So it is , indeed , to the shrewd keen eye of science ; but to an ignorant poor devil who has never seen a college , it is not a Monument , strictly speaking , but is yet a most rich and noble property ; and with your worship 's good permission I will proceed to manufacture it into spheres of exceeding grace and -- ''
`` Wherefore it appears that there were in old times two distinct species of this majestic fowl , the one being single and the other double .
Nature has a reason for all things .
It is plain to the eye of science that the Double-Man originally inhabited a region where dangers abounded ; hence he was paired together to the end that while one part slept the other might watch ; and likewise that , danger being discovered , there might always be a double instead of a single power to oppose it .
All honor to the mystery-dispelling eye of godlike Science ! ''
When the great official report of the expedition appeared , the above sentence bore this comment :
`` Well , sir , I did not know I was doing any harm .
I only wanted to convince them . ''
`` 'WASHINGTON , Nov. 24 .
`` Dodge the mischief !
-- but never mind .
As long as destruction must come now , let it be complete .
Let it be complete -- let this last of your performances , which I am about to read , make a finality of it .
I am a ruined man .
I had my misgivings when I gave you the letter from Humboldt , asking that the post route from Indian Gulch to Shakespeare Gap and intermediate points be changed partly to the old Mormon trail .
But I told you it was a delicate question , and warned you to deal with it deftly -- to answer it dubiously , and leave them a little in the dark .
And your fatal imbecility impelled you to make this disastrous reply .
I should think you would stop your ears , if you are not dead to all shame :
`` Du -- leave the house !
I am a ruined man .
Those Humboldt savages never will forgive me for tangling their brains up with this inhuman letter .
I have lost the respect of the Methodist Church , the board of aldermen -- ''
At General G -- -- 's reception the other night , the most fashionably dressed lady was Mrs. G. C. She wore a pink satin dress , plain in front but with a good deal of rake to it -- to the train , I mean ; it was said to be two or three yards long .
One could see it creeping along the floor some little time after the woman was gone .
Mrs. C. wore also a white bodice , cut bias , with Pompadour sleeves , flounced with ruches ; low neck , with the inside handkerchief not visible , with white kid gloves .
She had on a pearl necklace , which glinted lonely , high up the midst of that barren waste of neck and shoulders .
Her hair was frizzled into a tangled chaparral , forward of her ears , aft it was drawn together , and compactly bound and plaited into a stump like a pony 's tail , and furthermore was canted upward at a sharp angle , and ingeniously supported by a red velvet crupper , whose forward extremity was made fast with a half-hitch around a hairpin on the top of her head .
Her whole top hamper was neat and becoming .
She had a beautiful complexion when she first came , but it faded out by degrees in an unaccountable way .
However , it is not lost for good .
I found the most of it on my shoulder afterward .
( I stood near the door when she squeezed out with the throng . )
There were other ladies present , but I only took notes of one as a specimen .
I would gladly enlarge upon the subject were I able to do it justice .
Riley is full of humor , and has an unfailing vein of irony , which makes his conversation to the last degree entertaining ( as long as the remarks are about somebody else ) .
But notwithstanding the possession of these qualities , which should enable a man to write a happy and an appetizing letter , Riley 's newspaper letters often display a more than earthly solemnity , and likewise an unimaginative devotion to petrified facts , which surprise and distress all men who know him in his unofficial character .
He explains this curious thing by saying that his employers sent him to Washington to write facts , not fancy , and that several times he has come near losing his situation by inserting humorous remarks which , not being looked for at headquarters , and consequently not understood , were thought to be dark and bloody speeches intended to convey signals and warnings to murderous secret societies , or something of that kind , and so were scratched out with a shiver and a prayer and cast into the stove .
Riley says that sometimes he is so afflicted with a yearning to write a sparkling and absorbingly readable letter that he simply can not resist it , and so he goes to his den and revels in the delight of untrammeled scribbling ; and then , with suffering such as only a mother can know , he destroys the pretty children of his fancy and reduces his letter to the required dismal accuracy .
Having seen Riley do this very thing more than once , I know whereof I speak .
Often I have laughed with him over a happy passage , and grieved to see him plow his pen through it .
He would say , `` I had to write that or die ; and I 've got to scratch it out or starve .
They would n't stand it , you know . ''
And , sure enough , at breakfast the landlady was down in the very sloughs of woe -- entirely brokenhearted .
Everything she looked at reminded her of that poor old negro woman , and so the buckwheat cakes made her sob , the coffee forced a groan , and when the beefsteak came on she fetched a wail that made our hair rise .
Then she got to talking about deceased , and kept up a steady drizzle till both of us were soaked through and through .
Presently she took a fresh breath and said , with a world of sobs :
`` Put it , 'Well done , good and faithful servant , ' '' said Riley , and never smiled .
He is to be married next week to a girl one hundred and two years old , who still takes in washing .
Instead of being the simplest case in the world , it had somehow turned out to be an excessively knotty one .
The judge scratched his head over it awhile , and said there was no way of coming to a determination , because just as many men could be brought into court who would testify on one side as could be found to testify on the other .
But he said he was willing to do the fair thing by all parties , and would act upon any suggestion Mr. Sturgis would make for the solution of the difficulty .
[ `` Never put off till to-morrow what you can do day after to-morrow just as well. ''
This party was one of those persons whom they call Philosophers .
He was twins , being born simultaneously in two different houses in the city of Boston .
These houses remain unto this day , and have signs upon them worded in accordance with the facts .
The signs are considered well enough to have , though not necessary , because the inhabitants point out the two birthplaces to the stranger anyhow , and sometimes as often as several times in the same day .
The subject of this memoir was of a vicious disposition , and early prostituted his talents to the invention of maxims and aphorisms calculated to inflict suffering upon the rising generation of all subsequent ages .
His simplest acts , also , were contrived with a view to their being held up for the emulation of boys forever -- boys who might otherwise have been happy .
It was in this spirit that he became the son of a soap-boiler , and probably for no other reason than that the efforts of all future boys who tried to be anything might be looked upon with suspicion unless they were the sons of soap-boilers .
With a malevolence which is without parallel in history , he would work all day , and then sit up nights , and let on to be studying algebra by the light of a smoldering fire , so that all other boys might have to do that also , or else have Benjamin Franklin thrown up to them .
Not satisfied with these proceedings , he had a fashion of living wholly on bread and water , and studying astronomy at meal-time -- a thing which has brought affliction to millions of boys since , whose fathers had read Franklin's pernicious biography .
As if it were any object to a boy to be healthy and wealthy and wise on such terms .
The sorrow that that maxim has cost me , through my parents , experimenting on me with it , tongue can not tell .
The legitimate result is my present state of general debility , indigence , and mental aberration .
My parents used to have me up before nine o'clock in the morning sometimes when I was a boy .
If they had let me take my natural rest where would I have been now ?
Keeping store , no doubt , and respected by all .
-- Last evening , about six o'clock , as Mr. William Schuyler , an old and respectable citizen of South Park , was leaving his residence to go down-town , as has been his usual custom for many years with the exception only of a short interval in the spring of 1850 , during which he was confined to his bed by injuries received in attempting to stop a runaway horse by thoughtlessly placing himself directly in its wake and throwing up his hands and shouting , which if he had done so even a single moment sooner , must inevitably have frightened the animal still more instead of checking its speed , although disastrous enough to himself as it was , and rendered more melancholy and distressing by reason of the presence of his wife 's mother , who was there and saw the sad occurrence notwithstanding it is at least likely , though not necessarily so , that she should be reconnoitering in another direction when incidents occur , not being vivacious and on the lookout , as a general thing , but even the reverse , as her own mother is said to have stated , who is no more , but died in the full hope of a glorious resurrection , upwards of three years ago ; aged eighty-six , being a Christian woman and without guile , as it were , or property , in consequence of the fire of 1849 , which destroyed every single thing she had in the world .
But such is life .
Let us all take warning by this solemn occurrence , and let us endeavor so to conduct ourselves that when we come to die we can do it .
Let us place our hands upon our heart , and say with earnestness and sincerity that from this day forth we will beware of the intoxicating bowl.
-- 'First Edition of the Californian . '
A MEDIEVAL ROMANCE [ written about 1868 ]
`` Oh , my father , is it for this my life hath been a lie ?
Was it that I might cheat my unoffending cousin of her rights ?
Spare me , father , spare your child ! ''
The old baron sat silent for many minutes after his daughter 's departure , and then he turned to his sad wife and said :
`` Tush , woman !
Leave the owls to croak .
To bed with ye , and dream of Brandenburgh and grandeur ! ''
But in a remote apartment of the palace a scene of a different nature was transpiring .
By a window stood the duke 's only child , the Lady Constance .
Her eyes were red and swollen and full of tears .
Presently she fell to weeping anew , and said aloud :
`` The villain Detzin is gone -- has fled the dukedom !
I could not believe it at first , but alas !
it is too true .
And I loved him so .
I dared to love him though I knew the duke , my father , would never let me wed him .
I loved him -- but now I hate him !
With all my soul I hate him !
Oh , what is to become of me !
I am lost , lost , lost !
I shall go mad ! ''
He bitterly cursed himself for having yielded to the instinct that had made him seek the companionship of one of his own sex when he was new and a stranger in the palace -- when he was sorrowful and yearned for a sympathy such as only women can give or feel .
He now began to avoid his cousin .
But this only made matters worse , for , naturally enough , the more he avoided her the more she cast herself in his way .
He marveled at this at first , and next it startled him .
The girl haunted him ; she hunted him ; she happened upon him at all times and in all places , in the night as well as in the day .
She seemed singularly anxious .
There was surely a mystery somewhere .
This could not go on forever .
All the world was talking about it .
The duke was beginning to look perplexed .
Poor Conrad was becoming a very ghost through dread and dire distress .
One day as he was emerging from a private anteroom attached to the picture-gallery , Constance confronted him , and seizing both his hands , in hers , exclaimed :
Constance hesitated a moment , and then , misinterpreting his silence , a wild gladness flamed in her eyes , and she flung her arms about his neck and said :
A sickly pallor overspread his countenance , and he trembled like an aspen .
Presently , in desperation , he thrust the poor girl from him , and cried :
`` The Lady Constance hath given birth to a child ! ''
`` Long live Duke Conrad !
-- for lo , his crown is sure from this day forward !
Detzin has done his errand well , and the good scoundrel shall be rewarded ! ''
And he spread the tidings far and wide , and for eight-and-forty hours no soul in all the barony but did dance and sing , carouse and illuminate , to celebrate the great event , and all at proud and happy old Klugenstein's expense .
After the heralds had made due proclamation and the other preliminaries had followed , the venerable Lord Chief justice said :
`` Most noble lady , before the great judges of this realm it hath been charged and proven that out of holy wedlock your Grace hath given birth unto a child , and by our ancient law the penalty is death excepting in one sole contingency , whereof his Grace the acting Duke , our good Lord Conrad , will advertise you in his solemn sentence now ; wherefore , give heed . ''
`` Thou art the man ! ''
An appalling conviction of his helpless , hopeless peril struck a chill to Conrad 's heart like the chill of death itself .
What power on earth could save him !
To disprove the charge he must reveal that he was a woman , and for an uncrowned woman to sit in the ducal chair was death !
At one and the same moment he and his grim old father swooned and fell to the ground .
Whereas , The Constitution guarantees equal rights to all , backed by the Declaration of Independence ; and
Therefore , Your petitioner , having the good of his country solely at heart , humbly prays that `` equal rights '' and fair and equal treatment may be meted out to all citizens , by the restriction of rights in all property , real estate included , to the beneficent term of forty-two years .
Then shall all men bless your honorable body and be happy .
And for this will your petitioner ever pray .
`` It is enough .
So we got along all right .
Arrived at her official and mysterious den , she asked me to tell her the date of my birth , the exact hour of that occurrence , and the color of my grandmother 's hair .
I answered as accurately as I could .
But it was not his fault .
He could not help it . ''
`` Why , man , '' she said , `` hold up your head -- you have nothing to grieve about .
-- [ In this paragraph the fortune-teller details the exact history of the Pike-Brown assassination case in New Hampshire , from the succoring and saving of the stranger Pike by the Browns , to the subsequent hanging and coffining of that treacherous miscreant .
She adds nothing , invents nothing , exaggerates nothing ( see any New England paper for November , 1869 ) .
This Pike-Brown case is selected merely as a type , to illustrate a custom that prevails , not in New Hampshire alone , but in every state in the Union -- I mean the sentimental custom of visiting , petting , glorifying , and snuffling over murderers like this Pike , from the day they enter the jail under sentence of death until they swing from the gallows .
The following extract from the Temple Bar ( 1866 ) reveals the fact that this custom is not confined to the United States.
-- - `` On December 31 , 1841 , a man named John Johnes , a shoemaker , murdered his sweetheart , Mary Hallam , the daughter of a respectable laborer , at Mansfield , in the county of Nottingham .
He was executed on March 23 , 1842 .
He was a man of unsteady habits , and gave way to violent fits of passion .
The girl declined his addresses , and he said if he did not have her no one else should .
After he had inflicted the first wound , which was not immediately fatal , she begged for her life , but seeing him resolved , asked for time to pray .
He said that he would pray for both , and completed the crime .
The wounds were inflicted by a shoemaker 's knife , and her throat was cut barbarously .
After this he dropped on his knees some time , and prayed God to have mercy on two unfortunate lovers .
He made no attempt to escape , and confessed the crime .
After his imprisonment he behaved in a most decorous manner ; he won upon the good opinion of the jail chaplain , and he was visited by the Bishop of Lincoln .
It does not appear that he expressed any contrition for the crime , but seemed to pass away with triumphant certainty that he was going to rejoin his victim in heaven .
He was visited by some pious and benevolent ladies of Nottingham , some of whom declared he was a child of God , if ever there was one .
One of the ladies sent him a white camellia to wear at his execution . ''
I then took leave of the fortune-teller .
But , seriously , is it well to glorify a murderous villain on the scaffold , as Pike was glorified in New Hampshire ?
Is it well to turn the penalty for a bloody crime into a reward ?
Is it just to do it ?
Insanity certainly is on the increase in the world , and crime is dying out .
There are no longer any murders -- none worth mentioning , at any rate .
Formerly , if you killed a man , it was possible that you were insane -- but now , if you , having friends and money , kill a man , it is evidence that you are a lunatic .
In these days , too , if a person of good family and high social standing steals anything , they call it kleptomania , and send him to the lunatic asylum .
If a person of high standing squanders his fortune in dissipation , and closes his career with strychnine or a bullet , `` Temporary Aberration '' is what was the trouble with him .
Night before last I had a singular dream .
I seemed to be sitting on a doorstep ( in no particular city perhaps ) ruminating , and the time of night appeared to be about twelve or one o'clock .
The weather was balmy and delicious .
There was no human sound in the air , not even a footstep .
There was no sound of any kind to emphasize the dead stillness , except the occasional hollow barking of a dog in the distance and the fainter answer of a further dog .
Presently up the street I heard a bony clack-clacking , and guessed it was the castanets of a serenading party .
In a minute more a tall skeleton , hooded , and half clad in a tattered and moldy shroud , whose shreds were flapping about the ribby latticework of its person , swung by me with a stately stride and disappeared in the gray gloom of the starlight .
It had a broken and worm-eaten coffin on its shoulder and a bundle of something in its hand .
I knew what the clack-clacking was then ; it was this party 's joints working together , and his elbows knocking against his sides as he walked .
I may say I was surprised .
Before I could collect my thoughts and enter upon any speculations as to what this apparition might portend , I heard another one coming for I recognized his clack-clack .
He had two-thirds of a coffin on his shoulder , and some foot and head boards under his arm .
I mightily wanted to peer under his hood and speak to him , but when he turned and smiled upon me with his cavernous sockets and his projecting grin as he went by , I thought I would not detain him .
He was hardly gone when I heard the clacking again , and another one issued from the shadowy half-light .
This one was bending under a heavy gravestone , and dragging a shabby coffin after him by a string .
When he got to me he gave me a steady look for a moment or two , and then rounded to and backed up to me , saying :
It was summer-time , and twilight .
We were sitting on the porch of the farmhouse , on the summit of the hill , and `` Aunt Rachel '' was sitting respectfully below our level , on the steps -- for she was our Servant , and colored .
She was of mighty frame and stature ; she was sixty years old , but her eye was undimmed and her strength unabated .
She was a cheerful , hearty soul , and it was no more trouble for her to laugh than it is for a bird to sing .
She was under fire now , as usual when the day was done .
That is to say , she was being chaffed without mercy , and was enjoying it .
She would let off peal after peal of laughter , and then sit with her face in her hands and shake with throes of enjoyment which she could no longer get breath enough to express .
At such a moment as this a thought occurred to me , and I said :
She faced fairly around now , and was full earnestness .
THE SIAMESE TWINS -- [ Written about 1868 . ]
The sympathy existing between these two brothers is so close and so refined that the feelings , the impulses , the emotions of the one are instantly experienced by the other .
When one is sick , the other is sick ; when one feels pain , the other feels it ; when one is angered , the other's temper takes fire .
We have already seen with what happy facility they both fell in love with the same girl .
Now Chang is bitterly opposed to all forms of intemperance , on principle ; but Eng is the reverse -- for , while these men 's feelings and emotions are so closely wedded , their reasoning faculties are unfettered ; their thoughts are free .
Chang belongs to the Good Templars , and is a hard-working , enthusiastic supporter of all temperance reforms .
But , to his bitter distress , every now and then Eng gets drunk , and , of course , that makes Chang drunk too .
This unfortunate thing has been a great sorrow to Chang , for it almost destroys his usefulness in his favorite field of effort .
As sure as he is to head a great temperance procession Eng ranges up alongside of him , prompt to the minute , and drunk as a lord ; but yet no more dismally and hopelessly drunk than his brother , who has not tasted a drop .
And so the two begin to hoot and yell , and throw mud and bricks at the Good Templars ; and , of course , they break up the procession .
It would be manifestly wrong to punish Chang for what Eng does , and , therefore , the Good Templars accept the untoward situation , and suffer in silence and sorrow .
They have officially and deliberately examined into the matter , and find Chang blameless .
They have taken the two brothers and filled Chang full of warm water and sugar and Eng full of whisky , and in twenty-five minutes it was not possible to tell which was the drunkest .
Both were as drunk as loons -- and on hot whisky punches , by the smell of their breath .
Yet all the while Chang 's moral principles were unsullied , his conscience clear ; and so all just men were forced to confess that he was not morally , but only physically , drunk .
By every right and by every moral evidence the man was strictly sober ; and , therefore , it caused his friends all the more anguish to see him shake hands with the pump and try to wind his watch with his night-key .
-- a -- alas !
-- -- -- -- alas ! ''
And , not because she conquered George III -- [ laughter ] -- but because she wrote those divine lines : --
I slept profoundly , but how long I do not know .
All at once I found myself awake , and filled with a shuddering expectancy .
All but my own heart -- I could hear it beat .
Presently the bedclothes began to slip away slowly toward the foot of the bed , as if some one were pulling them !
I could not stir ; I could not speak .
Still the blankets slipped deliberately away , till my breast was uncovered .
Then with a great effort I seized them and drew them over my head .
I waited , listened , waited .
Once more that steady pull began , and once more I lay torpid a century of dragging seconds till my breast was naked again .
At last I roused my energies and snatched the covers back to their place and held them with a strong grip .
By and by I felt a faint tug , and took a fresh grip .
The tug strengthened to a steady strain -- it grew stronger and stronger .
My hold parted , and for the third time the blankets slid away .
An answering groan came from the foot of the bed !
Beaded drops of sweat stood upon my forehead .
I was more dead than alive .
Presently I heard a heavy footstep in my room -- the step of an elephant , it seemed to me -- it was not like anything human .
But it was moving from me -- there was relief in that .
I heard it approach the door -- pass out without moving bolt or lock -- and wander away among the dismal corridors , straining the floors and joists till they creaked again as it passed -- and then silence reigned once more .
When everything was still once more , I crept out of bed , sick and feeble , and lit the gas with a hand that trembled as if it were aged with a hundred years .
The light brought some little cheer to my spirits .
I sat down and fell into a dreamy contemplation of that great footprint in the ashes .
By and by its outlines began to waver and grow dim .
I glanced up and the broad gas-flame was slowly wilting away .
In the same moment I heard that elephantine tread again .
I noted its approach , nearer and nearer , along the musty halls , and dimmer and dimmer the light waned .
The tread reached my very door and paused -- the light had dwindled to a sickly blue , and all things about me lay in a spectral twilight .
The door did not open , and yet I felt a faint gust of air fan my cheek , and presently was conscious of a huge , cloudy presence before me .
I watched it with fascinated eyes .
A pale glow stole over the Thing ; gradually its cloudy folds took shape -- an arm appeared , then legs , then a body , and last a great sad face looked out of the vapor .
Stripped of its filmy housings , naked , muscular and comely , the majestic Cardiff Giant loomed above me !
`` Stop , stop , you 'll ruin ev -- ''
`` Well , I will not break any more furniture .
But what am I to do ?
I have not had a chance to sit down for a century . ''
And the tears came into his eyes .
[ Scene-An Artist 's Studio in Rome . ]
`` Oh , George , I do love you ! ''
[ Scene-A Dwelling in Rome . ]
`` You 're a simpleton ! ''
Six months to raise the money in -- and five will do ! ''
`` Are you insane ? ''
`` I have called to say that your credit at our bank , some time since unfortunately interrupted , is entirely and most satisfactorily restored , and we shall be most happy if you will draw upon us for any -- ''
-- '' Gentlemen , I propose that we immediately form an American joint-stock company for the purchase of lands and excavations of statues here , with proper connections in Wall Street to bull and bear the stock . ''
`` Cheer up -- do n't be downhearted .
It is not America that treats you in this way , it is merely one citizen , whose greed of gain has eaten the humanity out of his heart .
America has a broader hospitality for the exiled and oppressed .
America and Americans are always ready to help the unfortunate .
Money shall be raised -- you shall go back to China -- you shall see your friends again .
What wages do they pay you here ? ''
`` Divil a cint but four dollars a week and find meself ; but it 's aisy , barrin ' the troublesome furrin clothes that 's so expinsive . ''
HOW I EDITED AN AGRICULTURAL PAPER -- [ Written about 1870 . ]
In about half an hour an old gentleman , with a flowing beard and a fine but rather austere face , entered , and sat down at my invitation .
He seemed to have something on his mind .
He took off his hat and set it on the floor , and got out of it a red silk handkerchief and a copy of our paper .
`` No , '' I said ; `` this is my first attempt . ''
It is evident that we are to have a backward season for grain .
Therefore it will be well for the farmer to begin setting out his corn-stalks and planting his buckwheat cakes in July instead of August .
`` There , there -- that will do .
I know I am all right now , because you have read it just as I did , word , for word .
But , stranger , when I first read it this morning , I said to myself , I never , never believed it before , notwithstanding my friends kept me under watch so strict , but now I believe I am crazy ; and with that I fetched a howl that you might have heard two miles , and started out to kill somebody -- because , you know , I knew it would come to that sooner or later , and so I might as well begin .
I read one of them paragraphs over again , so as to be certain , and then I burned my house down and started .
I have crippled several people , and have got one fellow up a tree , where I can get him if I want him .
But I thought I would call in here as I passed along and make the thing perfectly certain ; and now it is certain , and I tell you it is lucky for the chap that is in the tree .
I should have killed him sure , as I went back .
Good-by , sir , good-by ; you have taken a great load off my mind .
My reason has stood the strain of one of your agricultural articles , and I know that nothing can ever unseat it now .
Good-by , sir . ''
I felt a little uncomfortable about the cripplings and arsons this person had been entertaining himself with , for I could not help feeling remotely accessory to them .
But these thoughts were quickly banished , for the regular editor walked in !
[ I thought to myself , Now if you had gone to Egypt as I recommended you to , I might have had a chance to get my hand in ; but you would n't do it , and here you are .
I sort of expected you . ]
Now , to show how really hard it is to foist a moral or a truth upon an unsuspecting public through a burlesque without entirely and absurdly missing one 's mark , I will here set down two experiences of my own in this thing .
In the fall of 1862 , in Nevada and California , the people got to running wild about extraordinary petrifactions and other natural marvels .
One could scarcely pick up a paper without finding in it one or two glorified discoveries of this kind .
The mania was becoming a little ridiculous .
I was a brand-new local editor in Virginia City , and I felt called upon to destroy this growing evil ; we all have our benignant , fatherly moods at one time or another , I suppose .
I chose to kill the petrifaction mania with a delicate , a very delicate satire .
But maybe it was altogether too delicate , for nobody ever perceived the satire part of it at all .
I put my scheme in the shape of the discovery of a remarkably petrified man .
As a satire on the petrifaction mania , or anything else , my Petrified Man was a disheartening failure ; for everybody received him in innocent good faith , and I was stunned to see the creature I had begotten to pull down the wonder-business with , and bring derision upon it , calmly exalted to the grand chief place in the list of the genuine marvels our Nevada had produced .
I was so disappointed at the curious miscarriage of my scheme , that at first I was angry , and did not like to think about it ; but by and by , when the exchanges began to come in with the Petrified Man copied and guilelessly glorified , I began to feel a soothing secret satisfaction ; and as my gentleman 's field of travels broadened , and by the exchanges I saw that he steadily and implacably penetrated territory after territory , state after state , and land after land , till he swept the great globe and culminated in sublime and unimpeached legitimacy in the august London Lancet , my cup was full , and I said I was glad I had done it .
I think that for about eleven months , as nearly as I can remember , Mr. -- -- 's daily mail-bag continued to be swollen by the addition of half a bushel of newspapers hailing from many climes with the Petrified Man in them , marked around with a prominent belt of ink .
I sent them to him .
I did it for spite , not for fun .
If they can not get the light in an inconvenient position any other way , they move the bed .
They always put your other boots into inaccessible places .
They chiefly enjoy depositing them as far under the bed as the wall will permit .
It is because this compels you to get down in an undignified attitude and make wild sweeps for them in the dark with the bootjack , and swear .
They keep always trying to make your bed before you get up , thus destroying your rest and inflicting agony upon you ; but after you get up , they do n't come any more till next day .
And again misfortune overtook the unhappy youth .
He lost one arm by the premature discharge of a Fourth of July cannon , and within three months he got the other pulled out by a carding-machine .
Aurelia 's heart was almost crushed by these latter calamities .
She could not but be deeply grieved to see her lover passing from her by piecemeal , feeling , as she did , that he could not last forever under this disastrous process of reduction , yet knowing of no way to stop its dreadful career , and in her tearful despair she almost regretted , like brokers who hold on and lose , that she had not taken him at first , before he had suffered such an alarming depreciation .
Still , her brave soul bore her up , and she resolved to bear with her friend 's unnatural disposition yet a little longer .
A grand affair of a ball -- the Pioneers ' -- came off at the Occidental some time ago .
The following notes of the costumes worn by the belles of the occasion may not be uninteresting to the general reader , and Jenkins may get an idea therefrom :
Now he began to shave , digging his fingers into my countenance to stretch the skin and bundling and tumbling my head this way and that as convenience in shaving demanded .
As long as he was on the tough sides of my face I did not suffer ; but when he began to rake , and rip , and tug at my chin , the tears came .
He now made a handle of my nose , to assist him shaving the corners of my upper lip , and it was by this bit of circumstantial evidence that I discovered that a part of his duties in the shop was to clean the kerosene-lamps .
I had often wondered in an indolent way whether the barbers did that , or whether it was the boss .
`` To hell with who ?
To hell with what ? ''
I handed him my card , and he read : `` The HON .
Then he looked at me from head to foot , as if he had never heard of me before .
The Secretary of the Treasury said :
I am done with official life for the present .
Let those clerks who are willing to be imposed on remain .
I know numbers of them in the departments who are never informed when there is to be a Cabinet meeting , whose advice is never asked about war , or finance , or commerce , by the heads of the nation , any more than if they were not connected with the government , and who actually stay in their offices day after day and work !
They know their importance to the nation , and they unconsciously show it in their bearing , and the way they order their sustenance at the restaurant -- but they work .
I know one who has to paste all sorts of little scraps from the newspapers into a scrapbook -- sometimes as many as eight or ten scraps a day .
He does n't do it well , but he does it as well as he can .
It is very fatiguing .
It is exhausting to the intellect .
Yet he only gets eighteen hundred dollars a year .
With a brain like his , that young man could amass thousands and thousands of dollars in some other pursuit , if he chose to do it .
But no -- his heart is with his country , and he will serve her as long as she has got a scrapbook left .
And I know clerks that do n't know how to write very well , but such knowledge as they possess they nobly lay at the feet of their country , and toil on and suffer for twenty-five hundred dollars a year .
What they write has to be written over again by other clerks sometimes ; but when a man has done his best for his country , should his country complain ?
Then there are clerks that have no clerkships , and are waiting , and waiting , and waiting for a vacancy -- waiting patiently for a chance to help their country out -- and while they are waiting , they only get barely two thousand dollars a year for it .
It is sad -- it is very , very sad .
When a member of Congress has a friend who is gifted , but has no employment wherein his great powers may be brought to bear , he confers him upon his country , and gives him a clerkship in a department .
And there that man has to slave his life out , fighting documents for the benefit of a nation that never thinks of him , never sympathizes with him -- and all for two thousand or three thousand dollars a year .
When I shall have completed my list of all the clerks in the several departments , with my statement of what they have to do , and what they get for it , you will see that there are not half enough clerks , and that what there are do not get half enough pay .
How touching is this tribute of the late Hon .
T. H. Benton to his mother 's influence : -- 'My mother asked me never to use tobacco ; I have never touched it from that time to the present day .
She asked me not to gamble , and I have never gambled .
I can not tell who is losing in games that are being played .
She admonished me , too , against liquor-drinking , and whatever capacity for endurance I have at present , and whatever usefulness I may have attained through life , I attribute to having complied with her pious and correct wishes .
When I was seven years of age she asked me not to drink , and then I made a resolution of total abstinence ; and that I have adhered to it through all time I owe to my mother . '
When I was two years of age she asked me not to drink , and then I made a resolution of total abstinence .
That I have adhered to it and enjoyed the beneficent effects of it through all time , I owe to my grandmother .
I have never drunk a drop from that day to this of any kind of water .
Here his feelings were too much for him , and he swooned away .
I pitied this poor creature from the bottom of my heart .
I was deeply moved .
I shed a few tears on him , and kissed him for his mother .
I then took what small change he had , and `` shoved . ''
`` Now I just knew how it would be -- that whisky cocktail has done the business for me ; I do n't understand any more than a clam . ''
`` Oh , do n't mind it , do n't mind it ; the fault was my own , no doubt -- though I did think it clear enough for -- ''
`` MR. CHARLES J. LANGDON : 'I nominate Mr. Samuel A. Bowen of St .
`` The motion was carried , and further debate shut off , of course .
The motion to elect officers was passed , and under it Mr. Gaston was chosen chairman , Mr. Blake , secretary , Messrs. Holcomb , Dyer , and Baldwin a committee on nominations , and Mr. R. M. Howland , purveyor , to assist the committee in making selections .
`` MR. ROGERS of Missouri : 'Mr .
President -- The report being properly before the House now , I move to amend it by substituting for the name of Mr. Herrman that of Mr. Lucius Harris of St. Louis , who is well and honorably known to us all .
I do not wish to be understood as casting the least reflection upon the high character and standing of the gentleman from Louisiana -- far from it .
I respect and esteem him as much as any gentleman here present possibly can ; but none of us can be blind to the fact that he has lost more flesh during the week that we have lain here than any among us -- none of us can be blind to the fact that the committee has been derelict in its duty , either through negligence or a graver fault , in thus offering for our suffrages a gentleman who , however pure his own motives may be , has really less nutriment in him -- '
`` MR. RADWAY moved that the House now take up the remaining candidates , and go into an election for breakfast .
THE KILLING OF JULIUS CAESAR `` LOCALIZED '' -- [ Written about 1865 . ]
On the contrary , she began to get miserly as her bank-account grew .
She grieved to part with a cent , poor creature , for twice in her hard-working life she had known what it was to be hungry , cold , friendless , sick , and without a dollar in the world , and she had a haunting dread of suffering so again .
Well , at last Dan died ; and the boys , in testimony of their esteem and respect for him , telegraphed to Mrs. Murphy to know if she would like to have him embalmed and sent home ; when you know the usual custom was to dump a poor devil like him into a shallow hole , and then inform his friends what had become of him .
Mrs. Murphy jumped to the conclusion that it would only cost two or three dollars to embalm her dead husband , and so she telegraphed `` Yes . ''
It was at the `` wake '' that the bill for embalming arrived and was presented to the widow .
`` 'My friend , you seem to know pretty much all the tunes there are , and you worry along first rate .
But then , did n't you notice that sometimes last night the piece you happened to be playing was a little rough on the proprieties , so to speak -- did n't seem to jibe with the general gait of the picture that was passing at the time , as it were -- was a little foreign to the subject , you know -- as if you did n't either trump or follow suit , you understand ? '
`` Oh , we 'll all get blind drunk When Johnny comes marching home !
`` 'Ladies and gentlemen , this exquisite painting represents the raising of Lazarus from the dead by our Saviour .
The subject has been handled with marvelous skill by the artist , and such touching sweetness and tenderness of expression has he thrown into it that I have known peculiarly sensitive persons to be even affected to tears by looking at it .
Observe the half-confused , half-inquiring look upon the countenance of the awakened Lazarus .
Observe , also , the attitude and expression of the Saviour , who takes him gently by the sleeve of his shroud with one hand , while He points with the other toward the distant city . '
`` Before anybody could get off an opinion in the case the innocent old ass at the piano struck up :
`` The showman went down and grabbed the orchestra and shook him up and says :
It is a good thing , perhaps , to write for the amusement of the public , but it is a far higher and nobler thing to write for their instruction , their profit , their actual and tangible benefit .
The latter is the sole object of this article .
If it prove the means of restoring to health one solitary sufferer among my race , of lighting up once more the fire of hope and joy in his faded eyes , or bringing back to his dead heart again the quick , generous impulses of other days , I shall be amply rewarded for my labor ; my soul will be permeated with the sacred delight a Christian feels when he has done a good , unselfish deed .
When the White House was burned in Virginia City , I lost my home , my happiness , my constitution , and my trunk .
The loss of the two first named articles was a matter of no great consequence , since a home without a mother , or a sister , or a distant young female relative in it , to remind you , by putting your soiled linen out of sight and taking your boots down off the mantelpiece , that there are those who think about you and care for you , is easily obtained .
And I cared nothing for the loss of my happiness , because , not being a poet , it could not be possible that melancholy would abide with me long .
But to lose a good constitution and a better trunk were serious misfortunes .
On the day of the fire my constitution succumbed to a severe cold , caused by undue exertion in getting ready to do something .
I suffered to no purpose , too , because the plan I was figuring at for the extinguishing of the fire was so elaborate that I never got it completed until the middle of the following week .
She mixed a decoction composed of molasses , aquafortis , turpentine , and various other drugs , and instructed me to take a wine-glass full of it every fifteen minutes .
I never took but one dose ; that was enough ; it robbed me of all moral principle , and awoke every unworthy impulse of my nature .
Under its malign influence my brain conceived miracles of meanness , but my hands were too feeble to execute them ; at that time , had it not been that my strength had surrendered to a succession of assaults from infallible remedies for my cold , I am satisfied that I would have tried to rob the graveyard .
Like most other people , I often feel mean , and act accordingly ; but until I took that medicine I had never reveled in such supernatural depravity , and felt proud of it .
At the end of two days I was ready to go to doctoring again .
I took a few more unfailing remedies , and finally drove my cold from my head to my lungs .
My case grew more and more serious every day .
A Plain gin was recommended ; I took it .
Then gin and molasses ; I took that also .
Then gin and onions ; I added the onions , and took all three .
I detected no particular result , however , except that I had acquired a breath like a buzzard 's .
I finally concluded to visit San Francisco , and the first day I got there a lady at the hotel told me to drink a quart of whisky every twenty-four hours , and a friend up-town recommended precisely the same course .
Each advised me to take a quart ; that made half a gallon .
I did it , and still live .
[ We have received the following advertisement , but , inasmuch as it concerns a matter of deep and general interest , we feel fully justified in inserting it in our reading-columns .
We are confident that our conduct in this regard needs only explanation , not apology.
The comet will visit Mars first , and proceed to Mercury , Jupiter , Venus , and Saturn .
Parties connected with the government of the District of Columbia and with the former city government of New York , who may desire to inspect the rings , will be allowed time and every facility .
Every star of prominent magnitude will be visited , and time allowed for excursions to points of interest inland .
I was fully committed , and must go on with the fight .
As I was looking listlessly over the papers at breakfast I came across this paragraph , and I may truly say I never was so confounded before .
I thought I should burst with amazement !
Such a cruel , heartless charge !
I never had seen Cochin China !
I never had heard of Wakawak !
I didn't know a plantain-patch from a kangaroo !
I did not know what to do .
I was crazed and helpless .
I let the day slip away without doing anything at all .
The next morning the same paper had this -- nothing more :
-- Will the new candidate for Governor deign to explain to certain of his fellow-citizens ( who are suffering to vote for him ! )
the little circumstance of his cabin-mates in Montana losing small valuables from time to time , until at last , these things having been invariably found on Mr .
Twain 's person or in his `` trunk '' ( newspaper he rolled his traps in ) , they felt compelled to give him a friendly admonition for his own good , and so tarred and feathered him , and rode him on a rail ; and then advised him to leave a permanent vacuum in the place he usually occupied in the camp .
Will he do this ?
There is things which you have done which is unbeknowens to anybody but me .
You better trot out a few dols , to yours truly , or you'll hear through the papers from HANDY ANDY .
Shortly the principal Republican journal `` convicted '' me of wholesale bribery , and the leading Democratic paper `` nailed '' an aggravated case of blackmailing to me .
By this time there had grown to be such a clamor for an `` answer '' to all the dreadful charges that were laid to me that the editors and leaders of my party said it would be political ruin for me to remain silent any longer .
As if to make their appeal the more imperative , the following appeared in one of the papers the very next day :
I gave it up .
I hauled down my colors and surrendered .
I was not equal to the requirements of a Gubernatorial campaign in the state of New York , and so I sent in my withdrawal from the candidacy , and in bitterness of spirit signed it , `` Truly yours , once a decent man , but now
He said he thought we would like his establishment well enough to confine ourselves to it -- said he never saw anybody who would go off and hunt up another man in his line after trading with him once .
Why , I should say I should like to see myself rolling in just such another ocean of affluence .
I 'll make a note of it .
-- and on top of all this am I to understand that you had still more income ? ''
Then the gentleman got up to go .
It came over me most uncomfortably that maybe I had made my revelations for nothing , besides being flattered into stretching them considerably by the stranger 's astonished exclamations .
But no ; at the last moment the gentleman handed me a large envelope , and said it contained his advertisement ; and that I would find out all about his business in it ; and that he would be happy to have my custom -- would , in fact , be proud to have the custom of a man of such prodigious income ; and that he used to think there were several wealthy men in the city , but when they came to trade with him he discovered that they barely had enough to live on ; and that , in truth , it had been such a weary , weary age since he had seen a rich man face to face , and talked to him , and touched him with his hands , that he could hardly refrain from embracing me -- in fact , would esteem it a great favor if I would let him embrace me .
This so pleased me that I did not try to resist , but allowed this simple-hearted stranger to throw his arms about me and weep a few tranquilizing tears down the back of my neck .
Then he went his way .
[ I may remark , in this place , that I did not do it . ]
[ While he was making this speech his little boy Willie lifted a two-dollar greenback out of his vest pocket and vanished with it , and I would wager anything that if my stranger were to call on that little boy to-morrow he would make a false return of his income . ]
It contained errors of judgment and of fact .
I have now corrected these to the best of my ability and later knowledge .
Book II was written at the beginning of 1903 , and has not until now appeared in any form .
In it my purpose has been to present a character-portrait of Mrs. Eddy , drawn from her own acts and words solely , not from hearsay and rumor ; and to explain the nature and scope of her Monarchy , as revealed in the Laws by which she governs it , and which she wrote herself .
BOOK I CHRISTIAN SCIENCE `` It is the first time since the dawn-days of Creation that a Voice has gone crashing through space with such placid and complacent confidence and command . ''
CHAPTER I VIENNA 1899 .
This last summer , when I was on my way back to Vienna from the Appetite-Cure in the mountains , I fell over a cliff in the twilight , and broke some arms and legs and one thing or another , and by good luck was found by some peasants who had lost an ass , and they carried me to the nearest habitation , which was one of those large , low , thatch-roofed farm-houses , with apartments in the garret for the family , and a cunning little porch under the deep gable decorated with boxes of bright colored flowers and cats ; on the ground floor a large and light sitting-room , separated from the milch-cattle apartment by a partition ; and in the front yard rose stately and fine the wealth and pride of the house , the manure-pile .
That sentence is Germanic , and shows that I am acquiring that sort of mastery of the art and spirit of the language which enables a man to travel all day in one sentence without changing cars .
There was a village a mile away , and a horse doctor lived there , but there was no surgeon .
It seemed a bad outlook ; mine was distinctly a surgery case .
Then it was remembered that a lady from Boston was summering in that village , and she was a Christian Science doctor and could cure anything .
So she was sent for .
It was night by this time , and she could not conveniently come , but sent word that it was no matter , there was no hurry , she would give me `` absent treatment '' now , and come in the morning ; meantime she begged me to make myself tranquil and comfortable and remember that there was nothing the matter with me .
I thought there must be some mistake .
`` Did you tell her I walked off a cliff seventy-five feet high ? ''
`` And struck a boulder at the bottom and bounced ? ''
`` And struck another one and bounced again ? ''
`` And struck another one and bounced yet again ? ''
`` And broke the boulders ? ''
`` That accounts for it ; she is thinking of the boulders .
Why did n't you tell her I got hurt , too ? ''
I told her what you told me to tell her : that you were now but an incoherent series of compound fractures extending from your scalp-lock to your heels , and that the comminuted projections caused you to look like a hat-rack . ''
`` And it was after this that she wished me to remember that there was nothing the matter with me ? ''
`` Those were her words . ''
`` I do not understand it .
I believe she has not diagnosed the case with sufficient care .
Did she look like a person who was theorizing , or did she look like one who has fallen off precipices herself and brings to the aid of abstract science the confirmations of personal experience ? ''
It was too large a contract for the Stubenmadchen 's vocabulary ; she could n't call the hand .
I allowed the subject to rest there , and asked for something to eat and smoke , and something hot to drink , and a basket to pile my legs in ; but I could not have any of these things .
`` She said you would need nothing at all . ''
`` But I am hungry and thirsty , and in desperate pain . ''
`` She said you would have these delusions , but must pay no attention to them .
She wants you to particularly remember that there are no such things as hunger and thirst and pain . ''
`` She does does she ? ''
`` It is what she said . ''
`` Does she seem to be in full and functionable possession of her intellectual plant , such as it is ? ''
`` Do they let her run at large , or do they tie her up ? ''
`` Tie her up ? ''
`` There , good-night , run along , you are a good girl , but your mental Geschirr is not arranged for light and airy conversation .
Leave me to my delusions . ''
CHAPTER II It was a night of anguish , of course -- at least , I supposed it was , for it had all the symptoms of it -- but it passed at last , and the Christian Scientist came , and I was glad She was middle-aged , and large and bony , and erect , and had an austere face and a resolute jaw and a Roman beak and was a widow in the third degree , and her name was Fuller .
I was eager to get to business and find relief , but she was distressingly deliberate .
She unpinned and unhooked and uncoupled her upholsteries one by one , abolished the wrinkles with a flirt of her hand , and hung the articles up ; peeled off her gloves and disposed of them , got a book out of her hand-bag , then drew a chair to the bedside , descended into it without hurry , and I hung out my tongue .
She said , with pity but without passion : `` Return it to its receptacle .
We deal with the mind only , not with its dumb servants . ''
I could not offer my pulse , because the connection was broken ; but she detected the apology before I could word it , and indicated by a negative tilt of her head that the pulse was another dumb servant that she had no use for .
Then I thought I would tell her my symptoms and how I felt , so that she would understand the case ; but that was another inconsequence , she did not need to know those things ; moreover , my remark about how I felt was an abuse of language , a misapplication of terms .
`` One does not feel , '' she explained ; `` there is no such thing as feeling : therefore , to speak of a non-existent thing as existent is a contradiction .
Matter has no existence ; nothing exists but mind ; the mind can not feel pain , it can only imagine it . ''
`` But if it hurts , just the same -- '' `` It does n't .
A thing which is unreal can not exercise the functions of reality .
Pain is unreal ; hence , pain can not hurt . ''
In making a sweeping gesture to indicate the act of shooing the illusion of pain out of the mind , she raked her hand on a pin in her dress , said `` Ouch ! ''
and went tranquilly on with her talk .
`` You should never allow yourself to speak of how you feel , nor permit others to ask you how you are feeling ; you should never concede that you are ill , nor permit others to talk about disease or pain or death or similar nonexistences in your presence .
Such talk only encourages the mind to continue its empty imaginings . ''
Just at that point the Stuben-madchen trod on the cat 's tail , and the cat let fly a frenzy of cat-profanity .
I asked , with caution : `` Is a cat 's opinion about pain valuable ? ''
`` A cat has no opinion ; opinions proceed from mind only ; the lower animals , being eternally perishable , have not been granted mind ; without mind , opinion is impossible . ''
`` She merely imagined she felt a pain -- the cat ? ''
`` She can not imagine a pain , for imagining is an effect of mind ; without mind , there is no imagination .
A cat has no imagination . ''
`` Then she had a real pain ? ''
It seemed nebulous ; it did not seem to say anything about the difficulty in hand -- how non-existent matter can propagate illusions I said , with some hesitancy :
`` A -- wonderful structure -- combination , so to speak , of profound thoughts -- unthinkable ones -- um -- ''
GOD -- Principle , Life , Truth , Love , Soul , Spirit , Mind .
Do you get that ? ''
`` Christian Science reverses the seeming relation of Soul and body -- as astronomy reverses the human perception of the movement of the solar system -- and makes body tributary to the Mind .
As it is the earth which is in motion , While the sun is at rest , though in viewing the sun rise one finds it impossible to believe the sun not to be really rising , so the body is but the humble servant of the restful Mind , though it seems otherwise to finite sense ; but we shall never understand this while we admit that soul is in body , or mind in matter , and that man is included in non-intelligence .
Soul is God , unchangeable and eternal ; and man coexists with and reflects Soul , for the All-in-all is the Altogether , and the Altogether embraces the All-one , Soul-Mind , Mind-Soul , Love , Spirit , Bones , Liver , one of a series , alone and without an equal . ''
`` Well , it is no matter , '' she said .
`` I remember the words -- indeed , all Christian Scientists know the book by heart ; it is necessary in our practice .
We should otherwise make mistakes and do harm .
She begins thus : 'In the year 1866 I discovered the Science of Metaphysical Healing , and named it Christian Science . '
And She says quite beautifully , I think -- 'Through Christian Science , religion and medicine are inspired with a diviner nature and essence , fresh pinions are given to faith and understanding , and thoughts acquaint themselves intelligently with God . '
Her very words . ''
`` We never give medicine in any circumstances whatever !
`` But , madam , it says -- ''
`` I do n't care what it says , and I do n't wish to talk about it . ''
`` I am sorry if I have offended , but you see the mention seemed in some way inconsistent , and -- ''
`` I can see that , but -- ''
`` The comparisons are not respectful , since they refer to trivialities -- but let it pass .
I will answer in the Discoverer 's own words : 'God had been graciously fitting me , during many years , for the reception of a final revelation of the absolute Principle of Scientific Mind-healing . '
`` All -- God , God -- good , good -- God , Truth , Bones , Liver , one of a series , alone and without equal -- it is amazing ! ''
`` But -- what does it mean ? ''
`` That is our Head , our Chief , our Discoverer of Christian Science -- nothing can be plainer , nothing surer .
`` Love , Livers , Lights , Bones , Truth , Kidneys , one of a series , alone and without equal -- it is beyond imagination for wonder ! ''
The Christian Scientist was not able to cure my stomach-ache and my cold ; but the horse-doctor did it .
This convinces me that Christian Science claims too much .
In my opinion it ought to let diseases alone and confine itself to surgery .
There it would have everything its own way .
That is a simple rule , and easy to remember .
When I , a thoughtful and unblessed Presbyterian , examine the Koran , I know that beyond any question every Mohammedan is insane ; not in all things , but in religious matters .
When a thoughtful and unblessed Mohammedan examines the Westminster Catechism , he knows that beyond any question I am spiritually insane .
I can not prove to him that he is insane , because you never can prove anything to a lunatic -- for that is a part of his insanity and the evidence of it .
He can not prove to me that I am insane , for my mind has the same defect that afflicts his .
All Democrats are insane , but not one of them knows it ; none but the Republicans and Mugwumps know it .
All the Republicans are insane , but only the Democrats and Mugwumps can perceive it .
The rule is perfect : in all matters of opinion our adversaries are insane .
When I look around me , I am often troubled to see how many people are mad .
To mention only a few :
But there 's no end to the list ; there are millions of them !
And all insane ; each in his own way ; insane as to his pet fad or opinion , but otherwise sane and rational .
This should move us to be charitable towards one another 's lunacies .
I recognize that in his special belief the Christian Scientist is insane , because he does not believe as I do ; but I hail him as my mate and fellow , because I am as insane as he insane from his point of view , and his point of view is as authoritative as mine and worth as much .
That is to say , worth a brass farthing .
Upon a great religious or political question , the opinion of the dullest head in the world is worth the same as the opinion of the brightest head in the world -- a brass farthing .
How do we arrive at this ?
The affirmative opinion of a stupid man is neutralized by the negative opinion of his stupid neighbor no decision is reached ; the affirmative opinion of the intellectual giant Gladstone is neutralized by the negative opinion of the intellectual giant Newman -- no decision is reached .
Opinions that prove nothing are , of course , without value any but a dead person knows that much .
This obliges us to admit the truth of the unpalatable proposition just mentioned above -- that , in disputed matters political and religious , one man 's opinion is worth no more than his peer 's , and hence it followers that no man 's opinion possesses any real value .
It is a humbling thought , but there is no way to get around it : all opinions upon these great subjects are brass-farthing opinions .
A lady has told me that in a chapel of the Mosque in Boston there is a picture or image of Mrs. Eddy , and that before it burns a never-extinguished light .
How long do you think it will be before the Christian Scientist will be worshipping that picture or image and praying to it ?
How long do you think it will be before it is claimed that Mrs. Eddy is a Redeemer , a Christ , and Christ 's equal ?
Already her army of disciples speak of her reverently as `` Our Mother . ''
There is a page about another good child -- little Gordon .
Little Gordon `` came into the world without the assistance of surgery or anaesthetics . ''
He was a `` demonstration . ''
A painless one ; therefore , his coming evoked `` joy and thankfulness to God and the Discoverer of Christian Science . ''
It is a noticeable feature of this literature -- the so frequent linking together of the Two Beings in an equal bond ; also of Their Two Bibles .
When little Gordon was two years old , `` he was playing horse on the bed , where I had left my 'little book . '
I noticed him stop in his play , take the book carefully in his little hands , kiss it softly , then look about for the highest place of safety his arms could reach , and put it there . ''
This pious act filled the mother `` with such a train of thought as I had never experienced before .
I thought of the sweet mother of long ago who kept things in her heart , '' etc .
It is a bold comparison ; however , unconscious profanations are about as common in the mouths of the lay member ship of the new Church as are frank and open ones in the mouths of its consecrated chiefs .
There is plenty of other testimonies in the magazine , but these quoted samples will answer .
They show the kind of trade the Science is driving .
Now we come back to the question , Does the Science kill a patient here and there and now and then ?
We must concede it .
Does it compensate for this ?
I am persuaded that it can make a plausible showing in that direction .
For instance : when it lays its hand upon a soldier who has suffered thirty years of helpless torture and makes him whole in body and mind , what is the actual sum of that achievement ?
This , I think : that it has restored to life a subject who had essentially died ten deaths a year for thirty years , and each of them a long and painful one .
But for its interference that man in the three years which have since elapsed , would have essentially died thirty times more .
There are thousands of young people in the land who are now ready to enter upon a life-long death similar to that man 's .
Every time the Science captures one of these and secures to him life-long immunity from imagination-manufactured disease , it may plausibly claim that in his person it has saved three hundred lives .
Meantime , it will kill a man every now and then .
But no matter , it will still be ahead on the credit side .
`` We consciously declare that Science and Health , with Key to the Scriptures , was foretold , as well as its author , Mary Baker Eddy , in Revelation x .
She is the 'mighty angel , ' or God 's highest thought to this age ( verse 1 ) , giving us the spiritual interpretation of the Bible in the 'little book open ' ( verse 2 ) .
Thus we prove that Christian Science is the second coming of Christ-Truth-Spirit . ''
-- Lecture by Dr. George Tomkins , D.D .
There you have it in plain speech .
She is the mighty angel ; she is the divinely and officially sent bearer of God 's highest thought .
For the present , she brings the Second Advent .
We must expect that before she has been in her grave fifty years she will be regarded by her following as having been herself the Second Advent .
She is already worshiped , and we must expect this feeling to spread , territorially , and also to deepen in intensity .
In order to force the sale of Mrs Eddy 's Bible-Annex , no healer , Metaphysical-College-bred or other , is allowed to practice the game unless he possesses a copy of that book .
That means a large and constantly augmenting income for the Trust .
family would consider itself loyal or pious or pain-proof without an Annex or two in the house .
That means an income for the Trust , in the near future , of millions ; not thousands-millions a year .
No charities to support .
No , nor even to contribute to .
One searches in vain the Trust 's advertisements and the utterances of its organs for any suggestion that it spends a penny on orphans , widows , discharged prisoners , hospitals , ragged schools , night missions , city missions , libraries , old people 's homes , or any other object that appeals to a human being 's purse through his heart .
That settles it -- as far as the disciple is concerned .
His mind is satisfied with that answer ; he gets down his Annex and does an incantation or two , and that mesmerizes his spirit and puts that to sleep -- brings it peace .
Peace and comfort and joy , until some inquirer punctures the old sore again .
`` Without money and without price . ''
Those used to be the terms .
Mrs. Eddy 's Annex cancels them .
The motto of Christian Science is , `` The laborer is worthy of his hire . ''
And now that it has been `` demonstrated over , '' we find its spiritual meaning to be , `` Do anything and everything your hand may find to do ; and charge cash for it , and collect the money in advance . ''
The Scientist has on his tongue 's end a cut-and-dried , Boston-supplied set of rather lean arguments , whose function is to show that it is a Heaven-commanded duty to do this , and that the croupiers of the game have no choice but to obey .
The Christian Scientist has organized the business .
Now that was certainly a gigantic idea .
Electricity , in limitless volume , has existed in the air and the rocks and the earth and everywhere since time began -- and was going to waste all the while .
In our time we have organized that scattered and wandering force and set it to work , and backed the business with capital , and concentrated it in few and competent hands , and the results are as we see .
`` There is no money in tinware ; there is nothing about it that appeals to the rich ; its market will be restricted to the poor . ''
The whole five hundred are thinkers , and they are all capable thinkers -- but only within the narrow limits of their specialized trainings .
Four hundred and ninety of them can not competently examine either a religious plan or a political one .
A scattering few of them do examine both -- that is , they think they do .
With results as precious as when I examine the nebular theory and explain it to myself .
If the four hundred and ninety got their religion through their minds , and by weighed and measured detail , Christian Science would not be a scary apparition .
But they do n't ; they get a little of it through their minds , more of it through their feelings , and the overwhelming bulk of it through their environment .
Will Christian Science get a chance to show its wares ?
It has already secured that chance .
Will it flourish and spread and prosper if it shall create for itself the one thing essential to those conditions -- an environment ?
It has already created an environment .
There are families of Christian Scientists in every community in America , and each family is a factory ; each family turns out a Christian Science product at the customary intervals , and contributes it to the Cause in the only way in which contributions of recruits to Churches are ever made on a large scale -- by the puissant forces of personal contact and association .
Each family is an agency for the Cause , and makes converts among the neighbors , and starts some more factories .
It is Mrs. Eddy over again .
As regards her minor half , she is as commonplace as the rest of us .
Vain of trivial things all the first half of her life , and still vain of them at seventy and recording them with naive satisfaction -- even rescuing some early rhymes of hers of the sort that we all scribble in the innocent days of our youth -- rescuing them and printing them without pity or apology , just as the weakest and commonest of us do in our gray age .
More -- she still frankly admires them ; and in her introduction of them profanely confers upon them the holy name of `` poetry . ''
`` Here fame-honored Hickory rears his bold form , And bears a brave breast to the lightning and storm , While Palm , Bay , and Laurel in classical glee , Chase Tulip , Magnolia , and fragrant Fringe-tree . ''
`` How unreasonable is the belief that we are wearing out life and hastening to death , and at the same time we are communing with immortality ?
If the departed are in rapport with mortality , or matter , they are not spiritual , but must still be mortal , sinful , suffering , and dying .
Then wherefore look to them -- even were communication possible -- for proofs of immortality and accept them as oracles ? ''
-- Edition of 1902 , page 78 .
`` Marriage and Parentage '' [ Chapter-heading .
You imagine that she is going to begin a talk about her marriage and finish with some account of her father and mother .
And so you will be deceived .
`` Marriage '' was right , but `` Parentage '' was not the best word for the rest of the record .
It refers to the birth of her own child .
After a certain period of time `` my babe was born . ''
Marriage and Motherhood -- Marriage and Maternity -- Marriage and Product -- Marriage and Dividend -- either of these would have fitted the facts and made the matter clear .
We shall never know why she put the word `` correspondingly '' in there .
Any fine , large word would have answered just as well : psychosuperintangibly -- electroincandescently -- oligarcheologically -- sanchrosynchro-stereoptically -- any of these would have answered , any of these would have filled the void .
`` His spiritual noumenon and phenomenon silenced portraiture . ''
Battles do not wage , battles are waged .
Mrs. Eddy has one very curious and interesting peculiarity : whenever she notices that she is chortling along without saying anything , she pulls up with a sudden `` God is over us all , '' or some other sounding irrelevancy , and for the moment it seems to light up the whole district ; then , before you can recover from the shock , she goes flitting pleasantly and meaninglessly along again , and you hurry hopefully after her , thinking you are going to get something this time ; but as soon as she has led you far enough away from her turkey lot she takes to a tree .
Whenever she discovers that she is getting pretty disconnected , she couples-up with an ostentatious `` But '' which has nothing to do with anything that went before or is to come after , then she hitches some empties to the train-unrelated verses from the Bible , usually -- and steams out of sight and leaves you wondering how she did that clever thing .
For striking instances , see bottom paragraph on page 34 and the paragraph on page 35 of her Autobiography .
She has a purpose -- a deep and dark and artful purpose -- in what she is saying in the first paragraph , and you guess what it is , but that is due to your own talent , not hers ; she has made it as obscure as language could do it .
The other paragraph has no meaning and no discoverable intention .
It is merely one of her God-over-alls .
I can not spare room for it in this place .
`` Naturally , my first jottings were but efforts to express in feeble diction Truth 's ultimate . ''
One understands what she means , but she should have been able to say what she meant -- at any time before she discovered Christian Science and forgot everything she knew -- and after it , too .
If she had put `` feeble '' in front of `` efforts '' and then left out `` in '' and `` diction , '' she would have scored .
This is too extraneous for me .
That is the trouble with Mrs. Eddy when she sets out to explain an over-large exhibit : the minute you think the light is bursting upon you the candle goes out and your mind begins to wander .
`` No one else can drain the cup which I have drunk to the dregs , as the discoverer and teacher of Christian Science '' Page 47 .
That is saying we can not empty an empty cup .
We knew it before ; and we know she meant to tell us that that particular cup is going to remain empty .
That is , we think that that was the idea , but we can not be sure .
She has a perfectly astonishing talent for putting words together in such a way as to make successful inquiry into their intention impossible .
She generally makes us uneasy when she begins to tune up on her fine-writing timbrel .
It carries me back to her Plague-Spot and Poetry days , and I just dread those :
It may be that there is evidence somewhere -- as has been claimed -- that Mrs. Eddy has charged upon the Deity the verbal authorship of Science and Health .
But if she ever made the charge , she has withdrawn it ( as it seems to me ) , and in the most formal and unqualified ; of all ways .
See Autobiography , page 57 :
In one place in the Autobiography she claims both the language and the ideas ; but when this witness is testifying , one must draw the line somewhere , or she will prove both sides of her case-nine sides , if desired .
`` Nothing could be plainer than that .
Here is a distinct avowal that the book entitled Science and Health was the work of Almighty God . ''
The Virgin Mary 2 .
I am not playing with Christian Science and its founder , I am examining them ; and I am doing it because of the interest I feel in the inquiry .
My results may seem inadequate to the reader , but they have for me clarified a muddle and brought a sort of order out of a chaos , and so I value them .
`` A limited number of clergymen received free of charge .
Except in the matter of the Dollar .
The Dollar , and appetite for power and notoriety .
English must also be added ; she is always consistent , she is always Mrs. Eddy , in her English : it is always and consistently confused and crippled and poor .
She wrote the Advertisement ; her literary trade-marks are there .
When she says all `` students '' are subject to examination , she does not mean students , she means candidates for that lofty place When she says students are `` liable '' to leave the class if found unfit to remain in it , she does not mean that if they find themselves unfit , or be found unfit by others , they will be likely to ask permission to leave the class ; she means that if she finds them unfit she will be `` liable '' to fire them out .
When she nobly offers `` tuition for all strictly in advance , '' she does not mean `` instruction for all in advance-payment for it later . ''
No , that is only what she says , it is not what she means .
If she had written Science and Health , the oldest man in the world would not be able to tell with certainty what any passage in it was intended to mean .
It is curious and interesting to note with what an unerring instinct the Pastor Emeritus has thought out and forecast all possible encroachments upon her planned autocracy , and barred the way against them , in the By-laws which she framed and copyrighted -- under the guidance of the Supreme Being .
and is still moving onward , ever onward .
When I contemplate her from a commercial point of view , there are no words that can convey my admiration of her .
There are no dangerously long office-terms in Mrs. Eddy 's government .
The Readers are elected for but one year .
This insures their subserviency to their proprietor .
Twice a year it `` votes on '' admitting candidates .
That is , for Church membership .
But its work is cut out for it beforehand , by Art .
But it is time to foot up again and `` see where we are at . ''
Thus far , Mrs. Eddy is :
`` Who are you ?
Who is your sponsor ?
Who asked you to come here ?
Go away , and do n't come again until you are invited . ''
Mrs. Eddy is proprietor of that Board .
It is likely that it is not frequently used .
It is also probable that the difficulties attendant upon getting admission to membership have been instituted more to invite than to deter , more to enhance the value of membership and make people long for it than to make it really difficult to get .
I think so , because the Mother .
Church has many thousands of members more than its building can accommodate .
Mrs. Eddy is very particular as regards one detail curiously so , for her , all things considered .
The Church Readers must be `` good English scholars '' ; they must be `` thorough English scholars . ''
She should have waited to calm down , then , but instead she added this , which lacks sugar :
It is an unfortunate sentence , for it could mislead a hasty or careless reader for a moment .
Mrs. Eddy framed it -- it is her very own -- it bears her trade-mark .
`` The Bible and Science and Health , with other works by the same author , '' could have come from no literary vacuum but the one which produced the remark ( in the Autobiography ) : `` I remember reading , in my childhood , certain manuscripts containing Scriptural Sonnets , besides other verses and enigmas . ''
The By-law book makes a showy pretence of orderliness and system , but it is only a pretence .
I will not go so far as to say it is a harum-scarum jumble , for it is not that , but I think it fair to say it is at least jumbulacious in places .
For instance , Articles III .
set forth in much detail the qualifications and duties of Readers , she then skips some thirty pages and takes up the subject again .
It looks like slovenliness , but it may be only art .
The belated By-law has a sufficiently quiet look , but it has a ton of dynamite in it .
It makes all the Christian Science Church Readers on the globe the personal chattels of Mrs. Eddy .
Whenever she chooses , she can stretch her long arm around the world 's fat belly and flirt a Reader out of his pulpit , though he be tucked away in seeming safety and obscurity in a lost village in the middle of China :
`` In any Church .
The Pastor Emeritus of the Mother-Church shall have the right ( through a letter addressed to the individual and Church of which he is the Reader ) to remove a Reader from this office in any Church of Christ , Scientist , both in America and in foreign nations ; or to appoint the Reader to fill any office belonging to the Christian Science denomination . ''
That Mrs. Eddy wrote that amazing By-law with her own hand we have much better evidence than her word .
We have her English .
It can not be imitated .
She ought never to go to the expense of copyrighting her verbal discharges .
When any one tries to claim them she should call me ; I can always tell them from any other literary apprentice 's at a glance .
It was like her to call America a `` nation '' ; she would call a sand-bar a nation if it should fall into a sentence in which she was speaking of peoples , for she would not know how to untangle it and get it out and classify it by itself .
And the closing arrangement of that By-law is in true Eddysonian form , too .
In it she reserves authority to make a Reader fill any office connected with a Science church-sexton , grave-digger , advertising-agent , Annex-polisher , leader of the choir , President , Director , Treasurer , Clerk , etc .
She did not mean that .
She already possessed that authority .
She meant to clothe herself with power , despotic and unchallengeable , to appoint all Science Readers to their offices , both at home and abroad .
The phrase `` or to appoint '' is another miscarriage of intention ; she did not mean `` or , '' she meant `` and . ''
Value of this Strait-jacket .
One must not underrate the magnificence of this long-headed idea , one must not underestimate its giant possibilities in the matter of trooping the Church solidly together and keeping it so .
It squelches independent inquiry , and makes such a thing impossible , profane , criminal , it authoritatively settles every dispute that can arise .
It starts with finality -- a point which the Roman Church has travelled towards fifteen or sixteen centuries , stage by stage , and has not yet reached .
The matter of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary was not authoritatively settled until the days of Pius IX.
-- yesterday , so to speak .
`` When Christ answered the rich young man and said for him to give to the poor all he possessed or he could not gain everlasting life , He did not mean it in the literal sense .
My interpretation of His words is that we should part with what comes between us and Christ .
In the present month ( February ) , Mr. E. I. Lindh , A.M. , has communicated to the Boston Transcript a hopeful article on the solution of the problem of the `` divided church . ''
Divided is not too violent a term .
Subdivided could have been permitted if he had thought of it .
He came near thinking of it , for he mentions some of the subdivisions himself : `` the 12 kinds of Presbyterians , the 17 kinds of Methodists , the 13 kinds of Baptists , etc . ''
He overlooked the 12 kinds of Mennonites and the 22 kinds of Lutherans , but they are in Rev .
Mr. Carroll 's list .
Altogether , 76 splits under 5 flags .
The Literary Digest ( February 14th ) is pleased with Mr. Lindh 's optimistic article , and also with the signs of the times , and perceives that `` the idea of Church unity is in the air . ''
Now , then , is not Mrs. Eddy profoundly wise in forbidding , for all time , all explanations of her religion except such as she shall let on to be her own ?
`` Members shall also instruct their students '' to look out and advertise the authorship when they read those poems and things .
Not on Mrs. Eddy's account , but `` for the good of our Cause . ''
`` Our Father-Mother God ' all-harmonious , adorable One .
Thy kingdom is within us , Thou art ever-present .
Enable us to know -- as in heaven , so on earth -- God is supreme .
Give us grace for to-day ; feed the famished affections .
And infinite Love is reflected in love .
And Love leadeth us not into temptation , but delivereth from sin , disease , and death .
For God is now and forever all Life , Truth , and Love . ''
`` Working Against the Cause .
If a member of this Church shall work against the accomplishment of what the Discoverer and Founder of Christian Science understands is advantageous to the individual , to this Church , and to the Cause of Christian Science '' -- out he goes .
`` It shall be the duty of this Church immediately to call a meeting , and drop forever the name of this member from its records . ''
Mrs. Eddy has only to say a member is guilty -- that is all .
It is not a case of he `` may '' be cut off from Christian Science salvation , it is a case of he `` shall '' be .
Her serfs must see to it , and not say a word .
What shall it profit him to know it is n't so ?
His testimony is of no value .
No one wants it , no one will ask for it .
He is not present to offer it ( he does not know he has been accused ) , and if he were there to offer it , it would not be listened to .
It is another case of `` Pastor Emeritus . ''
She gives up the shadow of authority , but keeps a good firm hold on the substance .
The lecturers are exceedingly important servants of Mrs. Eddy , and she chooses them with great care .
Each of them has an appointed territory in which to perform his duties -- in the North , the South , the East , the West , in Canada , in Great Britain , and so on -- and each must stick to his own territory and not forage beyond its boundaries .
I think it goes without saying -- from what we have seen of Mrs. Eddy -- that no lecture is delivered until she has examined and approved it , and that the lecturer is not allowed to change it afterwards .
There are but four .
They are elected -- like the rest of the domestics -- annually .
So far as I can discover , not a single servant of the Sacred Household has a steady job except Mrs. Eddy .
It is plain that she trusts no human being but herself .
So far as I can see , they could not do it if they wanted to .
The By-laws are merely the voice of the master issuing commands to the servants .
There is nothing and nobody for the servants to re-utter them to .
Now a perpetual copyright would be quite another matter .
I would like to give her a hint .
Let her strike for a perpetual copyright on that book .
There is precedent for it .
There is one book in the world which bears the charmed life of perpetual copyright ( a fact not known to twenty people in the world ) .
By a hardy perversion of privilege on the part of the lawmaking power the Bible has perpetual copyright in Great Britain .
There is no justification for it in fairness , and no explanation of it except that the Church is strong enough there to have its way , right or wrong .
The recent Revised Version enjoys perpetual copyright , too -- a stronger precedent , even , than the other one .
She delivered this sorrow to those lambs as a `` gift '' in consideration of their `` loyalty to our great cause . ''
At the time that Mrs. Eddy had unloaded that dismal gift on to her National Association , she had followed her inveterate custom : she had tied a string to its hind leg , and kept one end of it hitched to her belt .
We have seen her do that in the case of the Boston Mosque .
When she deeds property , she puts in that string-clause .
It provides that under certain conditions she can pull the string and land the property in the cherished home of its happy youth .
In the present case she believed that she had made provision that if at any time the National Christian Science Association should dissolve itself by a formal vote , she could pull .
I think that that is unassailable evidence that the waif was making money , hands down .
Every candidate for employment in a high capacity or a low one , on the other periodicals or in the publishing house , must first be `` accepted by Mrs. Eddy as suitable . ''
And `` by the Board of Directors '' -- which is surplusage , since Mrs. Eddy owns the Board .
If at any time a weekly shall be started , `` it shall be owned by The First Church of Christ , Scientist '' -- which is Mrs. Eddy .
The First Church of Christ , Scientist , in Boston , Massachusetts , shall assume no official control of other churches of this denomination .
It shall be officially controlled by no other church . ''
What is a branch Church ?
It is a body of Christian Scientists , organized in the one and only permissible way -- by a member , in good standing , of the Mother-Church , and who is also a pupil of one of Mrs. Eddy 's accredited students .
That is to say , one of her properties .
No other can do it .
There are other indispensable requisites ; what are they ?
The harnessing of all Christian Science wedding-teams , members of the branch Church , must be done by duly authorized and consecrated Christian Science functionaries .
Her factory is the only one that makes and licenses them .
`` shall assume no official control of other churches of this denomination . ''
`` In its relation to other Christian Science churches , the Mother-Church stands alone .
Therefore no branch Church is allowed to have branches .
There shall be no Christian Science St. Peter 's in the earth but just one -- the Mother-Church in Boston .
But for the thoughtful By-law thus entitled , every Science branch in the earth would imitate the Mother-Church and set up an aristocracy .
Every little group of ground-floor Smiths and Furgusons and Shadwells and Simpsons that organized a branch would assume that great title , of `` First Members , '' along with its vast privileges of `` discussing '' the weather and casting blank ballots , and soon there would be such a locust-plague of them burdening the globe that the title would lose its value and have to be abolished .
`` No First Members .
Branch Churches shall not organize with First Members , that special method of organization being adapted to the Mother-Church alone . ''
There is but one other object in the whole Christian Science world honored with that title and holding that office : it is her book , the Annex -- permanent Pastor of The First Church , and of all branch Churches .
Now , then , I hope the wound is healed .
I am willing to relinquish the portrait , and compromise on the Chair .
At the same time , if I were going to worship either , I should not choose the Chair .
`` His students then received the Holy Ghost .
By this is meant , that by all they had witnessed and suffered they were roused to an enlarged understanding of Divine Science , even to the spiritual interpretation.. ... of His teachings , '' etc .
It is a steady job .
I could help inspire if desired ; I am not doing much now , and would work for half-price , and should not object to the country .
That is flung at all the elect , everywhere that the sun shines , but no penalty is shaken over their heads to scare them .
The same command was issued to the members ( numbering to-day twenty-five thousand ) of The Mother-Church , also , but with it went a threat , of the infliction , in case of disobedience , of the most dreaded punishment that has a place in the Church 's list of penalties for transgressions of Mrs. Eddy's edicts -- excommunication :
But if he were an inspired person commissioned by the Deity to receive and print and spread broadcast among sorrowing and suffering and poor men a precious message of healing and cheer and salvation , he would have to do as Bible Societies do -- sell the book at a pinched margin above cost to such as could pay , and give it free to all that could n't ; and his name would be praised .
But if he sold it at seven hundred per cent .
profit and put the money in his pocket , his name would be mocked and derided .
Just as Mrs. Eddy 's is .
And most justifiably , as it seems to me .
The Christian Scientist believes that the Spirit of God ( life and love ) pervades the universe like an atmosphere ; that whoso will study Science and Health can get from it the secret of how to inhale that transforming air ; that to breathe it is to be made new ; that from the new man all sorrow , all care , all miseries of the mind vanish away , for that only peace , contentment and measureless joy can live in that divine fluid ; that it purifies the body from disease , which is a vicious creation of the gross human mind , and can not continue to exist in the presence of the Immortal Mind , the renewing Spirit of God .
There probably came a time , in due course , when her students began to think there was something deeper in her teachings than they had been suspecting -- a mystery beyond mental-healing , and higher .
It is conceivable that by consequence their manner towards her changed little by little , and from respectful became reverent .
It is conceivable that this would have an influence upon her ; that it would incline her to wonder if their secret thought -- that she was inspired -- might not be a well-grounded guess .
It is conceivable that as time went on the thought in their minds and its reflection in hers might solidify into conviction .
These qualities -- and the capacities growing out of them by the nurturing influences of training , observation , and experience seem to be clearly indicated by the character of her career and its achievements .
They seem to be :
She will have it until she dies ; and then we shall see a curious and interesting further development of her revolutionary work begin .
Did she hit upon the Great Idea herself ?
By the Great Idea I mean , of course , the conviction that the Force involved was still existent , and could be applied now just as it was applied by Christ 's Disciples and their converts , and as successfully .
Of course the Great Idea could strike her , we have to grant that , but why it should interest her is a question which can easily overstrain the imagination and bring on nervous prostration , or something like that , and is better left alone by the judicious , it seems to me --
They are prejudiced witnesses .
To the credit of human nature it is not possible that they should be otherwise .
They sincerely believe that Mrs. Eddy 's character is pure and perfect and beautiful , and her history without stain or blot or blemish .
But that does not settle it .
They sincerely believe she did not borrow the Great Idea from Quimby , but hit upon it herself .
It may be so , and it could be so .
Let it go -- there is no way to settle it .
They believe she carried away no Quimby manuscripts .
Let that go , too -- there is no way to settle it .
They believe that she , and not another , built the Religion upon the book , and organized it .
I believe it , too .
This volume may not open a new thought , and make it at once familiar .
It has the sturdy task of a pioneer , to hack away at the tall oaks and cut the rough granite , leaving future ages to declare what it has done .
We made our first discovery of the adaptation of metaphysics to the treatment of disease in the winter of 1866 ; since then we have tested the Principle on ourselves and others , and never found it to fail to prove the statements herein made of it .
We must learn the science of Life , to reach the perfection of man .
To understand God as the Principle of all being , and to live in accordance with this Principle , is the Science of Life .
But to reproduce this harmony of being , the error of personal sense must yield to science , even as the science of music corrects tones caught from the ear , and gives the sweet concord of sound .
There are many theories of physic and theology , and many calls in each of their directions for the right way ; but we propose to settle the question of `` What is Truth ? ''
on the ground of proof , and let that method of healing the sick and establishing Christianity be adopted that is found to give the most health and to make the best Christians ; science will then have a fair field , in which case we are assured of its triumph over all opinions and beliefs .
Sickness and sin have ever had their doctors ; but the question is , Have they become less because of them ?
The longevity of our antediluvians would say , No !
and the criminal records of today utter their voices little in favor of such a conclusion .
Not that we would deny to Caesar the things that are his , but that we ask for the things that belong to Truth ; and safely affirm , from the demonstrations we have been able to make , that the science of man understood would have eradicated sin , sickness , and death , in a less period than six thousand years .
We find great difficulties in starting this work right .
Some shockingly false claims are already made to a metaphysical practice ; mesmerism , its very antipodes , is one of them .
Hitherto we have never , in a single instance of our discovery , found the slightest resemblance between mesmerism and metaphysics .
No especial idiosyncrasy is requisite to acquire a knowledge of metaphysical healing ; spiritual sense is more important to its discernment than the intellect ; and those who would learn this science without a high moral standard of thought and action , will fail to understand it until they go up higher .
Owing to our explanations constantly vibrating between the same points , an irksome repetition of words must occur ; also the use of capital letters , genders , and technicalities peculiar to the science .
Variety of language , or beauty of diction , must give place to close analysis and unembellished thought .
`` Hoping all things , enduring all things , '' to do good to our enemies , to bless them that curse us , and to bear to the sorrowing and the sick consolation and healing , we commit these pages to posterity .
Principle , eternal and harmonious , Nameless and adorable Intelligence , Thou art ever present and supreme .
And when this supremacy of Spirit shall appear , the dream of matter will disappear .
Give us the understanding of Truth and Love .
And loving we shall learn God , and Truth will destroy all error .
And lead us unto the Life that is Soul , and deliver us from the errors of sense , sin , sickness , and death , For God is Life , Truth , and Love for ever.
-- Science and Health , edition of 1881 .
Prayer can not change the Science of Being , but it does bring us into harmony with it .
Goodness reaches the demonstration of Truth .
A request that another may work for us never does our work .
The habit of pleading with the divine Mind , as one pleads with a human being , perpetuates the belief in God as humanly circumscribed -- an error which impedes spiritual growth .
Can we ask Him to be more ?
Can we inform the infinite Mind , or tell Him anything He does not already comprehend ?
Do we hope to change perfection ?
Shall we plead for more at the open fount , which always pours forth more than we receive ?
The unspoken prayer does bring us nearer the Source of all existence and blessedness .
How empty are our conceptions of Deity !
We admit theoretically that God is good , omnipotent , omnipresent , infinite , and then we try to give information to this infinite Mind ; and plead for unmerited pardon , and a liberal outpouring of benefactions .
Are we really grateful for the good already received ?
Then we shall avail ourselves of the blessings we have , and thus be fitted to receive more .
Gratitude is much more than a verbal expression of thanks Action expresses more gratitude than speech .
`` God is Love . ''
More than this we can not ask ; higher we can not look ; farther we can not go .
To suppose that God forgives or punishes sin , according as His mercy is sought or unsought , is to misunderstand Love and make prayer the safety-valve for wrong-doing .
If a man , though apparently fervent and prayerful , is impure , and therefore insincere , what must be the comment upon him ?
If he had reached the loftiness of his prayer , there would be no occasion for such comment .
If we feel the aspiration , humility , gratitude , and love which our words express -- this God accepts ; and it is wise not to try to deceive ourselves or others , for `` there is nothing covered that shall not be revealed . ''
Professions and audible prayers are like charity in one respect -- they `` cover a multitude of sins . ''
Praying for humility , with whatever fervency of expression , does not always mean a desire for it .
If we turn away from the poor , we are not ready to receive the reward of Him who blesses the poor .
We confess to having a very wicked heart , and ask that it may be laid bare before us ; but do we not already know more of this heart than we are willing to have our neighbor see ?
The world must grow to the spiritual understanding of prayer .
If good enough to profit by Jesus ' cup of earthly sorrows , God will sustain us under these sorrows .
Until we are thus divinely qualified , and willing to drink His cup , millions of vain repetitions will never pour into prayer the unction of Spirit , in demonstration of power , and `` with signs following . ''
Christian Science reveals a necessity for overcoming the world , the flesh and evil , and thus destroying all error .
Seeking is not sufficient .
It is striving which enables us to enter .
Spiritual attainments open the door to a higher understanding of the divine Life .
One of the forms of worship in Thibet is to carry a praying-machine through the streets , and stop at the doors to earn a penny by grinding out a prayer ; whereas civilization pays for clerical prayers , in lofty edifices .
Is the difference very great , after all ?
Petitions only bring to mortals the results of their own faith .
We know that a desire for holiness is requisite in order to gain it ; but if we desire holiness above all else , we shall sacrifice everything for it .
We must be willing to do this , that we may walk securely in the only practical road to holiness .
Prayer alone can not change the unalterable Truth , or give us an understanding of it ; but prayer coupled with a fervent habitual desire to know and do the will of God will bring us into all Truth .
Such a desire has little need of audible expression .
It is best expressed in thought and life .
Few will deny that an intelligence apart from man formed and governs the spiritual universe and man ; and this intelligence is the eternal Mind , and neither matter nor man created this intelligence and divine Principle ; nor can this Principle produce aught unlike itself .
All that we term sin , sickness , and death is comprised in the belief of matter .
The realm of the real is spiritual ; the opposite of Spirit is matter ; and the opposite of the real is unreal or material .
Matter is an error of statement , for there is no matter .
This error of premises leads to error of conclusion in every statement of matter as a basis .
Nothing we can say or believe regarding matter is true , except that matter is unreal , simply a belief that has its beginning and ending .
The conservative firm called matter and mind God never formed .
The unerring and eternal Mind destroys this imaginary copartnership , formed only to be dissolved in a manner and at a period unknown .
This copartnership is obsolete .
Placed under the microscope of metaphysics matter disappears .
Only by understanding there are not two , matter and mind , is a logical and correct conclusion obtained by either one .
Science gathers not grapes of thorns or figs of thistles .
Intelligence never produced non-intelligence , such as matter : the immortal never produced mortality , good never resulted in evil .
The science of Mind shows conclusively that matter is a myth .
Metaphysics are above physics , and drag not matter , or what is termed that , into one of its premises or conclusions .
Metaphysics resolves things into thoughts , and exchanges the objects of sense for the ideas of Soul .
These ideas are perfectly tangible and real to consciousness , and they have this advantage -- they are eternal .
Mind and its thoughts comprise the whole of God , the universe , and of man .
Reason and revelation coincide with this statement , and support its proof every hour , for nothing is harmonious or eternal that is not spiritual : the realization of this will bring out objects from a higher source of thought ; hence more beautiful and immortal .
Her telegraphic response was read to the Association at next day's meeting :
Which Mother Mary is this one ?
If so , she is both of them ; for , when she signed this telegram in this satisfied and unprotesting way , the Mother-title which she was going to so strenuously object to , and put from her with humility , and seize with both hands , and reserve as her sole property , and protect her monopoly of it with a stern By-law , while recognizing with diffidence that it was `` not applicable '' to her ( then and to-day ) -- that Mother -- title was not yet born , and would not be offered to her until five years later .
The date of the above `` Mother Mary '' is 1890 ; the `` individual , endearing title of Mother '' was given her `` in 1895 '' -- according to her own testimony .
See her By-law quoted above .
In 1890 , there was but one Mother Mary .
The President said so .
Mrs. Eddy was that one .
She said so , in signing the telegram .
Mrs. Eddy was not that one for she says so , in her Associated Press utterance of January 17th .
And has `` never claimed to be that one '' -- unless the signature to the telegram is a claim .
I think that the only really troublesome confusion connected with these particular matters has arisen from the name Mary .
Much vexation , much misunderstanding , could have been avoided if Mrs. Eddy had used some of her other names in place of that one .
`` Mother Mary '' was certain to stir up discussion .
It would have been much better if she had signed the telegram `` Mother Baker '' ; then there would have been no Biblical competition , and , of course , that is a thing to avoid .
But it is not too late , yet .
In 1895 , she wrote a little primer , a little body of autocratic laws , called the Manual of The First Church of Christ , Scientist , and put those laws in force , in permanence .
Her government is all there ; all in that deceptively innocent-looking little book , that cunning little devilish book , that slumbering little brown volcano , with hell in its bowels .
In that book she has planned out her system , and classified and defined its purposes and powers .
By authority of this astonishing By-law , she has only to say a person connected with that Church is secretly practicing hypnotism or mesmerism ; whereupon , immediate excommunication , without a hearing , is his portion !
She does not have to order a trial and produce evidence -- her accusation is all that is necessary .
`` Rights '' is vague ; I do not know what it means there .
Mrs. Eddy is not well acquainted with the English language , and she is seldom able to say in it what she is trying to say .
She has no ear for the exact word , and does not often get it .
Does it mean `` honors ? ''
This is another umbrella where there should be a torch ; it does not illumine the sentence , it only deepens the shadows .
Does she mean `` denies ? ''
or something in that line ?
`` Christian Science denies divine honors to human beings ? ''
`` Christian Science forbids the worship of human beings ? ''
And I think that the full sentence was intended to mean what I have already suggested :
`` Although I am of divine origin , and gifted with supernatural power , I shall not draw upon these resources in determining the best method of elevating the race . ''
It may be that `` Christian Science eschews divine rights in human beings , '' and forbids worship of any but `` one God , one Christ '' ; but , if that is the case , it looks as if Mrs. Eddy is a very unsound Christian Scientist , and needs disciplining .
I believe she has a serious malady -- '' self-deification '' ; and that it will be well to have one of the experts demonstrate over it .
`` 'Well then , which do you reckon is the best looking ? ''
`` I crave the honor , madam and miss , to introduce to you my brother , Count Luigi Capello , '' ( the other head bowed ) `` and myself -- Count Angelo ; and at the same time offer sincere apologies for the lateness of our coming , which was unavoidable , '' and both heads bowed again .
The poor old lady was in a whirl of amazement and confusion , but she managed to stammer out :
`` Always been used to sleeping together -- in-fact , prefer it .
And I was thinking it was to accommodate me .
I thought it was very good of them , whereas a person situated as that young man is -- ''
`` Yes , Luigi ; anyway it 's the dark-skinned one ; the one that was west of his brother when they stood in the door .
Up to all kinds of mischief and disobedience when he was a boy , I 'll be bound .
I lay his mother had trouble to lay her hand on him when she wanted him .
But the one on the right is as good as gold , I can see that . ''
`` That 's Angelo . ''
The mother seemed to have the rights of the argument , so the daughter abandoned the struggle .
Presently the widow rose with a yawn and said :
Then she gave a little start , and looked perplexed .
`` Why , ma , it 's not necessary .
Calling one is calling both .
If one gets up , the other 's got to . ''
`` Sho , of course ; I never thought of that .
Well , come along , maybe we can get some sleep , but I do n't know , I 'm so shook up with what we 've been through . ''
`` I feel ever so sorry for it , do n't you , Joe ? ''
`` Talk as if what ?
I know one thing mighty certain : if you can fix me so I can eat for two and only have to stub toes for one , I ai n't going to fool away no such chance just for sentiment . ''
A slight shudder shook the frame of Angelo , but he said nothing and the conversation ceased .
Each buttoned his own share of the nightshirt in silence ; then Luigi , with Paine 's Age of Reason in his hand , sat down in one chair and put his feet in another and lit his pipe , while Angelo took his Whole Duty of Man , and both began to read .
Angelo presently began to cough ; his coughing increased and became mixed with gaspings for breath , and he was finally obliged to make an appeal to his brother 's humanity :
`` Now , ma , honor bright , did you ever hear 'Greenland 's Icy Mountains' sung sweeter -- now did you ? ''
`` It do n't make any difference what you thought , it ca n't be done .
They tried it , and to my mind it was a failure .
I never heard such a crazy uproar ; seemed to me , sometimes , the roof would come off ; and as for the cats -- well , I 've lived a many a year , and seen cats aggravated in more ways than one , but I 've never seen cats take on the way they took on last night . ''
`` Well , I do n't think that that goes for anything , ma , because it is the nature of cats that any sound that is unusual -- ''
You may well call it so .
Now if they are going to sing duets every night , I do hope they will both sing the same tune at the same time , for in my opinion a duet that is made up of two different tunes is a mistake ; especially when the tunes ai n't any kin to one another , that way . ''
`` Now that hand is going to take that coffee to -- no , it 's gone to the other mouth ; I ca n't understand it ; and Now , here is the dark-complected hand with a potato in its fork , I 'll see what goes with it -- there , the light-complected head 's got it , as sure as I live ! ''
`` Y-es , I thought you did : Did you mean to ? ''
`` I do n't know but what I 'm foolish , and you must n't mind ; but you see , he got the coffee I was expecting to see you drink , and you got a potato that I thought he was going to get .
So I thought it might be a mistake all around , and everybody getting what was n't intended for him . ''
`` No , they did n't , '' said Angelo .
`` They did it only twice , and in both cases it was a double bed -- a rare thing in Europe -- and the double bed gave them some excuse .
Be fair to the landlords ; twice doesn't constitute 'often . '
`` Well , that depends -- that depends .
I knew a man who fell down a well twice .
He said he did n't mind the first time , but he thought the second time was once too often .
Have I misused that word , Mrs .
`` To tell the truth , I was afraid you had , but it seems to look , now , like you had n't . ''
She stopped , and was evidently struggling with the difficult problem a moment , then she added in the tone of one who is convinced without being converted , `` It seems so , but I ca n't somehow tell why . ''
Rowena thought Luigi 's retort was wonderfully quick and bright , and she remarked to herself with satisfaction that there was n't any young native of Dawson 's Landing that could have risen to the occasion like that .
Luigi detected the applause in her face , and expressed his pleasure and his thanks with his eyes ; and so eloquently withal , that the girl was proud and pleased , and hung out the delicate sign of it on her cheeks .
Luigi went on , with animation :
`` Got the wrong one again , ma , '' said the boy .
`` I do n't care -- it was food , and I 'd 'a ' et it if it was rotten . ''
`` There , now -- close your head !
and do n't you open it again till you're asked . ''
`` Call you Angelo ?
Why , certainly I will ; what are you thinking of !
In the case of twins , why -- ''
[ It was a long and lively drive .
Angelo was a Methodist , Luigi was a Free-thinker .
The judge was very proud of his Freethinkers' Society , which was flourishing along in a most prosperous way and already had two members -- himself and the obscure and neglected Pudd'nhead Wilson .
It was to meet that evening , and he invited Luigi to join ; a thing which Luigi was glad to do , partly because it would please himself , and partly because it would gravel Angelo . ]
His quick eye had seen the sensitive blood mount into Angelo 's face , betraying the wound that had been inflicted .
The sting of the slight had gone deep , but the apology was so prompt , and so evidently sincere , that the hurt was almost immediately healed , and a forgiving smile testified to the kindly judge that all was well again .
Concealed behind Angelo 's modest and unassuming exterior , and unsuspected by any but his intimates , was a lofty pride , a pride of almost abnormal proportions , indeed , and this rendered him ever the prey of slights ; and although they were almost always imaginary ones , they hurt none the less on that account .
By ill fortune judge Driscoll had happened to touch his sorest point , i.e.
, his conviction that his brother 's presence was welcomer everywhere than his own ; that he was often invited , out of mere courtesy , where only his brother was wanted , and that in a majority of cases he would not be included in an invitation if he could be left out without offense .
A sensitive nature like this is necessarily subject to moods ; moods which traverse the whole gamut of feeling ; moods which know all the climes of emotion , from the sunny heights of joy to the black abysses of despair .
At times , in his seasons of deepest depressions , Angelo almost wished that he and his brother might become segregated from each other and be separate individuals , like other men .
But of course as soon as his mind cleared and these diseased imaginings passed away , he shuddered at the repulsive thought , and earnestly prayed that it might visit him no more .
To be separate , and as other men are !
How awkward it would seem ; how unendurable .
What would he do with his hands , his arms ?
How would his legs feel ?
How odd , and strange , and grotesque every action , attitude , movement , gesture would be .
To sleep by himself , eat by himself , walk by himself -- how lonely , how unspeakably lonely !
No , no , any fate but that .
In every way and from every point , the idea was revolting .
`` Cheer up , the worst is yet to come ! ''
`` What is that ? ''
`` That is mighty curious ; I do n't see how it can be .
I should n't think it could be managed that way . ''
`` And , moreover , '' said Aunt Betsy , `` the Freethinkers and the Baptist Bible class use the same room over the Market house , but you can take my word for it they do n't mush up together and use it at the same time . '
`` He who made us , '' said Angelo reverently , `` and with us this difficulty , also provided a way out of it .
By a mysterious law of our being , each of us has utter and indisputable command of our body a week at a time , turn and turn about . ''
`` Now , I should n't go as far as that , '' said Aunt Patsy , `` but if you 've a mind to say Sodom and Gomorrah , I am with you , Betsy Hale . ''
Tears stood in the eyes of both the old ladies and the widow said , softly :
`` In my opinion it ai n't right noW , and never has been right , the way a twin born a quarter of a minute sooner than the other one gets all the land and grandeurs and nobilities in the old countries and his brother has to go bare and be a nobody .
Which of you was born first ? ''
`` But how in the world can it be ?
If you were both born at the same time , how can one of you be older than the other ? ''
`` So would I , so would I , '' said Aunt Patsy with the emphasis of a certainty that is not impaired by any shade of doubt .
`` That is good of you , and kind .
Never let on ; treat us always as if we were twins . ''
`` Oh , yes , like enough .
I have n't asked her lately . ''
`` First rate , I believe .
Mrs. Pratt says so ; and being right in the house , and sister to the one and aunt to t'other , of course she ought to know .
She says the judge is real fond of him when he 's away ; but frets when he 's around and is vexed with his ways , and not sorry to have him go again .
He has been gone three weeks this time -- a pleasant thing for both of them , I reckon . ''
CHAPTER V. GUILT AND INNOCENCE FINELY BLENT
[ A long and vigorous quarrel follows , between the twins .
And there is plenty to quarrel about , for Angelo was always seeking truth , and this obliged him to change and improve his religion with frequency , which wearied Luigi , and annoyed him too ; for he had to be present at each new enlistment -- which placed him in the false position of seeming to indorse and approve his brother 's fickleness ; moreover , he had to go to Angelo's prohibition meetings , and he hated them .
On the other hand , when it was his week to command the legs he gave Angelo just cause of complaint , for he took him to circuses and horse-races and fandangoes , exposing him to all sorts of censure and criticism ; and he drank , too ; and whatever he drank went to Angelo 's head instead of his own and made him act disgracefully .
When the evening was come , the two attended the Free-thinkers ' meeting , where Angelo was sad and silent ; then came the Bible class and looked upon him coldly , finding him in such company .
Then they went to Wilson 's house and Chapter XI of Pudd'nhead Wilson follows , which tells of the girl seen in Tom Driscoll 's room ; and closes with the kicking of Tom by Luigi at the anti-temperance mass-meeting of the Sons of Liberty ; with the addition of some account of Roxy's adventures as a chamber-maid on a Mississippi boat .
Her exchange of the children had been flippantly and farcically described in an earlier chapter . ]
`` I 've kept my promise , you see ; I 'm throwing my business your way .
Sooner than I was expecting , too . ''
`` It 's very good of you -- particularly if you mean to keep it up . ''
`` Well , I ca n't tell about that yet .
But we 'll see .
If I find you deserve it I 'll take you under my protection and make your fame and fortune for you . ''
`` We will detain your honor but a moment with this case .
It is not one where any doubt of the fact of the assault can enter in .
These gentlemen -- the accused -- kicked my client at the Market Hall last night ; they kicked him with violence ; with extraordinary violence ; with even unprecedented violence , I may say ; insomuch that he was lifted entirely off his feet and discharged into the midst of the audience .
We can prove this by four hundred witnesses -- we shall call but three .
Mr. Harkness will take the stand . ''
`` Please answer , Mr. Harkness , you are keeping the court waiting .
It is a very simple question . ''
`` Your honor , the question is an irrelevant triviality .
Necessarily , they both kicked him , for they have but the one pair of legs , and both are responsible for them . ''
`` I -- er -- well , of course , I do not absolutely know , but in my opinion -- ''
The audience tittered , and the discomfited witness retired in a state of great embarrassment .
`` Yes , sir , '' -- with decision .
`` How do you know that both did it ? ''
The audience laughed , and got another warning from the court .
`` Well , they both went over there -- that I saw . ''
`` Yes , sir , he was .
He did join , too , and drank a glass or two of whisky , like a man . ''
`` Indeed , I do n't , sir . ''
Mr. Justice Robinson had been in office only two months , and in that short time had not had many cases to try , of course .
He had no knowledge of laws and courts except what he had picked up since he came into office .
He was a sore trouble to the lawyers , for his rulings were pretty eccentric sometimes , and he stood by them with Roman simplicity and fortitude ; but the people were well satisfied with him , for they saw that his intentions were always right , that he was entirely impartial , and that he usually made up in good sense what he lacked in technique , so to speak .
He now perceived that there was likely to be a miscarriage of justice here , and he rose to the occasion .
`` But , your honor ! ''
said Wilson , interrupting him , earnestly but respectfully , `` you are deciding the case yourself , whereas the jury -- ''
`` No , sir . ''
But they were gently called to order at this point , and asked not to talk in court .
Their tongues fell silent , but the radiant interest in their faces remained , and their gratitude for the blessing of a new sensation and a novel experience still beamed undimmed from their eyes .
Aunt Patsy stood up and took the oath , and Mr. Allen explained the point in issue , and asked her to go on now , in her own way , and throw as much light upon it as she could .
She toyed with her reticule a moment or two , as if considering where to begin , then she said :
`` Never mind about what Aunt Betsy remembers -- she is not a witness ; we only want to know what YOU remember yourself , '' said the judge .
`` You 'll not need to exercise it , Mr. Wilson -- the evidence is thrown out . ''
It was late Saturday night nearing eleven .
The judge and his second found the rest of the war party at the further end of the vacant ground , near the haunted house .
Pudd'nhead Wilson advanced to meet them , and said anxiously :
cried the judge , `` we have heard something about that extraordinary law of their being , already -- nothing very definite , it is true , as regards dates and durations of power , but I see it is definite enough as regards to-night .
Of course we must give Luigi every chance .
Omit all the ceremonial possible , gentlemen , and place us in position . ''
The seconds now stepped at once to their posts , halfway between the combatants , one of them on each side of the line of fire .
Wilson was to count , very deliberately , `` One-two-three-fire !
and the duelists could bang away at any time they chose during that recitation , but not after the last word .
Angelo grew very nervous when he saw Wilson 's hand rising slowly into the air as a sign to make ready , and he leaned his head against Luigi 's and said :
`` Oh , please take me away from here , I ca n't stay , I know I ca n't ! ''
The doctor examined and bandaged the wound .
`` I thank you most sincerely for this generosity , Judge Driscoll , '' said Luigi , with a polite bow , and moving to his place .
Then he added -- to Angelo , `` Now hold your grip , hold your grip , I tell you , and I 'll land him sure ! ''
The men stood erect , their pistol-arms at their sides , the two seconds stood at their official posts , the doctor stood five paces in Wilson's rear with his instruments and bandages in his hands .
The deep stillness , the peaceful moonlight , the motionless figures , made an impressive picture and the impending fatal possibilities augmented this impressiveness to solemnity .
Wilson 's hand began to rise -- slowly -- slowly -- higher -- still higher -- still higher -- in another moment :
They strolled along , still wondering , still talking .
`` There was no way to mend it , '' said Howard , whose ear was being readjusted now by the doctor ; `` the code fixes our place , and it would not have been lawful to change it .
If we could have stood at your side , or behind you , or in front of you , it -- but it would not have been legitimate and the other parties would have had a just right to complain of our trying to protect ourselves from danger ; infractions of the code are certainly not permissible in any case whatever . ''
He examined Angelo 's wound , and was really minded to say nothing for once ; but Aunt Patsy was so anxious and so pressing that he allowed his caution to be overcome , and proceeded to empty himself as follows , with scientific relish :
`` Why , of course . ''
`` Why , ma , they ai n't made in the im -- ''
A tender and ecstatic smile beamed from Angelo 's eyes , and he broke forth in a tone of joyous fervency :
`` -- and a shovel of fire for his head , and a mustard plaster for his neck , and some gum shoes for his ears , '' Luigi interrupted , with temper ; and added , to himself , `` Damnation , I 'm going to be roasted alive , I just know it ! ''
`` I do n't -- to that extent , Aunt Patsy .
I was glad the drowning was postponed a minute ago , but I 'm not now .
No , that is all gone by ; I want to be drowned . ''
`` But , Aunt Patsy -- ''
Did n't you hear what I told you ? ''
`` Yes , you are , too .
You are going to be good , and do everything I tell you , like a dear , '' and she tapped his cheek affectionately with her finger .
`` Rowena , take the prescription and go in the kitchen and hunt up the things and lay them out for me .
I 'll sit up with my patient the rest of the night , doctor ; I ca n't trust Nancy , she could n't make Luigi take the medicine .
Of course , you 'll drop in again during the day .
Have you got any more directions ? ''
By nine o'clock the town was humming with the news of the midnight duel , and there were but two opinions about it : one , that Luigi 's pluck in the field was most praiseworthy and Angelo 's flight most scandalous ; the other , that Angelo 's courage in flying the field for conscience ' sake was as fine and creditable as was Luigi 's in holding the field in the face of the bullets .
The one opinion was held by half of the town , the other one was maintained by the other half .
The division was clean and exact , and it made two parties , an Angelo party and a Luigi party .
The twins had suddenly become popular idols along with Pudd'nhead Wilson , and haloed with a glory as intense as his .
The children talked the duel all the way to Sunday-school , their elders talked it all the way to church , the choir discussed it behind their red curtain , it usurped the place of pious thought in the `` nigger gallery . ''
Do n't make a noise dear .
You must n't forget that your poor brother is sick and -- ''
`` Now , then , you 're sneezing again -- I just expected it . ''
During Monday , Tuesday , and Wednesday the twins grew steadily worse ; but then the doctor was summoned South to attend his mother 's funeral , and they got well in forty-eight hours .
They appeared on the street on Friday , and were welcomed with enthusiasm by the new-born parties , the Luigi and Angelo factions .
The Luigi faction carried its strength into the Democratic party , the Angelo faction entered into a combination with the Whigs .
The Democrats nominated Luigi for alderman under the new city government , and the Whigs put up Angelo against him .
The Democrats nominated Pudd'nhead Wilson for mayor , and he was left alone in this glory , for the Whigs had no man who was willing to enter the lists against such a formidable opponent .
No politician had scored such a compliment as this before in the history of the Mississippi Valley .
[ There was a long and sufficiently idiotic discussion here , which ended as reported in a previous note . ]
`` Who said anything about hanging him ?
We are only going to hang the other one . ''
`` Then that is all right -- there is no objection to that . ''
The reader already knew how the expert works ; he knows now how the other kind do it .
Chapter 1 When Wolves Ran Free in Paris
The children 's tears !
They brought each grief , And you did comfort them and cheer Their bruised hearts , and steal a tear That , healed , rose a leaf .
Bide always green in our young hearts , Arbre Fee de Bourlemont !
And we shall always youthful be , Not heeding Time his flight ; And when , in exile wand'ring , we Shall fainting yearn for glimpse of thee , Oh , rise upon our sight !
But in about a minute or two minutes the poor little ruined creatures discovered her .
They burst out in one heartbreaking squeak of grief and terror and fled every which way , with their wee hazel-nut fists in their eyes and crying ; and so disappeared .
Pere Fronte threw up his hands and cried out :
Pere Fronte turned away his face , for it would have hurt her to see him laugh , and said :
The old man , both touched and amused , gathered her to his breast and said :
`` Why did n't you want to hang them in the tree ? ''
The minute those words were out of his mouth her temper was up , the indignant tears rose in her eyes , and she burst out on him with an energy and passion which astonished him , but did n't astonish me , for I knew he had fired a mine when he touched off his ill-chosen climax .
The Pere had got upon his feet , toward the last , and now he stood there passing his hand back and forth across his forehead like a person who is dazed and troubled ; then he turned and wandered toward the door of his little workroom , and as he passed through it I heard him murmur sorrowfully :
`` Do you hear me ?
Sit down , I say ! ''
Chapter 4 Joan Tames the Mad Man
There was a general gasp .
We knew him , you see , for a trusty man .
`` You make a great thing of it , but you mistake ; it was not a great matter .
It was not as if I had been a stranger to the man .
I know him , and have known him long ; and he knows me , and likes me .
I have fed him through the bars of his cage many times ; and last December , when they chopped off two of his fingers to remind him to stop seizing and wounding people passing by , I dressed his hand every day till it was well again . ''
`` Did n't he threaten you more than once ? ''
And so , in the end , they all got back their self-respect ; yes , and even added somewhat to it ; indeed when the sitting broke up they had a finer opinion of themselves than they had ever had before .
You may well believe that we had plenty of matter for talk now , since the raiding of our village seemed by long odds the greatest event that had really ever occurred in the world ; for although these dull peasants may have thought they recognized the bigness of some of the previous occurrences that had filtered from the world 's history dimly into their minds , the truth is that they had n't .
One biting little fact , visible to their eyes of flesh and felt in their own personal vitals , became at once more prodigious to them than the grandest remote episode in the world 's history which they had got at second hand and by hearsay .
It amuses me now when I recall how our elders talked then .
They fumed and fretted in a fine fashion .
She said it as one who talks to himself aloud without knowing it , and none heard it but me .
I glanced at her and saw that her knitting-needles were idle in her hands , and that her face had a dreamy and absent look in it .
There were fleeting movements of her lips as if she might be occasionally saying parts of sentences to herself .
But there was no sound , for I was the nearest person to her and I heard nothing .
But I set my ears open , for those two speeches had affected me uncannily , I being superstitious and easily troubled by any little thing of a strange and unusual sort .
`` He shall give me a dukedom , name me premier peer , and make me Hereditary Lord High Constable of France . ''
Meaning Joan , though nobody suspected it at that time .
If any had , the Paladin would have been finely ridiculed for his vanity .
There was no fit mate in that village for Joan of Arc .
Every one would have said that .
`` The case of France hopeless ?
Why should you think that ?
It seemed to me that her clear intellect must surely be clouded to-day .
It must be so , or she would see that those figures could mean only one thing .
Perhaps if I marshaled them again she would see .
Her voice was low , and just touched with emotion , but distinct :
Now add this clinching fact , and surely the sum is complete : When have French soldiers won a victory ?
Scotch soldiers , under the French flag , have won a barren fight or two a few years back , but I am speaking of French ones .
Since eight thousand Englishmen nearly annihilated sixty thousand Frenchmen a dozen years ago at Agincourt , French courage has been paralyzed .
And so it is a common saying to-day that if you confront fifty French soldiers with five English ones , the French will run . ''
`` The drums will summon them .
They will answer , and they will march . ''
`` Both will have happened before two years are sped . ''
But I watched her , and tested her , and it was not so .
Her eye was clear and sane , her ways were natural , her speech direct and to the point .
No , there was nothing the matter with her mind ; it was still the soundest in the village and the best .
She went on thinking for others , planning for others , sacrificing herself for others , just as always before .
She went on ministering to her sick and to her poor , and still stood ready to give the wayfarer her bed and content herself with the floor .
There was a secret somewhere , but madness was not the key to it .
Now the key did presently come into my hands , and the way that it happened was this .
You have heard all the world talk of this matter which I am about to speak of , but you have not heard an eyewitness talk of it before .
`` Not a dream ? ''
I said , `` how can you know about it , Joan ? ''
`` But tell me one thing now ; what was that awful shadow that I saw ? ''
`` Where will it be struck ? ''
Like the other villagers , she had always accorded me the deference due my rank ; but now , without word said on either side , she and I changed places ; she gave orders , not suggestions .
I received them with the deference due a superior , and obeyed them without comment .
In the evening she said to me :
A strange idea , certainly .
Bring them in . ''
`` Next year he will be crowned , and after that will remain master of France . ''
As Joan was moving away she turned and said , with simplicity :
`` You refuse me the soldiers , I know not why , for it is my Lord that has commanded you .
Yes , it is He that has made the command ; therefore I must come again , and yet again ; then I shall have the men-at-arms . ''
After this victory , with this high praise from so imposing a source added , the fickle village turned again , and gave Joan countenance , compliment , and peace .
Her mother took her back to her heart , and even her father relented and said he was proud of her .
But the time hung heavy on her hands , nevertheless , for the siege of Orleans was begun , the clouds lowered darker and darker over France , and still her Voices said wait , and gave her no direct commands .
The winter set in , and wore tediously along ; but at last there was a change .
BOOK II IN COURT AND CAMP
`` One was the Sieur Jean de Novelonpont de Metz , the other the Sieur Bertrand de Poulengy . ''
Next morning I brought Mengette , and we four walked along the road in the cold dawn till the village was far behind ; then the two girls said their good-bys , clinging about each other 's neck , and pouring out their grief in loving words and tears , a pitiful sight to see .
And Joan took one long look back upon the distant village , and the Fairy Tree , and the oak forest , and the flowery plain , and the river , as if she was trying to print these scenes on her memory so that they would abide there always and not fade , for she knew she would not see them any more in this life ; then she turned , and went from us , sobbing bitterly .
It was her birthday and mine .
She was seventeen years old .
The brothers brought the parents ' blessing and godspeed to Joan , and their promise to bring it to her in person later ; and so , with this culminating happiness in her heart and the high hope it inspired , she went and confronted the governor again .
But he was no more tractable than he had been before .
He refused to send her to the King .
She was disappointed , but in no degree discouraged .
`` I am come to bid Robert de Baudricourt take or send me to the King , but he does not heed my words . ''
`` God knows I think you should have the men-at-arms , and that somewhat would come of it .
What is it that you would do ?
What is your hope and purpose ? ''
All day , the 23d , she glanced up wistfully whenever new bodies of strangers entered the house , but her parents did not appear .
Still she was not discouraged , but hoped on .
But when night fell at last , her hopes perished , and the tears came ; however , she dashed them away , and said :
`` It was to be so , no doubt ; no doubt it was so ordered ; I must bear it , and will . ''
He was charmed with this speech , and it swelled him up like a bladder .
`` Speaking of Noel , when did you see him last ? ''
I felt a great upleap in my heart , and said to myself , now I am at rest and glad ; I will never doubt her prophecies again .
Then I said aloud :
The Paladin gave me an outraged look , and said :
`` Do you think he was very glad ? ''
That man 's horse stumbled and fell on him in the first ford which we crossed that night , and he was drowned before we could help him .
We had no more conspiracies .
As soon as it was dark we filed out from the depth of the forest where we had been hidden and began the march .
From the time that we had begun to encounter ambushes Joan had ridden at the head of the column , and she took this post now .
By the time we had gone a league the rain and snow had turned to sleet , and under the impulse of the storm-wind it lashed my face like whips , and I envied Joan and the knights , who could close their visors and shut up their heads in their helmets as in a box .
Now , out of the pitchy darkness and close at hand , came the sharp command :
I made out a dim mass in front of us which might be a body of horsemen , but one could not be sure .
A man rode up and said to Joan in a tone of reproof :
`` Well , you have taken your time , truly .
And what have you found out ?
Is she still behind us , or in front ? ''
`` In the forest , not more than a league from here . ''
`` What was she doing ? ''
It made me shiver to hear her .
The officer considered awhile , then said :
`` With your permission , I will go and destroy it myself . ''
`` You have it , Captain , and my thanks .
With you to do it , it will be well done ; I could send another in your place , but not a better . ''
The Sieur Bertrand was amused at Joan 's naive way of referring to her advice as if it had been a valuable present to a hostile leader who was saved by it from making a censurable blunder of omission , and then he went on to admire how ingeniously she had deceived that man and yet had not told him anything that was not the truth .
This troubled Joan , and she said :
`` I thought he was deceiving himself .
I forbore to tell him lies , for that would have been wrong ; but if my truths deceived him , perhaps that made them lies , and I am to blame .
I would God I knew if I have done wrong . ''
`` I did n't know he had more discretion than other people , '' said Pierre , `` for discretion argues brains , and he has n't any more brains than the rest of us , in my opinion . ''
We housed ourselves in an inn , and soon the town came flocking to get a glimpse of the Maid .
`` The King has got the letter , but they will not let us have speech with him . ''
She almost always called the King the Dauphin .
To her mind he was not King yet , not being crowned .
`` Who sent them here ? ''
What Joan did that day bore fruit the very day after .
The King was obliged to respect the spirit of a young girl who could hold her own and stand her ground like that , and he asserted himself sufficiently to put his respect into an act instead of into polite and empty words .
He moved Joan out of that poor inn , and housed her , with us her servants , in the Castle of Courdray , personally confiding her to the care of Madame de Bellier , wife of old Raoul de Gaucourt , Master of the Palace .
Of course , this royal attention had an immediate result : all the great lords and ladies of the Court began to flock there to see and listen to the wonderful girl-soldier that all the world was talking about , and who had answered the King 's mandate with a bland refusal to obey .
Joan charmed them every one with her sweetness and simplicity and unconscious eloquence , and all the best and capablest among them recognized that there was an indefinable something about her that testified that she was not made of common clay , that she was built on a grander plan than the mass of mankind , and moved on a loftier plane .
These spread her fame .
She always made friends and advocates that way ; neither the high nor the low could come within the sound of her voice and the sight of her face and go out from her presence indifferent .
Joan walked two yards behind the Count , we three walked two yards behind Joan .
Our solemn march ended when we were as yet some eight or ten steps from the throne .
The Count made a deep obeisance , pronounced Joan's name , then bowed again and moved to his place among a group of officials near the throne .
I was devouring the crowned personage with all my eyes , and my heart almost stood still with awe .
`` They have taken advantage of the hint in her letter to play a trick upon her !
She will err , and they will laugh at her .
That is not the King that sits there . ''
Then I glanced at Joan .
She was still gazing steadfastly toward the throne , and I had the curious fancy that even her shoulders and the back of her head expressed bewilderment .
Now she turned her head slowly , and her eye wandered along the lines of standing courtiers till it fell upon a young man who was very quietly dressed ; then her face lighted joyously , and she ran and threw herself at his feet , and clasped his knees , exclaiming in that soft melodious voice which was her birthright and was now charged with deep and tender feeling :
Joan did not stir from her knees , but still lifted her happy face toward the King , and said :
`` I do n't know A from B ; but I know this : that I am come by command of the Lord of Heaven to deliver Orleans from the English power and crown the King of Rheims , and the matters ye are puttering over are of no consequence ! ''
`` Yes , He has willed it . ''
`` God is all-powerful , and able to do whatsoever thing He wills to do , is it not so ? ''
`` Then answer me this .
If He has willed to deliver France , and is able to do whatsoever He wills , where is the need for men-at-arms ? ''
How pleasant to know that our language is so honored !
`` Perfect , eh ?
Well , certainly you ought to know .
It was even better than your own , eh ? ''
This roused Joan , and she was on her feet in a moment , and flung out her retort with spirit :
On one of the latter days of that three-weeks session the gowned scholars and professors made one grand assault all along the line , fairly overwhelming Joan with objections and arguments culled from the writings of every ancient and illustrious authority of the Roman Church .
She was well-nigh smothered ; but at last she shook herself free and struck back , crying out :
Meantime the King was having a complete suit of armor made for her at Tours .
It was of the finest steel , heavily plated with silver , richly ornamented with engraved designs , and polished like a mirror .
He began to walk the floor and pile castles in the air so fast and so high that we could hardly keep up with him .
Then all of a sudden all the joy went out of his face and misery took its place , and he said :
It is the most conspicuous place in the army , after her own . ''
`` I thought you could n't be in earnest , but I see you are .
If you can make me understand this puzzle , do it .
Tell me what the explanation is . ''
WE WERE at Blois three days .
Oh , that camp , it is one of the treasures of my memory !
There was no more order among those brigands than there is among the wolves and the hyenas .
They went roaring and drinking about , whooping , shouting , swearing , and entertaining themselves with all manner of rude and riotous horse-play ; and the place was full of loud and lewd women , and they were no whit behind the men for romps and noise and fantastics .
It was in the midst of this wild mob that Noel and I had our first glimpse of La Hire .
He answered to our dearest dreams .
He was of great size and of martial bearing , he was cased in mail from head to heel , with a bushel of swishing plumes on his helmet , and at his side the vast sword of the time .
`` Every man who joins my standard must confess before the priest and absolve himself from sin ; and all accepted recruits must be present at divine service twice a day . ''
But she stuck to her point ; so the soldier yielded , and said all right , if such were the orders he must obey , and would do the best that was in him ; then he refreshed himself with a lurid explosion of oaths , and said that if any man in the camp refused to renounce sin and lead a pious life , he would knock his head off .
That started Joan off again ; she was really having a good time , you see .
But she would not consent to that form of conversions .
She said they must be voluntary .
La Hire said that that was all right , he was n't going to kill the voluntary ones , but only the others .
La Hire tried to cheer up , but he was not able to do it .
He sighed like a zephyr , and presently said :
If I had know that he had been praying , I could have understood why he was feeling so superior , but of course I could not know that .
They did it by deceiving Joan .
She trusted those people , she was not expecting this sort of treatment , and was not on the lookout for it .
It was a lesson to her ; she saw to it that the game was not played a second time .
Joan could have marched by the English forts .
However , it was not to be .
She had been cheated out of her first chance to strike a heavy blow for her country .
Her high manner abashed him , and he was not able to answer with anything like a confident promptness , but with many hesitations and partial excuses he managed to get out the confession that for what he and the council had regarded as imperative military reasons they so advised .
Dunois and the rest fumbled around the matter a moment , then gave in and conceded that a blunder had been made .
Dunois made some wandering attempts to explain the inexplicable and excuse the inexcusable , but Joan cut him short and said :
`` She 's not afraid of fire nor anything ! ''
they shouted , and delivered a storm of admiring applause that made everything quake .
Joan of Arc had stepped upon her stage at last , and was ready to begin .
She held her peace , only saying it was a pity that the English would persist in inviting present disaster and eventual destruction when she was `` doing all she could to get them out of the country with their lives still in their bodies . ''
But Noel was clever .
He knew the very best background for a poem of deep and refined sentiment and pathetic melancholy was one where great and satisfying merriment had prepared the spirit for the powerful contrast .
`` Hold up your hands . ''
`` He is under sentence ! ''
The man said , quite simply :
`` It is to persuade persons to respect France . ''
Joan laughed again , and said :
`` The pupils behaved to suit you , afterward ? ''
It was on this march that the histories say Dunois told Joan that the English were expecting reinforcements under the command of Sir John Fastolfe , and that she turned upon him and said :
But it was not a fortunate remark , for the Paladin said :
It was as straight and sensible a speech as ever I heard , and I was grateful for the opening it gave me ; so I came out and said :
She was so eager and pretty that the Paladin said straight out that he would ; and then as none of the rest had bravery enough to expose the fear that was in him , one volunteered after the other with a prompt mouth and a sick heart till all were shipped for the voyage ; then the girl clapped her hands in glee , and the parents were gratified , too , saying that the ghosts of their house had been a dread and a misery to them and their forebears for generations , and nobody had ever been found yet who was willing to confront them and find out what their trouble was , so that the family could heal it and content the poor specters and beguile them to tranquillity and peace .
`` Ah , French blood ; it makes my hair rise to see it ! ''
Chapter 19 We Burst In Upon Ghosts
Nothing there but vacancy !
On the floor lay a rusty sword and a rotten fan .
`` Am I to believe this ?
That is to say , am I to believe that you have lost your wits ? ''
She turned to Dunois , and said , `` Bastard , you have sense , answer me this : if this attack is made and the bastille taken , how much better off would we be than we are now ? ''
The Bastard hesitated , and then began some rambling talk not quite germane to the question .
Joan interrupted him and said :
He saluted in his large way and came up and shook Joan by the hand .
Then she took her leave .
La Hire made this general remark to the council :
Chapter 21 She Gently Reproves Her Dear Friend
Why should I write about such a scratch as that ?
I was not thinking of it , dear heart . ''
Catherine had the look of one who is trying to understand a puzzling proposition but can not quite do it .
She said , in a distraught fashion :
These marvels disturbed Catherine profoundly , but I had long ceased to be surprised at them .
One can get used to anything in this world .
`` Then you will send word to my headquarters that I am not going ? ''
`` Then word it like this : 'The chief of staff is commanded to make known to the King 's forces in garrison and in the field , that the General-in-Chief of the Armies of France will not face the English on the morrow , she being afraid she may get hurt .
Signed , JOAN OF ARC , by the hand of CATHERINE BOUCHER , who loves France . '
`` Oh , do n't say that .
Are n't you coming back to us ? ''
`` Be good then , and save me some for supper ; and I will bring one of those Englishmen with me and he shall have his share . ''
`` When we 've raised the siege of Orleans .
`` There is no authority above mine but the King 's .
If you have an order from the King , produce it . ''
He began to argue the case , for he was like the rest of the tribe , always ready to fight with words , not acts ; but in the midst of his gabble Joan interrupted with the terse order :
`` Sounding the retreat ! ''
Joan mounted her horse now , with her staff about her , and when our people saw us coming they raised a great shout , and were at once eager for another assault on the boulevard .
Joan rode straight to the fosse where she had received her wound , and standing there in the rain of bolts and arrows , she ordered the Paladin to let her long standard blow free , and to note when its fringes should touch the fortress .
`` Wait for what ? ''
`` Matters of state are not proper matters for public discussion . ''
But the King put his hand on her arm , and there was a really brave awakening in his voice and a manly fire in his eye when he said :
But it was different with her brothers .
They were proud and happy in their new dignity , which was quite natural .
And Joan was glad it had been conferred , when she saw how pleased they were .
It was a clever thought in the King to outflank her scruples by marching on them under shelter of her love for her family and her kin .
`` Yes , '' I said , `` I think you are right . ''
`` Come , I like that !
I did n't want to talk .
I tried to get out of talking .
If you did n't want to hear my clack , what did you keep intruding your conversation on me for ? ''
`` Why , that Jean and Pierre are going to take precedence of all the lay noblesse hereabouts except the Duke d'Alencon ? ''
`` I think there is not a doubt of it . ''
Just then the bugles blew the assembly , and that cut our talk short .
The duchess could not speak , but she kissed Joan on the forehead ; and so they parted .
Yes , they were ours ; the enemy had been driven back within the walls .
On the ground which Joan had won we camped ; for night was coming on .
Joan was abroad at the crack of dawn , galloping here and there and yonder , examining the situation minutely , and choosing what she considered the most effective positions for her artillery ; and with such accurate judgment did she place her guns that her Lieutenant-General's admiration of it still survived in his memory when his testimony was taken at the Rehabilitation , a quarter of a century later .
The veteran captains of the armies of France said she was great in war in all ways , but greatest of all in her genius for posting and handling artillery .
Then the spectacle was fine ; turreted gray walls and towers , and streaming bright flags , and jets of red fire and gushes of white smoke in long rows , all standing out with sharp vividness against the deep leaden background of the sky ; and then the whizzing missiles began to knock up the dirt all around us , and I felt no more interest in the scenery .
There was one English gun that was getting our position down finer and finer all the time .
Presently Joan pointed to it and said :
`` Ah , gentle duke , are you afraid ?
Do you not know that I have promised to send you home safe ? ''
I had him AGAIN , Peters !
He puzzled a second , then he says , sharp and irritable --
`` Ah , '' says he , brightening up , `` now that 's something like !
`` Come , come , what world ? ''
`` Well , sir , '' I says , pretty humble , `` I do n't seem to make out which world it is I 'm from .
But you may know it from this -- it 's the one the Saviour saved . ''
`` What system is Jupiter in ? ''
Well , they let me in , then , and told me I was safe forever and would n't have any more trouble .
`` Look at me , '' says I , `` look me all over . ''
`` Its customs ! ''
`` Heaven is a large place , good friend .
Large empires have many and diverse customs .
Even small dominions have , as you doubtless know by what you have seen of the matter on a small scale in the Wart .
How can you imagine I could ever learn the varied customs of the countless kingdoms of heaven ?
It makes my head ache to think of it .
I know the customs that prevail in those portions inhabited by peoples that are appointed to enter by my own gate -- and hark ye , that is quite enough knowledge for one individual to try to pack into his head in the thirty-seven millions of years I have devoted night and day to that study .
But the idea of learning the customs of the whole appalling expanse of heaven -- O man , how insanely you talk !
Now I do n't doubt that this odd costume you talk about is the fashion in that district of heaven you belong to , but you wo n't be conspicuous in this section without it . ''
I opened my eyes .
Sure enough , it was a Pi Ute Injun I used to know in Tulare County ; mighty good fellow -- I remembered being at his funeral , which consisted of him being burnt and the other Injuns gauming their faces with his ashes and howling like wildcats .
He was powerful glad to see me , and you may make up your mind I was just as glad to see him , and feel that I was in the right kind of a heaven at last .
`` I 'll have to get you to excuse me , my friend , -- _I_ ai n't no hat- rack . ''
`` Do n't you reckon you could learn another one ? ''
`` Do n't break my heart , '' says I ; `` I 'm getting low-spirited enough already . ''
Millions were coming to the cloud-bank all the time , happy and hosannahing ; millions were leaving it all the time , looking mighty quiet , I tell you .
We laid for the new-comers , and pretty soon I 'd got them to hold all my things a minute , and then I was a free man again and most outrageously happy .
Just then I ran across old Sam Bartlett , who had been dead a long time , and stopped to have a talk with him .
`` Sam , I 'm as glad to hear it as I thought I 'd be sorry .
I 'm glad I come , now . ''
`` Oh , hold on ; there 's plenty of pain here -- but it do n't kill .
There 's plenty of suffering here , but it do n't last .
You see , happiness ai n't a THING IN ITSELF -- it 's only a CONTRAST with something that ai n't pleasant .
That 's all it is .
There ai n't a thing you can mention that is happiness in its own self -- it 's only so by contrast with the other thing .
And so , as soon as the novelty is over and the force of the contrast dulled , it ain't happiness any longer , and you have to get something fresh .
Well , there 's plenty of pain and suffering in heaven -- consequently there 's plenty of contrasts , and just no end of happiness . ''
Along in the first months I knocked around about the Kingdom , making friends and looking at the country , and finally settled down in a pretty likely region , to have a rest before taking another start .
I went on making acquaintances and gathering up information .
I had a good deal of talk with an old bald-headed angel by the name of Sandy McWilliams .
He was from somewhere in New Jersey .
I went about with him , considerable .
We used to lay around , warm afternoons , in the shade of a rock , on some meadow- ground that was pretty high and out of the marshy slush of his cranberry-farm , and there we used to talk about all kinds of things , and smoke pipes .
One day , says I --
`` About how old might you be , Sandy ? ''
`` You ca n't mean it ! ''
`` Well , then , why did n't you wish ? ''
He did n't say anything for a while , but sat looking at the ground , thinking .
Then he says , kind of mournful :
`` Sandy , out with it .
Come -- no secrets among friends .
I notice you do n't ever wear wings -- and plenty others do n't .
I 've been making an ass of myself -- is that it ? ''
`` That is about the size of it .
But it is no harm .
We all do it at first .
It 's perfectly natural .
You see , on earth we jump to such foolish conclusions as to things up here .
In the pictures we always saw the angels with wings on -- and that was all right ; but we jumped to the conclusion that that was their way of getting around- -and that was all wrong .
The wings ai n't anything but a uniform , that 's all .
When they are in the field -- so to speak , -- they always wear them ; you never see an angel going with a message anywhere without his wings , any more than you would see a military officer presiding at a court-martial without his uniform , or a postman delivering letters , or a policeman walking his beat , in plain clothes .
But they ai n't to FLY with !
The wings are for show , not for use .
Old experienced angels are like officers of the regular army -- they dress plain , when they are off duty .
New angels are like the militia -- never shed the uniform -- always fluttering and floundering around in their wings , butting people down , flapping here , and there , and everywhere , always imagining they are attracting the admiring eye -- well , they just think they are the very most important people in heaven .
And when you see one of them come sailing around with one wing tipped up and t'other down , you make up your mind he is saying to himself : 'I wish Mary Ann in Arkansaw could see me now .
I reckon she 'd wish she had n't shook me . '
No , they 're just for show , that 's all -- only just for show . ''
`` I judge you 've got it about right , Sandy , '' says I .
`` Why , look at it yourself , '' says he .
`` YOU ai n't built for wings -- no man is .
You know what a grist of years it took you to come here from the earth -- and yet you were booming along faster than any cannon-ball could go .
Suppose you had to fly that distance with your wings -- would n't eternity have been over before you got here ?
Well , angels have to go to the earth every day -- millions of them -- to appear in visions to dying children and good people , you know -- it 's the heft of their business .
They appear with their wings , of course , because they are on official service , and because the dying persons would n't know they were angels if they had n't wings -- but do you reckon they fly with them ?
It stands to reason they do n't .
The wings would wear out before they got half-way ; even the pin-feathers would be gone ; the wing frames would be as bare as kite sticks before the paper is pasted on .
The distances in heaven are billions of times greater ; angels have to go all over heaven every day ; could they do it with their wings alone ?
No , indeed ; they wear the wings for style , but they travel any distance in an instant by WISHING .
The wishing-carpet of the Arabian Nights was a sensible idea -- but our earthly idea of angels flying these awful distances with their clumsy wings was foolish .
`` This barkeeper got converted at a Moody and Sankey meeting , in New York , and started home on the ferry-boat , and there was a collision and he got drowned .
He is of a class that think all heaven goes wild with joy when a particularly hard lot like him is saved ; they think all heaven turns out hosannahing to welcome them ; they think there is n't anything talked about in the realms of the blest but their case , for that day .
This barkeeper thinks there has n't been such another stir here in years , as his coming is going to raise.
-- And I 've always noticed this peculiarity about a dead barkeeper -- he not only expects all hands to turn out when he arrives , but he expects to be received with a torchlight procession . ''
Sandy sent home for his things , and I sent for mine , and about nine in the evening we begun to dress .
`` This is going to be a grand time for you , Stormy .
Like as not some of the patriarchs will turn out . ''
`` Like as not .
Of course they are pretty exclusive .
They hardly ever show themselves to the common public .
I believe they never turn out except for an eleventh-hour convert .
They would n't do it then , only earthly tradition makes a grand show pretty necessary on that kind of an occasion . ''
`` Did you talk with those archangels and patriarchs , Sandy ? ''
`` I get your drift again , Sandy .
I would n't be used to such grand people as the patriarchs and prophets , and I would be sheepish and tongue-tied in their company , and mighty glad to get out of it .
Sandy , which is the highest rank , patriarch or prophet ? ''
`` Have they really rung in Mahomet and all those other heathens ? ''
`` But why did they throw off on Shakespeare , that way , and put him away down there below those shoe-makers and horse-doctors and knife-grinders -- a lot of people nobody ever heard of ? ''
`` Then let 's be moving along , Sandy ; we do n't want to miss any of this thing , you know . ''
`` Well , why did n't you , Sandy ? ''
`` Do the kings rank just as they did below ? ''
`` Keep your eyes on the Grand Stand and the miles of seats -- sharp ! ''
says Sandy , `` and listen for the gun-fire . ''
This is the broadest , most unselfish , and most catholic treaty yet framed by man , perhaps .
There is nothing mean , or exacting , or unworthy in any of its provisions .
It freely offers every privilege , every benefit , and every concession the most grasping suitor could demand , to a nation accustomed for generations to understand a `` treaty '' as being a contrivance whose province was to extort as many `` advantages '' as possible and give as few as possible in return .
The only `` advantage '' to the United States perceptible on the face of the document , perhaps , is the advantage of having dealt justly and generously by a neighbor and done it in a cordial spirit .
It is something to have done right -- a species of sentiment seldom considered in treaties .
In ratifying this treaty the Senate of the United States did themselves high credit , and all the more so that they did it with such alacrity and such heartiness .
This is a treaty with no specific advantages noted in it ; it is simply the first great step toward throwing all China open to the world , by showing toward her a spirit which invites her esteem and her confidence instead of her customary curses .
There is nothing in it about China ceding to us the navigation of an ocean in return for the navigation of a creek ; nor the monopoly of silk for a monopoly of beeswax ; nor a whaling-ground in return for a sardine-fishery .
Yet it is a treaty which is full of `` advantages . ''
It is more full of them than is any other treaty , but they are meted out with an even hand to all -- to China upon the one hand , and to the world upon the other .
It looks to the opening up , in China , of a vast and lucrative commerce with the world , and of which America will have only her just share , nothing more .
It looks to the lifting up of a mighty nation and conferring upon it the boon of a purer religion and of a higher and better civilization than it has known before .
It is a treaty made in the broad interests of justice , enlightenment , and progress , and therefore it must stand .
It bridges the Pacific , it breaks down the Tartar wall , it inspires with fresh young blood the energies of the most venerable of the nations .
It acquires a grand field for capital , labor , research , enterprise -- confers science , mechanics , social and political advancement , Christianity .
Is it not enough ?
As soon as Tom was back we cut along the path , around the garden fence , and by and by fetched up on the steep top of the hill the other side of the house .
Tom said he slipped Jim 's hat off of his head and hung it on a limb right over him , and Jim stirred a little , but he did n't wake .
Afterwards Jim said the witches be witched him and put him in a trance , and rode him all over the State , and then set him under the trees again , and hung his hat on a limb to show who done it .
And next time Jim told it he said they rode him down to New Orleans ; and , after that , every time he told it he spread it more and more , till by and by he said they rode him all over the world , and tired him most to death , and his back was all over saddle-boils .
Jim was monstrous proud about it , and he got so he would n't hardly notice the other niggers .
Niggers would come miles to hear Jim tell about it , and he was more looked up to than any nigger in that country .
Strange niggers would stand with their mouths open and look him all over , same as if he was a wonder .
Niggers is always talking about witches in the dark by the kitchen fire ; but whenever one was talking and letting on to know all about such things , Jim would happen in and say , `` Hm !
What you know 'bout witches ? ''
and that nigger was corked up and had to take a back seat .
Jim always kept that five-center piece round his neck with a string , and said it was a charm the devil give to him with his own hands , and told him he could cure anybody with it and fetch witches whenever he wanted to just by saying something to it ; but he never told what it was he said to it .
Niggers would come from all around there and give Jim anything they had , just for a sight of that five-center piece ; but they would n't touch it , because the devil had had his hands on it .
Jim was most ruined for a servant , because he got stuck up on account of having seen the devil and been rode by witches .
We went to a clump of bushes , and Tom made everybody swear to keep the secret , and then showed them a hole in the hill , right in the thickest part of the bushes .
Then we lit the candles , and crawled in on our hands and knees .
We went about two hundred yards , and then the cave opened up .
Tom poked about amongst the passages , and pretty soon ducked under a wall where you would n't a noticed that there was a hole .
We went along a narrow place and got into a kind of room , all damp and sweaty and cold , and there we stopped .
So Tom got out a sheet of paper that he had wrote the oath on , and read it .
It swore every boy to stick to the band , and never tell any of the secrets ; and if anybody done anything to any boy in the band , whichever boy was ordered to kill that person and his family must do it , and he must n't eat and he must n't sleep till he had killed them and hacked a cross in their breasts , which was the sign of the band .
And nobody that did n't belong to the band could use that mark , and if he did he must be sued ; and if he done it again he must be killed .
And if anybody that belonged to the band told the secrets , he must have his throat cut , and then have his carcass burnt up and the ashes scattered all around , and his name blotted off of the list with blood and never mentioned again by the gang , but have a curse put on it and be forgot forever .
Everybody said it was a real beautiful oath , and asked Tom if he got it out of his own head .
He said , some of it , but the rest was out of pirate-books and robber-books , and every gang that was high-toned had it .
`` But who are we going to rob ?
-- houses , or cattle , or -- ''
What 's that ? ''
`` How you talk , Ben Rogers .
How can they get loose when there 's a guard over them , ready to shoot them down if they move a peg ? ''
I do n't mind ; but I say it 's a fool way , anyhow .
Say , do we kill the women , too ? ''
`` Well , Ben Rogers , if I was as ignorant as you I would n't let on .
No ; nobody ever saw anything in the books like that .
You fetch them to the cave , and you 're always as polite as pie to them ; and by and by they fall in love with you , and never want to go home any more . ''
Little Tommy Barnes was asleep now , and when they waked him up he was scared , and cried , and said he wanted to go home to his ma , and didn't want to be a robber any more .
`` Who makes them tear around so ? ''
`` Why , whoever rubs the lamp or the ring .
They belong to whoever rubs the lamp or the ring , and they 've got to do whatever he says .
If he tells them to build a palace forty miles long out of di'monds , and fill it full of chewing-gum , or whatever you want , and fetch an emperor 's daughter from China for you to marry , they 've got to do it -- and they 've got to do it before sun-up next morning , too .
And more : they 've got to waltz that palace around over the country wherever you want it , you understand . ''
I thought all this over for two or three days , and then I reckoned I would see if there was anything in it .
I got an old tin lamp and an iron ring , and went out in the woods and rubbed and rubbed till I sweat like an Injun , calculating to build a palace and sell it ; but it war n't no use , none of the genies come .
So then I judged that all that stuff was only just one of Tom Sawyer 's lies .
I reckoned he believed in the A-rabs and the elephants , but as for me I think different .
It had all the marks of a Sunday-school .
I was up in a second and shinning down the hill .
I looked over my shoulder every now and then , but I did n't see nobody .
I was at Judge Thatcher 's as quick as I could get there .
`` Why , my boy , you are all out of breath .
Did you come for your interest ? ''
`` Oh , yes , a half-yearly is in last night -- over a hundred and fifty dollars .
Quite a fortune for you .
You had better let me invest it along with your six thousand , because if you take it you 'll spend it . ''
`` No , sir , '' I says , `` I do n't want to spend it .
I do n't want it at all -- nor the six thousand , nuther .
I want you to take it ; I want to give it to you -- the six thousand and all . ''
I says , `` Do n't you ask me no questions about it , please .
You 'll take it -- wo n't you ? ''
`` Please take it , '' says I , `` and do n't ask me nothing -- then I wo n't have to tell no lies . ''
He studied a while , and then he says :
Jim put the quarter under the hair-ball , and got down and listened again .
This time he said the hair-ball was all right .
He said it would tell my whole fortune if I wanted it to .
I says , go on .
So the hair-ball talked to Jim , and Jim told it to me .
`` The widow , hey ?
-- and who told the widow she could put in her shovel about a thing that ai n't none of her business ? ''
`` It 's so .
You can do it .
I had my doubts when you told me .
Now looky here ; you stop that putting on frills .
I wo n't have it .
I 'll lay for you , my smarty ; and if I catch you about that school I 'll tan you good .
First you know you 'll get religion , too .
I never see such a son . ''
`` I 'll give you something better -- I 'll give you a cowhide . ''
`` AI N'T you a sweet-scented dandy , though ?
A bed ; and bedclothes ; and a look'n'-glass ; and a piece of carpet on the floor -- and your own father got to sleep with the hogs in the tanyard .
I never see such a son .
I bet I 'll take some o ' these frills out o ' you before I 'm done with you .
Why , there ai n't no end to your airs -- they say you 're rich .
-- how's that ? ''
But by and by pap got too handy with his hick'ry , and I could n't stand it .
I was all over welts .
He got to going away so much , too , and locking me in .
Once he locked me in and was gone three days .
It was dreadful lonesome .
I judged he had got drownded , and I was n't ever going to get out any more .
I made up my mind I would fix up some way to leave there .
I had tried to get out of that cabin many a time , but I could n't find no way .
There war n't a window to it big enough for a dog to get through .
I could n't get up the chimbly ; it was too narrow .
The door was thick , solid oak slabs .
Pap was pretty careful not to leave a knife or anything in the cabin when he was away ; I reckon I had hunted the place over as much as a hundred times ; well , I was most all the time at it , because it was about the only way to put in the time .
But this time I found something at last ; I found an old rusty wood-saw without any handle ; it was laid in between a rafter and the clapboards of the roof .
I greased it up and went to work .
There was an old horse-blanket nailed against the logs at the far end of the cabin behind the table , to keep the wind from blowing through the chinks and putting the candle out .
I got under the table and raised the blanket , and went to work to saw a section of the big bottom log out -- big enough to let me through .
Well , it was a good long job , but I was getting towards the end of it when I heard pap 's gun in the woods .
I got rid of the signs of my work , and dropped the blanket and hid my saw , and pretty soon pap come in .
`` Well , I tried to , but I could n't ; I could n't budge you . ''
It was pretty close to the shanty , and I thought I heard the old man coming all the time ; but I got her hid ; and then I out and looked around a bunch of willows , and there was the old man down the path a piece just drawing a bead on a bird with his gun .
So he had n't seen anything .
It was all grass clear to the canoe , so I had n't left a track .
I followed around to see .
I stood on the bank and looked out over the river .
So I took the gun and went up a piece into the woods , and was hunting around for some birds when I see a wild pig ; hogs soon went wild in them bottoms after they had got away from the prairie farms .
I shot this fellow and took him into camp .
I did n't hope so .
They all crowded up and leaned over the rails , nearly in my face , and kept still , watching with all their might .
I could see them first-rate , but they could n't see me .
Then the captain sung out :
So I took my paddle and slid out from shore just a step or two , and then let the canoe drop along down amongst the shadows .
The moon was shining , and outside of the shadows it made it most as light as day .
I poked along well on to an hour , everything still as rocks and sound asleep .
Well , by this time I was most down to the foot of the island .
A little ripply , cool breeze begun to blow , and that was as good as saying the night was about done .
I give her a turn with the paddle and brung her nose to shore ; then I got my gun and slipped out and into the edge of the woods .
I sat down there on a log , and looked out through the leaves .
I see the moon go off watch , and the darkness begin to blanket the river .
But in a little while I see a pale streak over the treetops , and knowed the day was coming .
So I took my gun and slipped off towards where I had run across that camp fire , stopping every minute or two to listen .
But I had n't no luck somehow ; I could n't seem to find the place .
But by and by , sure enough , I catched a glimpse of fire away through the trees .
I went for it , cautious and slow .
By and by I was close enough to have a look , and there laid a man on the ground .
It most give me the fan-tods .
He had a blanket around his head , and his head was nearly in the fire .
I set there behind a clump of bushes , in about six foot of him , and kept my eyes on him steady .
It was getting gray daylight now .
Pretty soon he gapped and stretched himself and hove off the blanket , and it was Miss Watson 's Jim !
I bet I was glad to see him .
`` Strawberries and such truck , '' I says .
`` Is that what you live on ? ''
`` Yes -- indeedy . ''
`` No , sah -- nuffn else . ''
When breakfast was ready we lolled on the grass and eat it smoking hot .
Jim laid it in with all his might , for he was most about starved .
Then when we had got pretty well stuffed , we laid off and lazied .
By and by Jim says :
`` Oh , yes .
I knowed dey was arter you .
I see um go by heah -- watched um thoo de bushes . ''
`` What did you do with the ten cents , Jim ? ''
The light begun to come before we got to the foot of the island .
Then we looked in at the window .
We could make out a bed , and a table , and two old chairs , and lots of things around about on the floor , and there was clothes hanging against the wall .
There was something laying on the floor in the far corner that looked like a man .
But it did n't budge .
So I hollered again , and then Jim says :
We rummaged the clothes we 'd got , and found eight dollars in silver sewed up in the lining of an old blanket overcoat .
Jim said he reckoned the people in that house stole the coat , because if they 'd a knowed the money was there they would n't a left it .
I said I reckoned they killed him , too ; but Jim did n't want to talk about that .
`` Now you think it 's bad luck ; but what did you say when I fetched in the snake-skin that I found on the top of the ridge day before yesterday ?
You said it was the worst bad luck in the world to touch a snake-skin with my hands .
Well , here 's your bad luck !
We 've raked in all this truck and eight dollars besides .
I wish we could have some bad luck like this every day , Jim . ''
`` Well , I reckon there 's a right smart chance of people HERE that 'd like to know who killed him .
Some think old Finn done it himself . ''
`` Most everybody thought it at first .
He 'll never know how nigh he come to getting lynched .
But before night they changed around and judged it was done by a runaway nigger named Jim . ''
`` Oh , no , not everybody .
A good many thinks he done it .
But they 'll get the nigger pretty soon now , and maybe they can scare it out of him . ''
`` Oh , yes 'm , I did .
Sarah 's my first name .
Some calls me Sarah , some calls me Mary . ''
`` No , you wo n't .
Set down and stay where you are .
I ai n't going to hurt you , and I ai n't going to tell on you , nuther .
You just tell me your secret , and trust me .
I 'll keep it ; and , what 's more , I 'll help you .
So 'll my old man if you want him to .
You see , you 're a runaway 'prentice , that 's all .
It ai n't anything .
There ai n't no harm in it .
You 've been treated bad , and you made up your mind to cut .
Bless you , child , I would n't tell on you .
Tell me all about it now , that 's a good boy . ''
`` He was drunk , I reckon .
He told you just exactly wrong . ''
`` Well , then , a horse ? ''
`` Well , try to remember it , George .
Do n't forget and tell me it's Elexander before you go , and then get out by saying it 's George Elexander when I catch you .
And do n't go about women in that old calico .
You do a girl tolerable poor , but you might fool men , maybe .
Bless you , child , when you set out to thread a needle do n't hold the thread still and fetch the needle up to it ; hold the needle still and poke the thread at it ; that 's the way a woman most always does , but a man always does t'other way .
And when you throw at a rat or anything , hitch yourself up a tiptoe and fetch your hand up over your head as awkward as you can , and miss your rat about six or seven foot .
Throw stiff-armed from the shoulder , like there was a pivot there for it to turn on , like a girl ; not from the wrist and elbow , with your arm out to one side , like a boy .
And , mind you , when a girl tries to catch anything in her lap she throws her knees apart ; she do n't clap them together , the way you did when you catched the lump of lead .
Why , I spotted you for a boy when you was threading the needle ; and I contrived the other things just to make certain .
Now trot along to your uncle , Sarah Mary Williams George Elexander Peters , and if you get into trouble you send word to Mrs. Judith Loftus , which is me , and I 'll do what I can to get you out of it .
Keep the river road all the way , and next time you tramp take shoes and socks with you .
The river road 's a rocky one , and your feet 'll be in a condition when you get to Goshen , I reckon . ''
I went up the bank about fifty yards , and then I doubled on my tracks and slipped back to where my canoe was , a good piece below the house .
I jumped in , and was off in a hurry .
I went up-stream far enough to make the head of the island , and then started across .
I took off the sun-bonnet , for I did n't want no blinders on then .
When I was about the middle I heard the clock begin to strike , so I stops and listens ; the sound come faint over the water but clear -- eleven .
When I struck the head of the island I never waited to blow , though I was most winded , but I shoved right into the timber where my old camp used to be , and started a good fire there on a high and dry spot .
Then I jumped in the canoe and dug out for our place , a mile and a half below , as hard as I could go .
I landed , and slopped through the timber and up the ridge and into the cavern .
There Jim laid , sound asleep on the ground .
I roused him out and says :
IT must a been close on to one o'clock when we got below the island at last , and the raft did seem to go mighty slow .
If a boat was to come along we was going to take to the canoe and break for the Illinois shore ; and it was well a boat did n't come , for we had n't ever thought to put the gun in the canoe , or a fishing-line , or anything to eat .
We was in ruther too much of a sweat to think of so many things .
It war n't good judgment to put EVERYTHING on the raft .
If the men went to the island I just expect they found the camp fire I built , and watched it all night for Jim to come .
Anyways , they stayed away from us , and if my building the fire never fooled them it war n't no fault of mine .
I played it as low down on them as I could .
`` Le 's land on her , Jim . ''
`` Oh , please do n't , boys ; I swear I wo n't ever tell ! ''
And every time he said that the man with the lantern would laugh and say :
`` Bless yo ' heart for them words , Jake Packard !
I 'll never forgit you long 's I live ! ''
says the man on the floor , sort of blubbering .
`` He 's said he 'll tell , and he will .
If we was to give both our shares to him NOW it would n't make no difference after the row and the way we've served him .
Shore 's you 're born , he 'll turn State 's evidence ; now you hear ME .
I 'm for putting him out of his troubles . ''
`` So 'm I , '' says Packard , very quiet .
`` Quick , Jim , it ai n't no time for fooling around and moaning ; there 's a gang of murderers in yonder , and if we do n't hunt up their boat and set her drifting down the river so these fellows ca n't get away from the wreck there 's one of 'em going to be in a bad fix .
But if we find their boat we can put ALL of 'em in a bad fix -- for the sheriff 'll get 'em .
I 'll hunt the labboard side , you hunt the stabboard .
You start at the raft , and -- ''
He flung a bag of something into the boat , and then got in himself and set down .
Then Bill HE come out and got in .
Packard says , in a low voice :
`` All ready -- shove off ! ''
So he 's got his share o ' the cash yet . ''
`` Yes , '' he says , kind of pretty-well-satisfied like .
`` I 'm the captain and the owner and the mate and the pilot and watchman and head deck-hand ; and sometimes I 'm the freight and passengers .
I ai n't as rich as old Jim Hornback , and I ca n't be so blame ' generous and good to Tom , Dick , and Harry as what he is , and slam around money the way he does ; but I 've told him a many a time 't I would n't trade places with him ; for , says I , a sailor 's life 's the life for me , and I 'm derned if I 'D live two mile out o ' town , where there ai n't nothing ever goin ' on , not for all his spondulicks and as much more on top of it .
I broke in and says :
I struck for the light , but as soon as he turned the corner I went back and got into my skiff and bailed her out , and then pulled up shore in the easy water about six hundred yards , and tucked myself in among some woodboats ; for I could n't rest easy till I could see the ferryboat start .
But take it all around , I was feeling ruther comfortable on accounts of taking all this trouble for that gang , for not many would a done it .
I wished the widow knowed about it .
I judged she would be proud of me for helping these rapscallions , because rapscallions and dead beats is the kind the widow and good people takes the most interest in .
`` Roun ' de which ? ''
`` But I tell you you do n't get the point . ''
`` Why , Huck , doan ' de French people talk de same way we does ? ''
`` Well , now , I be ding-busted !
How do dat come ? ''
WE judged that three nights more would fetch us to Cairo , at the bottom of Illinois , where the Ohio River comes in , and that was what we was after .
We would sell the raft and get on a steamboat and go way up the Ohio amongst the free States , and then be out of trouble .
Thinks I , it wo n't do to paddle ; first I know I 'll run into the bank or a towhead or something ; I got to set still and float , and yet it 's mighty fidgety business to have to hold your hands still at such a time .
I whooped and listened .
Away down there somewheres I hears a small whoop , and up comes my spirits .
I went tearing after it , listening sharp to hear it again .
The next time it come I see I war n't heading for it , but heading away to the right of it .
And the next time I was heading away to the left of it -- and not gaining on it much either , for I was flying around , this way and that and t'other , but it was going straight ahead all the time .
It was a monstrous big river here , with the tallest and the thickest kind of timber on both banks ; just a solid wall , as well as I could see by the stars .
I looked away down-stream , and seen a black speck on the water .
I took after it ; but when I got to it it war n't nothing but a couple of sawlogs made fast together .
Then I see another speck , and chased that ; then another , and this time I was right .
It was the raft .
`` Why , de fog !
-- de fog dat 's been aroun ' all night .
En did n't you whoop , en did n't I whoop , tell we got mix ' up in de islands en one un us got los ' en t'other one was jis ' as good as los ' , 'kase he didn ' know whah he wuz ?
En did n't I bust up agin a lot er dem islands en have a turrible time en mos ' git drownded ?
Now ain ' dat so , boss -- ai n't it so ?
You answer me dat . ''
Jim talked out loud all the time while I was talking to myself .
He was saying how the first thing he would do when he got to a free State he would go to saving up money and never spend a single cent , and when he got enough he would buy his wife , which was owned on a farm close to where Miss Watson lived ; and then they would both work to buy the two children , and if their master would n't sell them , they 'd get an Ab'litionist to go and steal them .
`` I 'll take the canoe and go and see , Jim .
It might n't be , you know . ''
Well , I just felt sick .
But I says , I GOT to do it -- I ca n't get OUT of it .
Right then along comes a skiff with two men in it with guns , and they stopped and I stopped .
One of them says :
`` Only one , sir . ''
I did n't answer up prompt .
I tried to , but the words would n't come .
I tried for a second or two to brace up and out with it , but I war n't man enough -- had n't the spunk of a rabbit .
I see I was weakening ; so I just give up trying , and up and says :
`` Hold on , Parker , '' says the other man , `` here 's a twenty to put on the board for me .
Good-bye , boy ; you do as Mr. Parker told you , and you'll be all right . ''
He was in the river under the stern oar , with just his nose out .
I told him they were out of sight , so he come aboard .
`` Maybe we went by Cairo in the fog that night . ''
`` I wish I 'd never seen that snake-skin , Jim -- I do wish I 'd never laid eyes on it . ''
`` It ai n't yo ' fault , Huck ; you didn ' know .
Do n't you blame yo'self 'bout it . ''
We did n't say a word for a good while .
There war n't anything to say .
We both knowed well enough it was some more work of the rattlesnake-skin ; so what was the use to talk about it ?
It would only look like we was finding fault , and that would be bound to fetch more bad luck -- and keep on fetching it , too , till we knowed enough to keep still .
So we shoved out after dark on the raft .
`` Be done , boys !
Who 's there ? ''
`` I war n't prowling around , sir , I fell overboard off of the steamboat . ''
I heard the people stirring around in the house now , and see a light .
The man sung out :
`` Well , that may be so , and it may n't .
Now , all ready .
Step forward , George Jackson .
And mind , do n't you hurry -- come mighty slow .
If there's anybody with you , let him keep back -- if he shows himself he 'll be shot .
Come slow ; push the door open yourself -- just enough to squeeze in , d ' you hear ? ''
They said , no , 't was a false alarm .
They all laughed , and Bob says :
`` Well , nobody come after me , and it ai n't right I 'm always kept down ; I do n't get no show . ''
`` Why , any candle , '' he says .
`` Well , '' says I , `` you done it , but I did n't think you could .
It ai n't no slouch of a name to spell -- right off without studying . ''
ODE TO STEPHEN DOWLING BOTS , DEC'D
No ; such was not the fate of Young Stephen Dowling Bots ; Though sad hearts round him thickened , 'T was not from sickness ' shots .
`` Did you want to kill him , Buck ? ''
`` Well , I bet I did . ''
`` What was the trouble about , Buck ?
`` Laws , how do I know ?
It was so long ago . ''
`` Has there been many killed , Buck ? ''
`` I reckon that old man was a coward , Buck . ''
Next Sunday we all went to church , about three mile , everybody a-horseback .
The men took their guns along , so did Buck , and kept them between their knees or stood them handy against the wall .
The Shepherdsons done the same .
It was pretty ornery preaching -- all about brotherly love , and such-like tiresomeness ; but everybody said it was a good sermon , and they all talked it over going home , and had such a powerful lot to say about faith and good works and free grace and preforeordestination , and I do n't know what all , that it did seem to me to be one of the roughest Sundays I had run across yet .
`` You shove right in dah jist a few steps , Mars Jawge ; dah 's whah dey is .
I 's seed 'm befo ' ; I do n't k'yer to see 'em no mo ' . ''
`` I got hurt a little , en could n't swim fas ' , so I wuz a considable ways behine you towards de las ' ; when you landed I reck'ned I could ketch up wid you on de lan ' 'dout havin ' to shout at you , but when I see dat house I begin to go slow .
I 'uz off too fur to hear what dey say to you -- I wuz 'fraid o ' de dogs ; but when it 'uz all quiet agin I knowed you 's in de house , so I struck out for de woods to wait for day .
Early in de mawnin' some er de niggers come along , gwyne to de fields , en dey tuk me en showed me dis place , whah de dogs ca n't track me on accounts o ' de water , en dey brings me truck to eat every night , en tells me how you 's a-gitt'n along . ''
Soon as it was night out we shoved ; when we got her out to about the middle we let her alone , and let her float wherever the current wanted her to ; then we lit the pipes , and dangled our legs in the water , and talked about all kinds of things -- we was always naked , day and night , whenever the mosquitoes would let us -- the new clothes Buck 's folks made for me was too good to be comfortable , and besides I did n't go much on clothes , nohow .
Sometimes we 'd have that whole river all to ourselves for the longest time .
Yonder was the banks and the islands , across the water ; and maybe a spark -- which was a candle in a cabin window ; and sometimes on the water you could see a spark or two -- on a raft or a scow , you know ; and maybe you could hear a fiddle or a song coming over from one of them crafts .
It 's lovely to live on a raft .
We had the sky up there , all speckled with stars , and we used to lay on our backs and look up at them , and discuss about whether they was made or only just happened .
Jim he allowed they was made , but I allowed they happened ; I judged it would have took too long to MAKE so many .
Jim said the moon could a LAID them ; well , that looked kind of reasonable , so I did n't say nothing against it , because I 've seen a frog lay most as many , so of course it could be done .
We used to watch the stars that fell , too , and see them streak down .
Jim allowed they 'd got spoiled and was hove out of the nest .
Once or twice of a night we would see a steamboat slipping along in the dark , and now and then she would belch a whole world of sparks up out of her chimbleys , and they would rain down in the river and look awful pretty ; then she would turn a corner and her lights would wink out and her powwow shut off and leave the river still again ; and by and by her waves would get to us , a long time after she was gone , and joggle the raft a bit , and after that you would n't hear nothing for you couldn't tell how long , except maybe frogs or something .
After midnight the people on shore went to bed , and then for two or three hours the shores was black -- no more sparks in the cabin windows .
These sparks was our clock -- the first one that showed again meant morning was coming , so we hunted a place to hide and tie up right away .
`` Do n't you do it .
I do n't hear the dogs and horses yet ; you 've got time to crowd through the brush and get up the crick a little ways ; then you take to the water and wade down to me and get in -- that 'll throw the dogs off the scent . ''
`` I 've done considerble in the doctoring way in my time .
Layin ' on o' hands is my best holt -- for cancer and paralysis , and sich things ; and I k'n tell a fortune pretty good when I 've got somebody along to find out the facts for me .
Preachin 's my line , too , and workin ' camp-meetin 's , and missionaryin ' around . ''
`` Dern your skin , ai n't the company good enough for you ? ''
says the baldhead , pretty pert and uppish .
`` No , I know you have n't .
I ai n't blaming you , gentlemen .
I brought myself down -- yes , I did it myself .
It 's right I should suffer -- perfectly right -- I do n't make any moan . ''
`` Gentlemen , '' says the young man , very solemn , `` I will reveal it to you , for I feel I may have confidence in you .
By rights I am a duke ! ''
But the old man got pretty silent by and by -- did n't have much to say , and did n't look pretty comfortable over all that petting that was going on around that duke .
He seemed to have something on his mind .
So , along in the afternoon , he says :
`` Looky here , Bilgewater , '' he says , `` I 'm nation sorry for you , but you ai n't the only person that 's had troubles like that . ''
`` Bilgewater , I am the late Dauphin ! ''
`` You are what ? ''
`` Leave me alone to cipher out a way so we can run in the daytime if we want to .
I 'll think the thing over -- I 'll invent a plan that 'll fix it .
We 'll let it alone for to-day , because of course we do n't want to go by that town yonder in daylight -- it might n't be healthy . ''
`` I should a reckoned the difference in rank would a sejested to you that a corn-shuck bed war n't just fitten for me to sleep on .
Your Grace 'll take the shuck bed yourself . ''
We got away as soon as it was good and dark .
The king told us to stand well out towards the middle of the river , and not show a light till we got a long ways below the town .
We come in sight of the little bunch of lights by and by -- that was the town , you know -- and slid by , about a half a mile out , all right .
When we was three-quarters of a mile below we hoisted up our signal lantern ; and about ten o'clock it come on to rain and blow and thunder and lighten like everything ; so the king told us to both stay on watch till the weather got better ; then him and the duke crawled into the wigwam and turned in for the night .
It was my watch below till twelve , but I would n't a turned in anyway if I 'd had a bed , because a body do n't see such a storm as that every day in the week , not by a long sight .
My souls , how the wind did scream along !
And every second or two there 'd come a glare that lit up the white-caps for a half a mile around , and you 'd see the islands looking dusty through the rain , and the trees thrashing around in the wind ; then comes a H-WHACK !
bumble-umble-um-bum-bum-bum-bum -- and the thunder would go rumbling and grumbling away , and quit -- and then RIP comes another flash and another sockdolager .
The waves most washed me off the raft sometimes , but I had n't any clothes on , and did n't mind .
We did n't have no trouble about snags ; the lightning was glaring and flittering around so constant that we could see them plenty soon enough to throw her head this way or that and miss them .
I 'm jist a-freezn ' for something fresh , anyway .
Le's commence right away . ''
We got there in about a half an hour fairly dripping , for it was a most awful hot day .
There was as much as a thousand people there from twenty mile around .
The woods was full of teams and wagons , hitched everywheres , feeding out of the wagon-troughs and stomping to keep off the flies .
There was sheds made out of poles and roofed over with branches , where they had lemonade and gingerbread to sell , and piles of watermelons and green corn and such-like truck .
The preaching was going on under the same kinds of sheds , only they was bigger and held crowds of people .
The benches was made out of outside slabs of logs , with holes bored in the round side to drive sticks into for legs .
They did n't have no backs .
The preachers had high platforms to stand on at one end of the sheds .
The women had on sun-bonnets ; and some had linsey-woolsey frocks , some gingham ones , and a few of the young ones had on calico .
Some of the young men was barefooted , and some of the children did n't have on any clothes but just a tow-linen shirt .
Some of the old women was knitting , and some of the young folks was courting on the sly .
You could n't make out what the preacher said any more , on account of the shouting and crying .
Folks got up everywheres in the crowd , and worked their way just by main strength to the mourners ' bench , with the tears running down their faces ; and when all the mourners had got up there to the front benches in a crowd , they sung and shouted and flung themselves down on the straw , just crazy and wild .
Well , the first I knowed the king got a-going , and you could hear him over everybody ; and next he went a-charging up on to the platform , and the preacher he begged him to speak to the people , and he done it .
He told them he was a pirate -- been a pirate for thirty years out in the Indian Ocean -- and his crew was thinned out considerable last spring in a fight , and he was home now to take out some fresh men , and thanks to goodness he 'd been robbed last night and put ashore off of a steamboat without a cent , and he was glad of it ; it was the blessedest thing that ever happened to him , because he was a changed man now , and happy for the first time in his life ; and , poor as he was , he was going to start right off and work his way back to the Indian Ocean , and put in the rest of his life trying to turn the pirates into the true path ; for he could do it better than anybody else , being acquainted with all pirate crews in that ocean ; and though it would take him a long time to get there without money , he would get there anyway , and every time he convinced a pirate he would say to him , `` Do n't you thank me , do n't you give me no credit ; it all belongs to them dear people in Pokeville camp-meeting , natural brothers and benefactors of the race , and that dear preacher there , the truest friend a pirate ever had ! ''
`` Well , Capet , we 'll want to make this a first-class show , you know , so I guess we 'll add a little more to it .
We want a little something to answer encores with , anyway . ''
The world renowned tragedians , David Garrick the Younger , of Drury Lane Theatre London , and Edmund Kean the elder , of the Royal Haymarket Theatre , Whitechapel , Pudding Lane , Piccadilly , London , and the Royal Continental Theatres , in their sublime Shaksperean Spectacle entitled
Assisted by the whole strength of the company !
New costumes , new scenery , new appointments !
Also : The thrilling , masterly , and blood-curdling Broad-sword conflict In Richard III .
`` Cai n't ; I hai n't got but one chaw left .
Maybe Bill he gives him a chaw ; maybe he lies and says he ai n't got none .
Some of them kinds of loafers never has a cent in the world , nor a chaw of tobacco of their own .
They get all their chawing by borrowing ; they say to a fellow , `` I wisht you 'd len ' me a chaw , Jack , I jist this minute give Ben Thompson the last chaw I had '' -- which is a lie pretty much everytime ; it do n't fool nobody but a stranger ; but Jack ai n't no stranger , so he says :
Store tobacco is flat black plug , but these fellows mostly chaws the natural leaf twisted .
When they borrow a chaw they do n't generly cut it off with a knife , but set the plug in between their teeth , and gnaw with their teeth and tug at the plug with their hands till they get it in two ; then sometimes the one that owns the tobacco looks mournful at it when it 's handed back , and says , sarcastic :
Another one says , `` I wisht old Boggs 'd threaten me , 'cuz then I 'd know I war n't gwyne to die for a thousan ' year . ''
He see me , and rode up and says :
`` Whar 'd you come f 'm , boy ?
You prepared to die ? ''
Then he rode on .
I was scared , but a man says :
`` Come out here , Sherburn !
Come out and meet the man you 've swindled .
You 're the houn ' I 'm after , and I 'm a-gwyne to have you , too ! ''
Well , pretty soon the whole town was there , squirming and scrouging and pushing and shoving to get at the window and have a look , but people that had the places would n't give them up , and folks behind them was saying all the time , `` Say , now , you 've looked enough , you fellows ; 'tai n't right and 'tai n't fair for you to stay thar all the time , and never give nobody a chance ; other folks has their rights as well as you . ''
Well , by and by somebody said Sherburn ought to be lynched .
In about a minute everybody was saying it ; so away they went , mad and yelling , and snatching down every clothes-line they come to to do the hanging with .
`` So they always acquit ; and then a MAN goes in the night , with a hundred masked cowards at his back and lynches the rascal .
Your mistake is , that you did n't bring a man with you ; that 's one mistake , and the other is that you did n't come in the dark and fetch your masks .
You brought PART of a man -- Buck Harkness , there -- and if you had n't had him to start you , you 'd a taken it out in blowing .
LADIES AND CHILDREN NOT ADMITTED .
The duke says yes .
Then there was a fine time .
Everybody sings out , `` Sold ! ''
and rose up mad , and was a-going for that stage and them tragedians .
But a big , fine looking man jumps up on a bench and shouts :
`` Well , how 'd the old thing pan out this time , duke ? ''
He had n't been up-town at all .
We never showed a light till we was about ten mile below the village .
Then we lit up and had a supper , and the king and the duke fairly laughed their bones loose over the way they 'd served them people .
`` Greenhorns , flatheads !
I knew the first house would keep mum and let the rest of the town get roped in ; and I knew they 'd lay for us the third night , and consider it was THEIR turn now .
Well , it IS their turn , and I 'd give something to know how much they 'd take for it .
I WOULD just like to know how they 're putting in their opportunity .
They can turn it into a picnic if they want to -- they brought plenty provisions . ''
`` Now de duke , he 's a tolerble likely man in some ways . ''
`` Well , anyways , I doan ' hanker for no mo ' un um , Huck .
Dese is all I kin stan ' . ''
I went to sleep , and Jim did n't call me when it was my turn .
He often done that .
When I waked up just at daybreak he was sitting there with his head down betwixt his knees , moaning and mourning to himself .
I did n't take notice nor let on .
I knowed what it was about .
He was thinking about his wife and his children , away up yonder , and he was low and homesick ; because he had n't ever been away from home before in his life ; and I do believe he cared just as much for his people as white folks does for their'n .
It do n't seem natural , but I reckon it 's so .
He was often moaning and mourning that way nights , when he judged I was asleep , and saying , `` Po ' little 'Lizabeth !
po ' little Johnny !
it 's mighty hard ; I spec ' I ai n't ever gwyne to see you no mo ' , no mo ' ! ''
He was a mighty good nigger , Jim was .
`` She never done it ; jis ' stood dah , kiner smilin ' up at me .
It make me mad ; en I says agin , mighty loud , I says :
And he nailed that shingle to a lath , and stood the lath up four or five foot in front of the wigwam .
He said it was a sight better than lying tied a couple of years every day , and trembling all over every time there was a sound .
The duke told him to make himself free and easy , and if anybody ever come meddling around , he must hop out of the wigwam , and carry on a little , and fetch a howl or two like a wild beast , and he reckoned they would light out and leave him alone .
Which was sound enough judgment ; but you take the average man , and he wouldn't wait for him to howl .
Why , he did n't only look like he was dead , he looked considerable more than that .
`` Seein ' how I 'm dressed , I reckon maybe I better arrive down from St. Louis or Cincinnati , or some other big place .
Go for the steamboat , Huckleberry ; we 'll come down to the village on her . ''
The duke said , leave him alone for that ; said he had played a deef and dumb person on the histronic boards .
So then they waited for a steamboat .
`` Is it THEM ? ''
It most busted them , but they made up the six thousand clean and clear .
`` Good land , duke , lem me hug you !
It 's the most dazzling idea 'at ever a man struck .
You have cert'nly got the most astonishin ' head I ever see .
Oh , this is the boss dodge , ther ' ai n't no mistake 'bout it .
Let 'em fetch along their suspicions now if they want to -- this 'll lay 'em out . ''
Well , then , pretty soon all hands got to talking about the diseased again , and how good he was , and what a loss he was , and all that ; and before long a big iron-jawed man worked himself in there from outside , and stood a-listening and looking , and not saying anything ; and nobody saying anything to him either , because the king was talking and they was all busy listening .
The king was saying -- in the middle of something he'd started in on --
`` Is it my poor brother 's dear good friend and physician ?
And when it was all done me and the hare-lip had supper in the kitchen off of the leavings , whilst the others was helping the niggers clean up the things .
The hare-lip she got to pumping me about England , and blest if I did n't think the ice was getting mighty thin sometimes .
`` Well , he does .
Where WOULD he live ? ''
`` I never said nothing of the kind . ''
`` Well , what DID you say , then ? ''
`` Said he come to take the sea BATHS -- that 's what I said . ''
`` Looky here , '' I says ; `` did you ever see any Congress-water ? ''
`` Well , did you have to go to Congress to get it ? ''
`` Where do you set ? ''
What does HE want with a pew ? ''
`` Why , they 're for STYLE .
Do n't you know nothing ? ''
`` Honest injun , now , hai n't you been telling me a lot of lies ? ''
`` I do n't care whether 't was little or whether 't was big ; he 's here in our house and a stranger , and it was n't good of you to say it .
If you was in his place it would make you feel ashamed ; and so you ought n't to say a thing to another person that will make THEM feel ashamed . ''
Then Mary Jane she took another inning , and went in sweet and lovely again -- which was her way ; but when she got done there war n't hardly anything left o ' poor Hare-lip .
She done it , too ; and she done it beautiful .
She done it so beautiful it was good to hear ; and I wished I could tell her a thousand lies , so she could do it again .
`` Well , this is it , Capet .
I ai n't easy ; I ai n't comfortable .
That doctor lays on my mind .
I wanted to know your plans .
I 've got a notion , and I think it 's a sound one . ''
`` That we better glide out of this before three in the morning , and clip it down the river with what we 've got .
Specially , seeing we got it so easy -- GIVEN back to us , flung at our heads , as you may say , when of course we allowed to have to steal it back .
I 'm for knocking off and lighting out . ''
That made me feel pretty bad .
About an hour or two ago it would a been a little different , but now it made me feel bad and disappointed , The king rips out and says :
`` Why , how you talk ! ''
`` We sha'n't rob 'em of nothing at all but jest this money .
The people that BUYS the property is the suff'rers ; because as soon 's it 's found out 'at we did n't own it -- which wo n't be long after we 've slid -- the sale wo n't be valid , and it 'll all go back to the estate .
These yer orphans 'll git their house back agin , and that 's enough for THEM ; they 're young and spry , and k'n easy earn a livin ' .
THEY ai n't a-goin to suffer .
Why , jest think -- there 's thous'n's and thous'n 's that ai n't nigh so well off .
Bless you , THEY ai n't got noth'n ' to complain of . ''
Well , the king he talked him blind ; so at last he give in , and said all right , but said he believed it was blamed foolishness to stay , and that doctor hanging over them .
But the king says :
That cheered me up .
I 'd begun to think I war n't going to get a hint of no kind to help me .
But I knowed better .
I had it out of there before they was half-way down stairs .
I groped along up to my cubby , and hid it there till I could get a chance to do better .
I judged I better hide it outside of the house somewheres , because if they missed it they would give the house a good ransacking : I knowed that very well .
Then I turned in , with my clothes all on ; but I could n't a gone to sleep if I 'd a wanted to , I was in such a sweat to get through with the business .
By and by I heard the king and the duke come up ; so I rolled off my pallet and laid with my chin at the top of my ladder , and waited to see if anything was going to happen .
I CREPT to their doors and listened ; they was snoring .
So I tiptoed along , and got down stairs all right .
There war n't a sound anywheres .
I peeped through a crack of the dining-room door , and see the men that was watching the corpse all sound asleep on their chairs .
The door was open into the parlor , where the corpse was laying , and there was a candle in both rooms .
I passed along , and the parlor door was open ; but I see there war n't nobody in there but the remainders of Peter ; so I shoved on by ; but the front door was locked , and the key was n't there .
Just then I heard somebody coming down the stairs , back behind me .
I run in the parlor and took a swift look around , and the only place I see to hide the bag was in the coffin .
The lid was shoved along about a foot , showing the dead man 's face down in there , with a wet cloth over it , and his shroud on .
I tucked the money-bag in under the lid , just down beyond where his hands was crossed , which made me creep , they was so cold , and then I run back across the room and in behind the door .
When I got down stairs in the morning the parlor was shut up , and the watchers was gone .
There war n't nobody around but the family and the widow Bartley and our tribe .
I watched their faces to see if anything had been happening , but I could n't tell .
Next day was auction day .
About broad day in the morning the king and the duke come up in the garret and woke me up , and I see by their look that there was trouble .
`` Honor bright , now -- no lies . ''
`` No , your grace , not as I remember , I believe . ''
`` Stop and think . ''
`` Great guns , THIS is a go ! ''
says the king ; and both of them looked pretty sick and tolerable silly .
They stood there a-thinking and scratching their heads a minute , and the duke he bust into a kind of a little raspy chuckle , and says :
`` Oh , dear , dear , to think they ai n't EVER going to see each other any more ! ''
`` Miss Mary Jane , is there any place out of town a little ways where you could go and stay three or four days ? ''
`` Four days ! ''
she says ; `` I 'll stay a year ! ''
Come , do n't waste a minute -- not a SECOND -- we 'll have them tarred and feathered , and flung in the river ! ''
`` Well , '' I says , `` it 's a rough gang , them two frauds , and I 'm fixed so I got to travel with them a while longer , whether I want to or not -- I druther not tell you why ; and if you was to blow on them this town would get me out of their claws , and I 'd be all right ; but there 'd be another person that you do n't know about who 'd be in big trouble .
Well , we got to save HIM , hai n't we ?
Well , then , we wo n't blow on them . ''
`` Good , '' she says , `` I 'll do it . ''
`` Why , it 's because you ai n't one of these leather-face people .
I don't want no better book than what your face is .
A body can set down and read it off like coarse print .
Do you reckon you can go and face your uncles when they come to kiss you good-morning , and never -- ''
`` There , there , do n't !
Yes , I 'll go before breakfast -- I 'll be glad to .
And leave my sisters with them ? ''
`` There 's several ; but it 's the Proctors , mainly . ''
`` My goodness , and she so well only last week !
Is she took bad ? ''
`` It ai n't no name for it .
They set up with her all night , Miss Mary Jane said , and they do n't think she 'll last many hours . ''
`` Only think of that , now !
What 's the matter with her ? ''
`` Just look at it a minute , and maybe you can see .
Hai n't your uncles obleegd to get along home to England as fast as they can ?
And do you reckon they 'd be mean enough to go off and leave you to go all that journey by yourselves ?
YOU know they 'll wait for you .
So fur , so good .
Your uncle Harvey 's a preacher , ai n't he ?
Very well , then ; is a PREACHER going to deceive a steamboat clerk ?
is he going to deceive a SHIP CLERK ?
-- so as to get them to let Miss Mary Jane go aboard ?
Now YOU know he ai n't .
What WILL he do , then ?
Why , he 'll say , 'It 's a great pity , but my church matters has got to get along the best way they can ; for my niece has been exposed to the dreadful pluribus-unum mumps , and so it's my bounden duty to set down here and wait the three months it takes to show on her if she 's got it . '
But never mind , if you think it 's best to tell your uncle Harvey -- ''
`` Why , you must mean the Apthorps , ai n't it ? ''
So him and the new dummy started off ; and the king he laughs , and blethers out :
`` It 's a lie . ''
`` Where is it , then ? ''
I says yes ; and him and some others laughed , and said , `` Stuff ! ''
The lawyer and him shook hands , and the lawyer smiled and looked pleased , and they talked right along awhile , and then got to one side and talked low ; and at last the lawyer speaks up and says :
`` That 'll fix it .
I 'll take the order and send it , along with your brother 's , and then they 'll know it 's all right . ''
So they got some paper and a pen , and the king he set down and twisted his head to one side , and chawed his tongue , and scrawled off something ; and then they give the pen to the duke -- and then for the first time the duke looked sick .
But he took the pen and wrote .
So then the lawyer turns to the new old gentleman and says :
`` If you please , let me explain .
Nobody can read my hand but my brother there -- so he copies for me .
It 's HIS hand you 've got there , not mine . ''
Well , I never see anything like that old blister for clean out-and-out cheek .
they all shouted , and was starting right off ; but the lawyer and the doctor sung out :
`` Hold on , hold on !
Collar all these four men and the boy , and fetch THEM along , too ! ''
Well , we swarmed along down the river road , just carrying on like wildcats ; and to make it more scary the sky was darking up , and the lightning beginning to wink and flitter , and the wind to shiver amongst the leaves .
This was the most awful trouble and most dangersome I ever was in ; and I was kinder stunned ; everything was going so different from what I had allowed for ; stead of being fixed so I could take my own time if I wanted to , and see all the fun , and have Mary Jane at my back to save me and set me free when the close-fit come , here was nothing in the world betwixt me and sudden death but just them tattoo-marks .
If they did n't find them --
So they dug and dug like everything ; and it got awful dark , and the rain started , and the wind swished and swushed along , and the lightning come brisker and brisker , and the thunder boomed ; but them people never took no notice of it , they was so full of this business ; and one minute you could see everything and every face in that big crowd , and the shovelfuls of dirt sailing up out of the grave , and the next second the dark wiped it all out , and you could n't see nothing at all .
`` Not now ; have it for breakfast , have it for breakfast !
Cut loose and let her slide ! ''
`` No , your majesty , we war n't -- PLEASE do n't , your majesty ! ''
`` Quick , then , and tell us what WAS your idea , or I 'll shake the insides out o ' you ! ''
And we reckoned the NIGGERS stole it ! ''
The king kind of ruffles up , and says :
`` That 's me , every time , '' says I .
`` But maybe his chance ai n't worth no more than that , if he 'll sell it so cheap .
Maybe there 's something ain't straight about it . ''
Once I said to myself it would be a thousand times better for Jim to be a slave at home where his family was , as long as he 'd GOT to be a slave , and so I 'd better write a letter to Tom Sawyer and tell him to tell Miss Watson where he was .
But I soon give up that notion for two things : she 'd be mad and disgusted at his rascality and ungratefulness for leaving her , and so she 'd sell him straight down the river again ; and if she did n't , everybody naturally despises an ungrateful nigger , and they'd make Jim feel it all the time , and so he 'd feel ornery and disgraced .
And then think of ME !
It would get all around that Huck Finn helped a nigger to get his freedom ; and if I was ever to see anybody from that town again I 'd be ready to get down and lick his boots for shame .
That's just the way : a person does a low-down thing , and then he do n't want to take no consequences of it .
Thinks as long as he can hide it , it ai n't no disgrace .
That was my fix exactly .
The more I studied about this the more my conscience went to grinding me , and the more wicked and low-down and ornery I got to feeling .
And at last , when it hit me all of a sudden that here was the plain hand of Providence slapping me in the face and letting me know my wickedness was being watched all the time from up there in heaven , whilst I was stealing a poor old woman 's nigger that had n't ever done me no harm , and now was showing me there 's One that's always on the lookout , and ai n't a-going to allow no such miserable doings to go only just so fur and no further , I most dropped in my tracks I was so scared .
Well , I tried the best I could to kinder soften it up somehow for myself by saying I was brung up wicked , and so I war n't so much to blame ; but something inside of me kept saying , `` There was the Sunday-school , you could a gone to it ; and if you 'd a done it they 'd a learnt you there that people that acts as I 'd been acting about that nigger goes to everlasting fire . ''
It was a close place .
I took it up , and held it in my hand .
I was a-trembling , because I 'd got to decide , forever , betwixt two things , and I knowed it .
I studied a minute , sort of holding my breath , and then says to myself :
`` I 'll tell you something .
We got to be here three days .
If you'll promise you wo n't blow , and wo n't let the nigger blow , I 'll tell you where to find him . ''
That was the order I wanted , and that was the one I played for .
I wanted to be left free to work my plans .
`` It 's YOU , at last !
-- AI N'T it ? ''
`` Do n't say yes 'm -- say Aunt Sally .
Where 'd she get aground ? ''
`` No , I did n't see nobody , Aunt Sally .
The boat landed just at daylight , and I left my baggage on the wharf-boat and went looking around the town and out a piece in the country , to put in the time and not get here too soon ; and so I come down the back way . ''
`` Not where I hid it I reckon it wo n't , '' I says .
`` The captain see me standing around , and told me I better have something to eat before I went ashore ; so he took me in the texas to the officers' lunch , and give me all I wanted . ''
`` Here he comes !
Stick your head down lower -- there , that 'll do ; you can't be seen now .
Do n't you let on you 're here .
I 'll play a joke on him .
Children , do n't you say a word . ''
I see I was in a fix now .
But it war n't no use to worry ; there warn't nothing to do but just hold still , and try and be ready to stand from under when the lightning struck .
`` Good-NESS gracious ! ''
she says , `` what in the warld can have become of him ? ''
`` Why , who 's that ? ''
Now I was feeling pretty comfortable all down one side , and pretty uncomfortable all up the other .
Being Tom Sawyer was easy and comfortable , and it stayed easy and comfortable till by and by I hear a steamboat coughing along down the river .
Then I says to myself , s'pose Tom Sawyer comes down on that boat ?
And s'pose he steps in here any minute , and sings out my name before I can throw him a wink to keep quiet ?
When he heard my voice it righted him up some , but he war n't quite satisfied yet .
Why , Jim is -- ''
He stopped and went to studying .
`` I 'm surprised at you , m'am . ''
`` Why , no ; I -- I -- well , no , I b'lieve I did n't . ''
`` Why , dear me , I never see such a surprise .
We war n't looking for YOU at all , but only Tom .
Sis never wrote to me about anybody coming but him . ''
`` My plan is this , '' I says .
`` We can easy find out if it 's Jim in there .
Then get up my canoe to-morrow night , and fetch my raft over from the island .
Then the first dark night that comes steal the key out of the old man 's britches after he goes to bed , and shove off down the river on the raft with Jim , hiding daytimes and running nights , the way me and Jim used to do before .
Would n't that plan work ? ''
Why , cert'nly it would work , like rats a-fighting .
But it 's too blame ' simple ; there ai n't nothing TO it .
What 's the good of a plan that ai n't no more trouble than that ?
It 's as mild as goose-milk .
Why , Huck , it would n't make no more talk than breaking into a soap factory . ''
I never said nothing , because I war n't expecting nothing different ; but I knowed mighty well that whenever he got HIS plan ready it would n't have none of them objections to it .
And it did n't .
He told me what it was , and I see in a minute it was worth fifteen of mine for style , and would make Jim just as free a man as mine would , and maybe get us all killed besides .
So I was satisfied , and said we would waltz in on it .
I need n't tell what it was here , because I knowed it would n't stay the way , it was .
I knowed he would be changing it around every which way as we went along , and heaving in new bullinesses wherever he got a chance .
And that is what he done .
`` Well , then , '' I says , `` how 'll it do to saw him out , the way I done before I was murdered that time ? ''
In the morning we was up at break of day , and down to the nigger cabins to pet the dogs and make friends with the nigger that fed Jim -- if it WAS Jim that was being fed .
The niggers was just getting through breakfast and starting for the fields ; and Jim 's nigger was piling up a tin pan with bread and meat and things ; and whilst the others was leaving , the key come from the house .
`` Why , HUCK !
En good LAN ' !
ain ' dat Misto Tom ? ''
I just knowed how it would be ; I just expected it .
I did n't know nothing to do ; and if I had I could n't a done it , because that nigger busted in and says :
`` Why , de gracious sakes !
do he know you genlmen ? ''
`` No ; I ai n't heard nobody say nothing . ''
Jim only had time to grab us by the hand and squeeze it ; then the nigger come back , and we said we 'd come again some time if the nigger wanted us to ; and he said he would , more particular if it was dark , because the witches went for him mostly in the dark , and it was good to have folks around then .
`` Blame it , this whole thing is just as easy and awkward as it can be .
And so it makes it so rotten difficult to get up a difficult plan .
There ai n't no watchman to be drugged -- now there OUGHT to be a watchman .
There ai n't even a dog to give a sleeping-mixture to .
And there 's Jim chained by one leg , with a ten-foot chain , to the leg of his bed : why , all you got to do is to lift up the bedstead and slip off the chain .
And Uncle Silas he trusts everybody ; sends the key to the punkin-headed nigger , and do n't send nobody to watch the nigger .
Jim could a got out of that window-hole before this , only there would n't be no use trying to travel with a ten-foot chain on his leg .
Why , drat it , Huck , it 's the stupidest arrangement I ever see .
You got to invent ALL the difficulties .
Well , we ca n't help it ; we got to do the best we can with the materials we 've got .
Anyhow , there 's one thing -- there 's more honor in getting him out through a lot of difficulties and dangers , where there war n't one of them furnished to you by the people who it was their duty to furnish them , and you had to contrive them all out of your own head .
Now look at just that one thing of the lantern .
When you come down to the cold facts , we simply got to LET ON that a lantern 's resky .
Why , we could work with a torchlight procession if we wanted to , I believe .
Now , whilst I think of it , we got to hunt up something to make a saw out of the first chance we get . ''
`` What do we want of a saw ? ''
`` What do we want of a moat when we 're going to snake him out from under the cabin ? ''
`` Well , all right , Tom , fix it your own way ; but if you 'll take my advice , you 'll let me borrow a sheet off of the clothesline . ''
`` Borrow a shirt , too . ''
`` Many makes it out of iron-rust and tears ; but that 's the common sort and women ; the best authorities uses their own blood .
Jim can do that ; and when he wants to send any little common ordinary mysterious message to let the world know where he 's captivated , he can write it on the bottom of a tin plate with a fork and throw it out of the window .
The Iron Mask always done that , and it 's a blame ' good way , too . ''
`` That ai n't nothing ; we can get him some . ''
`` Why , blame it all , it ai n't the PRISONER 'S plates . ''
`` But it 's SOMEBODY 'S plates , ai n't it ? ''
`` Why , to dig with .
We ai n't a-going to GNAW him out , are we ? ''
He turns on me , looking pitying enough to make a body cry , and says :
`` Huck Finn , did you EVER hear of a prisoner having picks and shovels , and all the modern conveniences in his wardrobe to dig himself out with ?
Now I want to ask you -- if you got any reasonableness in you at all -- what kind of a show would THAT give him to be a hero ?
Why , they might as well lend him the key and done with it .
Picks and shovels -- why , they wouldn't furnish 'em to a king . ''
`` I do n't know . ''
`` THIRTY-SEVEN YEAR -- and he come out in China .
THAT 'S the kind .
I wish the bottom of THIS fortress was solid rock . ''
`` Well , we ca n't resk being as long as we ought to , because it may n't take very long for Uncle Silas to hear from down there by New Orleans .
He'll hear Jim ai n't from there .
Then his next move will be to advertise Jim , or something like that .
So we ca n't resk being as long digging him out as we ought to .
By rights I reckon we ought to be a couple of years ; but we ca n't .
Things being so uncertain , what I recommend is this : that we really dig right in , as quick as we can ; and after that , we can LET ON , to ourselves , that we was at it thirty-seven years .
Then we can snatch him out and rush him away the first time there 's an alarm .
Yes , I reckon that 'll be the best way . ''
He never said nothing .
But he sighed , and pretty soon he stopped digging , and then for a good little while I knowed that he was thinking .
So then I got a shovel , and then we picked and shoveled , turn about , and made the fur fly .
We stuck to it about a half an hour , which was as long as we could stand up ; but we had a good deal of a hole to show for it .
When I got up stairs I looked out at the window and see Tom doing his level best with the lightning-rod , but he could n't come it , his hands was so sore .
At last he says :
`` Yes , '' I says , `` but I reckon it ai n't regular .
Come up the stairs , and let on it 's a lightning-rod . ''
`` Take them in through the hole , '' I says , `` when we get it done . ''
That night we went down the lightning-rod a little after ten , and took one of the candles along , and listened under the window-hole , and heard Jim snoring ; so we pitched it in , and it did n't wake him .
Then we whirled in with the pick and shovel , and in about two hours and a half the job was done .
We crept in under Jim 's bed and into the cabin , and pawed around and found the candle and lit it , and stood over Jim awhile , and found him looking hearty and healthy , and then we woke him up gentle and gradual .
He was so glad to see us he most cried ; and called us honey , and all the pet names he could think of ; and was for having us hunt up a cold-chisel to cut the chain off of his leg with right away , and clearing out without losing any time .
But Tom he showed him how unregular it would be , and set down and told him all about our plans , and how we could alter them in a minute any time there was an alarm ; and not to be the least afraid , because we would see he got away , SURE .
So Jim he said it was all right , and we set there and talked over old times awhile , and then Tom asked a lot of questions , and when Jim told him Uncle Silas come in every day or two to pray with him , and Aunt Sally come in to see if he was comfortable and had plenty to eat , and both of them was kind as they could be , Tom says :
`` HANNEL 'm , Mars Sid ?
What IS you a-talkin ' 'bout ?
I wouldn ' lay de weight er my finger on um , not f'r ten hund 'd thous'n billion dollars , I would n't . ''
`` Well , Sally , I 'm in fault , and I acknowledge it ; I 've been remiss ; but I wo n't let to-morrow go by without stopping up them holes . ''
Well , she was just a-biling .
I begun to lay for a chance ; I reckoned I would sneak out and go for the woods till the weather moderated .
She kept a-raging right along , running her insurrection all by herself , and everybody else mighty meek and quiet ; and at last Uncle Silas , looking kind of foolish , fishes up that spoon out of his pocket .
She stopped , with her mouth open and her hands up ; and as for me , I wished I was in Jeruslem or somewheres .
But not long , because she says :
`` I declare to gracious ther ' AI N'T but nine ! ''
`` Why , what in the world -- plague TAKE the things , I 'll count 'm again . ''
`` You numskull , did n't you see me COUNT 'm ? ''
`` We ai n't got no time to bother over that , '' he says ; `` we got to dig in like all git-out . ''
`` A fess -- a fess is -- YOU do n't need to know what a fess is .
I 'll show him how to make it when he gets to it . ''
`` Why , Mars Tom , I doan ' WANT no sich glory .
Snake take 'n bite Jim's chin off , den WHAH is de glory ?
No , sah , I doan ' want no sich doin 's . ''
`` Well , it ALWAYS is when it 's done right .
You got any rats around here ? ''
`` Well , we 'll get you some rats . ''
`` Do n't you believe it .
We 'll fetch you a little one and you plant it in the corner over there , and raise it .
And do n't call it mullen , call it Pitchiola -- that 's its right name when it 's in a prison .
And you want to water it with your tears . ''
IN the morning we went up to the village and bought a wire rat-trap and fetched it down , and unstopped the best rat-hole , and in about an hour we had fifteen of the bulliest kind of ones ; and then we took it and put it in a safe place under Aunt Sally 's bed .
But while we was gone for spiders little Thomas Franklin Benjamin Jefferson Elexander Phelps found it there , and opened the door of it to see if the rats would come out , and they did ; and Aunt Sally she come in , and when we got back she was a-standing on top of the bed raising Cain , and the rats was doing what they could to keep off the dull times for her .
So she took and dusted us both with the hickry , and we was as much as two hours catching another fifteen or sixteen , drat that meddlesome cub , and they war n't the likeliest , nuther , because the first haul was the pick of the flock .
I never see a likelier lot of rats than what that first haul was .
`` Yes , I know ; but you ca n't depend on them .
It 's the way they 've acted from the very start -- left us to do EVERYTHING .
They 're so confiding and mullet-headed they do n't take notice of nothing at all .
So if we don't GIVE them notice there wo n't be nobody nor nothing to interfere with us , and so after all our hard work and trouble this escape 'll go off perfectly flat ; wo n't amount to nothing -- wo n't be nothing TO it . ''
`` Well , as for me , Tom , that 's the way I 'd like . ''
`` Why , Tom , that 'll make trouble next morning ; because , of course , she prob'bly hai n't got any but that one . ''
`` All right , then , I 'll do it ; but I could carry it just as handy in my own togs . ''
`` Well , then , you 'll have to stay in the cabin when me and Jim leaves . ''
Do n't betray me , I wish to be your friend .
There is a desprate gang of cutthroats from over in the Indian Territory going to steal your runaway nigger to-night , and they have been trying to scare you so as you will stay in the house and not bother them .
I am one of the gang , but have got religgion and wish to quit it and lead an honest life again , and will betray the helish design .
They will sneak down from northards , along the fence , at midnight exact , with a false key , and go in the nigger 's cabin to get him .
I am to be off a piece and blow a tin horn if I see any danger ; but stead of that I will BA like a sheep soon as they get in and not blow at all ; then whilst they are getting his chains loose , you slip there and lock them in , and can kill them at your leasure .
Do n't do anything but just the way I am telling you , if you do they will suspicion something and raise whoop-jamboreehoo .
I do not wish any reward but to know I have done the right thing .
`` I laid out a hunk of it , '' I says , `` on a piece of a corn-pone . ''
`` We can get along without it , '' I says .
`` I hai n't been doing a single thing , Aunt Sally , I hope to gracious if I have . ''
I did wish Aunt Sally would come , and get done with me , and lick me , if she wanted to , and let me get away and tell Tom how we 'd overdone this thing , and what a thundering hornet's-nest we 'd got ourselves into , so we could stop fooling around straight off , and clear out with Jim before these rips got out of patience and come for us .
`` Here they are !
They 've broke for the river !
After 'em , boys , and turn loose the dogs ! ''
So here they come , full tilt .
We could hear them because they wore boots and yelled , but we did n't wear no boots and did n't yell .
We was in the path to the mill ; and when they got pretty close on to us we dodged into the bush and let them go by , and then dropped in behind them .
They 'd had all the dogs shut up , so they would n't scare off the robbers ; but by this time somebody had let them loose , and here they come , making powwow enough for a million ; but they was our dogs ; so we stopped in our tracks till they catched up ; and when they see it war n't nobody but us , and no excitement to offer them , they only just said howdy , and tore right ahead towards the shouting and clattering ; and then we up-steam again , and whizzed along after them till we was nearly to the mill , and then struck up through the bush to where my canoe was tied , and hopped in and pulled for dear life towards the middle of the river , but did n't make no more noise than we was obleeged to .
Then we struck out , easy and comfortable , for the island where my raft was ; and we could hear them yelling and barking at each other all up and down the bank , till we was so far away the sounds got dim and died out .
And when we stepped on to the raft I says :
`` NOW , old Jim , you 're a free man again , and I bet you wo n't ever be a slave no more . ''
`` En a mighty good job it wuz , too , Huck .
It 'uz planned beautiful , en it 'uz done beautiful ; en dey ai n't NOBODY kin git up a plan dat 's mo' mixed-up en splendid den what dat one wuz . ''
We was all glad as we could be , but Tom was the gladdest of all because he had a bullet in the calf of his leg .
When me and Jim heard that we did n't feel so brash as what we did before .
It was hurting him considerable , and bleeding ; so we laid him in the wigwam and tore up one of the duke 's shirts for to bandage him , but he says :
`` Gim me the rags ; I can do it myself .
Do n't stop now ; do n't fool around here , and the evasion booming along so handsome ; man the sweeps , and set her loose !
Boys , we done it elegant !
-- 'deed we did .
I wish WE 'D a had the handling of Louis XVI.
, there would n't a been no 'Son of Saint Louis , ascend to heaven ! '
wrote down in HIS biography ; no , sir , we 'd a whooped him over the BORDER -- that 's what we 'd a done with HIM -- and done it just as slick as nothing at all , too .
Man the sweeps -- man the sweeps ! ''
`` Well , then , if you 're bound to go , I 'll tell you the way to do when you get to the village .
Shut the door and blindfold the doctor tight and fast , and make him swear to be silent as the grave , and put a purse full of gold in his hand , and then take and lead him all around the back alleys and everywheres in the dark , and then fetch him here in the canoe , in a roundabout way amongst the islands , and search him and take his chalk away from him , and do n't give it back to him till you get him back to the village , or else he will chalk this raft so he can find it again .
It 's the way they all do . ''
`` Oh , '' he says .
And after a minute , he says :
`` Oh , you need n't be afeard , sir , she carried the three of us easy enough . ''
`` Why , me and Sid , and -- and -- and THE GUNS ; that 's what I mean . ''
`` Why , where ever did you go ? ''
`` Your aunt 's been mighty uneasy . ''
So then we went to the post-office to get `` Sid '' ; but just as I suspicioned , he war n't there ; so the old man he got a letter out of the office , and we waited awhile longer , but Sid did n't come ; so the old man said , come along , let Sid foot it home , or canoe it , when he got done fooling around -- but we would ride .
I could n't get him to let me stay and wait for Sid ; and he said there war n't no use in it , and I must come along , and let Aunt Sally see we was all right .
`` I 'll run right up to town and get him , '' I says .
THE old man was uptown again before breakfast , but could n't get no track of Tom ; and both of them set at the table thinking , and not saying nothing , and looking mournful , and their coffee getting cold , and not eating anything .
And by and by the old man says :
`` Oh , he 's dead , he 's dead , I know he 's dead ! ''
Then they come out and locked him up .
I hoped they was going to say he could have one or two of the chains took off , because they was rotten heavy , or could have meat and greens with his bread and water ; but they did n't think of it , and I reckoned it war n't best for me to mix in , but I judged I 'd get the doctor 's yarn to Aunt Sally somehow or other as soon as I 'd got through the breakers that was laying just ahead of me -- explanations , I mean , of how I forgot to mention about Sid being shot when I was telling how him and me put in that dratted night paddling around hunting the runaway nigger .
I was going to say yes ; but she chipped in and says : `` About what , Sid ? ''
`` Why , about the way the whole thing was done . ''
`` What whole thing ? ''
`` Meddling with WHO ? ''
Tom says , dropping his smile and looking surprised .
`` Tom , did n't you just tell me he was all right ?
Has n't he got away ? ''
`` They hai n't no RIGHT to shut him up !
-- and do n't you lose a minute .
he ai n't no slave ; he 's as free as any cretur that walks this earth ! ''
`` Look at that , now !
I might have expected it , letting him go off that way without anybody to watch him .
So now I got to go and trapse all the way down the river , eleven hundred mile , and find out what that creetur's up to THIS time , as long as I could n't seem to get any answer out of you about it . ''
`` Why , I never heard nothing from you , '' says Aunt Sally .
Aunt Polly she turns around slow and severe , and says :
THE first time I catched Tom private I asked him what was his idea , time of the evasion ?
-- what it was he 'd planned to do if the evasion worked all right and he managed to set a nigger free that was already free before ?
And he said , what he had planned in his head from the start , if we got Jim out all safe , was for us to run him down the river on the raft , and have adventures plumb to the mouth of the river , and then tell him about his being free , and take him back up home on a steamboat , in style , and pay him for his lost time , and write word ahead and get out all the niggers around , and have them waltz him into town with a torchlight procession and a brass-band , and then he would be a hero , and so would we .
But I reckoned it was about as well the way it was .
And then Tom he talked along and talked along , and says , le 's all three slide out of here one of these nights and get an outfit , and go for howling adventures amongst the Injuns , over in the Territory , for a couple of weeks or two ; and I says , all right , that suits me , but I ain't got no money for to buy the outfit , and I reckon I could n't get none from home , because it 's likely pap 's been back before now , and got it all away from Judge Thatcher and drunk it up .
Jim says , kind of solemn :
But I kept at him ; so at last he says :
Tom 's most well now , and got his bullet around his neck on a watch-guard for a watch , and is always seeing what time it is , and so there ain't nothing more to write about , and I am rotten glad of it , because if I 'd a knowed what a trouble it was to make a book I would n't a tackled it , and ai n't a-going to no more .
But I reckon I got to light out for the Territory ahead of the rest , because Aunt Sally she 's going to adopt me and sivilize me , and I ca n't stand it .
I been there before .
( AFTER A QUARTER OF AN HOUR . )
Ca n't I EVER change one of these automatic opinions ?
Yes , he had .
No , you mean Shakespeare 's IMITATIONS .
He correctly observed , and he marvelously painted .
He exactly portrayed people whom GOD had created ; but he created none himself .
Let us spare him the slander of charging him with trying .
Shakespeare could not create .
HE WAS A MACHINE , AND MACHINES DO NOT CREATE .
Well , anyway , the idea of CULTIVATING it , the resolution to cultivate it , was meritorious , and he originated that .
What detail is that ?
It is a mistake .
The act must do HIM good , FIRST ; otherwise he will not do it .
He may THINK he is doing it solely for the other person's sake , but it is not so ; he is contenting his own spirit first -- the other person 's benefit has to always take SECOND place .
The doing good to another person where no shadow nor suggestion of benefit to one 's self can result from it .
There have been instances of it -- you think ?
You have not jumped to conclusions ?
You have examined them -- critically ?
Well , then , for instance .
Take the case in the book here .
The man lives three miles up-town .
It is bitter cold , snowing hard , midnight .
He is about to enter the horse-car when a gray and ragged old woman , a touching picture of misery , puts out her lean hand and begs for rescue from hunger and death .
The man finds that he has but a quarter in his pocket , but he does not hesitate : he gives it her and trudges home through the storm .
There -- it is noble , it is beautiful ; its grace is marred by no fleck or blemish or suggestion of self-interest .
Then there is but ONE law , one source .
This is the law , keep it in your mind .
FROM HIS CRADLE TO HIS GRAVE A MAN NEVER DOES A SINGLE THING WHICH HAS ANY FIRST AND FOREMOST OBJECT BUT ONE -- TO SECURE PEACE OF MIND , SPIRITUAL COMFORT , FOR HIMSELF .
They acted ACCORDING TO THEIR MAKE .
They valued their principles and the approval of their families ABOVE the public approval .
They took the thing they valued MOST and let the rest go .
They took what would give them the LARGEST share of PERSONAL CONTENTMENT AND APPROVAL -- a man ALWAYS does .
Public opinion can not force that kind of men to go to the wars .
When they go it is for other reasons .
What do you call Love , Hate , Charity , Revenge , Humanity , Magnanimity , Forgiveness ?
Why , love is that impulse , that law , in its most uncompromising form .
It will squander life and everything else on its object .
Not PRIMARILY for the object 's sake , but for ITS OWN .
When its object is happy IT is happy -- and that is what it is unconsciously after .
Of course by parents , teachers , the pulpit , and books .
Yes -- they do their share ; they do what they can .
And the rest is done by --
You have tabulated these ?
Many of them -- yes .
Another time , yes .
It would take an hour .
He does seven-tenths of the act because it gratifies HIM to gratify his mother .
Throw the bulk of advantage the other way and the good boy would not do the act .
He MUST obey the iron law .
None can escape it .
I will tell you a little story :
`` MY CHILD IS FOREVER LOST , AND MY HEART IS BROKEN .
HOW COULD YOU DO THIS CRUEL THING ?
WE HAD DONE YOU NO HARM , BUT ONLY KINDNESS ; WE MADE OUR HOUSE YOUR HOME , YOU WERE WELCOME TO ALL WE HAD , AND THIS IS OUR REWARD . ''
That we ( mankind ) have ticketed ourselves with a number of qualities to which we have given misleading names .
Love , Hate , Charity , Compassion , Avarice , Benevolence , and so on .
I mean we attach misleading MEANINGS to the names .
They are all forms of self-contentment , self-gratification , but the names so disguise them that they distract our attention from the fact .
Also we have smuggled a word into the dictionary which ought not to be there at all -- Self-Sacrifice .
It describes a thing which does not exist .
But worst of all , we ignore and never mention the Sole Impulse which dictates and compels a man 's every act : the imperious necessity of securing his own approval , in every emergency and at all costs .
To it we owe all that we are .
It is our breath , our heart , our blood .
It is our only spur , our whip , our goad , our only impelling power ; we have no other .
Without it we should be mere inert images , corpses ; no one would do anything , there would be no progress , the world would stand still .
We ought to stand reverently uncovered when the name of that stupendous power is uttered .
Under searching analysis the ostensible self-sacrifice disappeared ?
In what way and to what extend did his self-sacrifice affect THEM ?
HE thought it was firstly .
I wonder why you should think so .
When you find service charged in the HOTEL bill does it annoy you ?
Very well , then .
As I understand it , it is n't really compassion nor yet duty that moves you to pay the tax , and it is n't the AMOUNT of the tax that annoys you .
Yet SOMETHING annoys you .
To guess out what is right to give them , and not be unfair to any of them .
It has quite a noble look -- taking so much pains and using up so much valuable time in order to be just and fair to a poor servant to whom you owe nothing , but who needs money and is ill paid .
How do you know when you have not paid a servant fairly ?
How do you feel THEN ?
If you fell short of what he was expecting and wanting , you would get a look which would SHAME YOU BEFORE FOLK .
That would give you PAIN .
YOU -- for you are only working for yourself , not HIM .
If you gave him too much you would be ASHAMED OF YOURSELF for it , and that would give YOU pain -- another case of thinking of YOURSELF , protecting yourself , SAVING YOURSELF FROM DISCOMFORT .
You never think of the servant once -- except to guess out how to get HIS APPROVAL .
If you get that , you get your OWN approval , and that is the sole and only thing you are after .
The Master inside of you is then satisfied , contented , comfortable ; there was NO OTHER thing at stake , as a matter of FIRST interest , anywhere in the transaction .
I have n't said it .
What did you say , then ?
It was something as fine as that , as exalted as that .
Could you have remained in those ranks and gone down to your death in that unflinching way ?
But it would be your DUTY to do it .
Yes , I know -- but I could n't .
Take the case of a clergyman of stainless private morals who votes for a thief for public office , on his own party 's ticket , and against an honest man on the other ticket .
Merely the laying of traps for people .
Traps baited with INITIATORY IMPULSES TOWARD HIGH IDEALS .
It is what the tract-distributor does .
It is what the missionary does .
It is what governments ought to do .
Do n't you believe that God could make an inherently honest man ?
A wiser observer than you has recorded the fact that `` an honest man 's the noblest work of God . ''
And the honest one is not entitled to --
How often must I tell you that ?
HE is not the architect of his honesty .
Now then , I will ask you where there is any sense in training people to lead virtuous lives .
What is gained by it ?
I said training and ANOTHER thing .
Let that other thing pass , for the moment .
What were you going to say ?
To please HER is enough .
More times this year than last ?
What do you mean by that ?
The same advantage he might get out of thinking himself a duke , and living a duke 's life and parading in ducal fuss and feathers , when he was n't a duke at all , and could find it out if he would only examine the herald 's records .
Have you committed a benevolence lately ?
The cabin of the old negro woman who used to nurse me when I was a child and who saved my life once at the risk of her own , was burned last night , and she came mourning this morning , and pleading for money to build another one .
Stop where you are !
I know your whole catalog of questions , and I could answer every one of them without your wasting the time to ask them ; but I will summarize the whole thing in a single remark : I did the charity knowing it was because the act would give ME a splendid pleasure , and because old Sally 's moving gratitude and delight would give ME another one ; and because the reflection that she would be happy now and out of her trouble would fill ME full of happiness .
I did the whole thing with my eyes open and recognizing and realizing that I was looking out for MY share of the profits FIRST .
Now then , I have confessed .
Then you believe that such tendency toward doing good as is in men 's hearts would not be diminished by the removal of the delusion that good deeds are done primarily for the sake of No .
2 instead of for the sake of No .
DILIGENTLY TRAIN YOUR IDEALS UPWARD AND STILL UPWARD TOWARD A SUMMIT WHERE YOU WILL FIND YOUR CHIEFEST PLEASURE IN CONDUCT WHICH , WHILE CONTENTING YOU , WILL BE SURE TO CONFER BENEFITS UPON YOUR NEIGHBOR AND THE COMMUNITY .
Yes , I commanded it to stand ready to take orders when I should wake in the morning .
I learned it a week ago .
At some time or other you have been captivated by a ridiculous rhyme-jingle ?
My mind went mad with joy over it .
It repeated it all day and all night for a week in spite of all I could do to stop it , and it seemed to me that I must surely go crazy .
`` In the Swee-eet By and By '' ; etc .
Yes , the new popular song with the taking melody sings through one 's head day and night , asleep and awake , till one is a wreck .
There is no getting the mind to let it alone .
Yes , asleep as well as awake .
The mind is quite independent .
You have nothing to do with it .
It is so apart from you that it can conduct its affairs , sing its songs , play its chess , weave its complex and ingeniously constructed dreams , while you sleep .
It has no use for your help , no use for your guidance , and never uses either , whether you be asleep or awake .
You have imagined that you could originate a thought in your mind , and you have sincerely believed you could do it .
Yet you ca n't originate a dream-thought for it to work out , and get it accepted ?
And there are dreams that are rational , simple , consistent , and unfantastic ?
Did you try hard to make it obey ?
What was the other text ?
When your mind is racing along from subject to subject and strikes an inspiring one , open your mouth and begin talking upon that matter -- or -- take your pen and use that .
It will interest your mind and concentrate it , and it will pursue the subject with satisfaction .
It will take full charge , and furnish the words itself .
There are certainly occasions when you have n't time .
The words leap out before you know what is coming .
You really think a man originates nothing , creates nothing .
The humble , earnest , and sincere Truth-Seeker is always convertible by such means .
I am thankful to God to hear you say this , for now I know that your conversion --
I said I have BEEN a Truth-Seeker .
But you have no right to put him on a level with a rat .
Then what do you mean ?
In form -- not in degree .
How did the first one come to start it ?
You can prove it , if you doubt .
If you will take a man to a clothing-store and watch him try on a dozen pairs of trousers , you will see .
If Edison were in trouble and a stranger helped him out of it and next day he got into the same difficulty again , he would infer the wise thing to do in case he knew the stranger 's address .
Here is a case of a bird and a stranger as related by a naturalist .
An Englishman saw a bird flying around about his dog 's head , down in the grounds , and uttering cries of distress .
He went there to see about it .
The dog had a young bird in his mouth -- unhurt .
The gentleman rescued it and put it on a bush and brought the dog away .
Early the next morning the mother bird came for the gentleman , who was sitting on his veranda , and by its maneuvers persuaded him to follow it to a distant part of the grounds -- flying a little way in front of him and waiting for him to catch up , and so on ; and keeping to the winding path , too , instead of flying the near way across lots .
The distance covered was four hundred yards .
The same dog was the culprit ; he had the young bird again , and once more he had to give it up .
Now the mother bird had reasoned it all out : since the stranger had helped her once , she inferred that he would do it again ; she knew where to find him , and she went upon her errand with confidence .
Her mental processes were what Edison 's would have been .
She put this and that together -- and that is all that thought IS -- and out of them built her logical arrangement of inferences .
Edison could n't have done it any better himself .
Not if he were a thorough idiot .
I beg your pardon .
One can not abolish what does not exist .
You are not in earnest , I hope .
You can not mean to seriously say there is no such frontier .
It looks exasperatingly true ; and is distinctly offensive .
It elevates the dumb beasts to -- to --
What makes you think that ?
What is your opinion regarding Free Will ?
Yes , there was a choice to be made , between bodily comfort on the one hand and the comfort of the spirit on the other .
The body made a strong appeal , of course -- the body would be quite sure to do that ; the spirit made a counter appeal .
A choice had to be made between the two appeals , and was made .
Who or what determined that choice ?
We are constantly assured that every man is endowed with Free Will , and that he can and must exercise it where he is offered a choice between good conduct and less-good conduct .
Yet we clearly saw that in that man 's case he really had no Free Will : his temperament , his training , and the daily influences which had molded him and made him what he was , COMPELLED him to rescue the old woman and thus save HIMSELF -- save himself from spiritual pain , from unendurable wretchedness .
He did not make the choice , it was made FOR him by forces which he could not control .
Free Will has always existed in WORDS , but it stops there , I think -- stops short of FACT .
I would not use those words -- Free Will -- but others .
In the machine which stands for him .
In his born disposition and the character which has been built around it by training and environment .
It would -- yes .
Not Two Values , But Only One
Maybe the thing longed for is a new hat .
You get it and your vanity is pleased , your spirit contented .
Suppose your friends deride the hat , make fun of it : at once it loses its value ; you are ashamed of it , you put it out of your sight , you never want to see it again .
I think I see .
That is pleasant and convenient , if true .
When you speak of `` my body '' who is the `` my '' ?
So YOU divide the Me yourself .
Everybody does ; everybody must .
What , then , definitely , is the Me ?
Does the mind remain sober when the body is drunk ?
A cracked skull has resulted in a crazy mind .
Why should that happen if the mind is spiritual , and INDEPENDENT of physical influences ?
When you have a pain in your foot , how do you know it ?
It is indifferent to the man 's good ; it never concerns itself about anything but the satisfying of its own desires .
It can be TRAINED to prefer things which will be for the man 's good , but it will prefer them only because they will content IT better than other things would .
It seems to be an IMMORAL force seated in the man 's moral constitution .
Upon reflection I have arrived at the conviction that the publication of your doctrines would be harmful .
Do you pardon me ?
You have done nothing .
You are an instrument -- a speaking-trumpet .
Speaking-trumpets are not responsible for what is said through them .
Outside influences -- in the form of lifelong teachings , trainings , notions , prejudices , and other second-hand importations -- have persuaded the Master within you that the publication of these doctrines would be harmful .
Very well , this is quite natural , and was to be expected ; in fact , was inevitable .
Go on ; for the sake of ease and convenience , stick to habit : speak in the first person , and tell me what your Master thinks about it .
Take those others -- the elemental moral qualities -- charity , benevolence , magnanimity , kindliness ; fruitful seeds , out of which spring , through cultivation by outside influences , all the manifold blends and combinations of virtues named in the dictionaries : does man manufacture any one of those seeds , or are they all born in him ?
Who manufactures them , then ?
You have instanced extreme temperaments .
At half past seven this morning I woke , and heard voices outside my door .
I said to myself , `` Jean is starting on her usual horseback flight to the station for the mail . ''
Then Katy ( 1 ) entered , stood quaking and gasping at my bedside a moment , then found her tongue :
Seventy-four years old twenty-four days ago .
Seventy-four years old yesterday .
Who can estimate my age today ?
Jean was on the dock when the ship came in , only four days ago .
She was at the door , beaming a welcome , when I reached this house the next evening .
We sat chatting cheerily in the library last night , and she would n't let me look into the loggia , where she was making Christmas preparations .
She said she would finish them in the morning , and then her little French friend would arrive from New York -- the surprise would follow ; the surprise she had been working over for days .
While she was out for a moment I disloyally stole a look .
The loggia floor was clothed with rugs and furnished with chairs and sofas ; and the uncompleted surprise was there : in the form of a Christmas tree that was drenched with silver film in a most wonderful way ; and on a table was a prodigal profusion of bright things which she was going to hang upon it today .
What desecrating hand will ever banish that eloquent unfinished surprise from that place ?
Not mine , surely .
All these little matters have happened in the last four days .
Nothing she said or thought or did is little now .
And all the lavish humor !
-- what is become of it ?
It is pathos , now .
Pathos , and the thought of it brings tears .
No -- she was n't willing .
She had been making plans herself .
The matter ended in a compromise , I submitted .
She would n't audit the bills and let Paine fill out the checks -- she would continue to attend to that herself .
Also , she would continue to be housekeeper , and let Katy assist .
Also , she would continue to answer the letters of personal friends for me .
Such was the compromise .
Both of us called it by that name , though I was not able to see where any formidable change had been made .
Jean 's mother always devoted two or three weeks to Christmas shopping , and was always physically exhausted when Christmas Eve came .
Jean was her very own child -- she wore herself out present-hunting in New York these latter days .
Paine has just found on her desk a long list of names -- fifty , he thinks -- people to whom she sent presents last night .
Apparently she forgot no one .
And Katy found there a roll of bank-notes , for the servants .
There was never a kinder heart than Jean 's .
From her childhood up she always spent the most of her allowance on charities of one kind and another .
After she became secretary and had her income doubled she spent her money upon these things with a free hand .
Mine too , I am glad and grateful to say .
She was a loyal friend to all animals , and she loved them all , birds , beasts , and everything -- even snakes -- an inheritance from me .
She knew all the birds ; she was high up in that lore .
She became a member of various humane societies when she was still a little girl -- both here and abroad -- and she remained an active member to the last .
She founded two or three societies for the protection of animals , here and in Europe .
She was an embarrassing secretary , for she fished my correspondence out of the waste-basket and answered the letters .
She thought all letters deserved the courtesy of an answer .
Her mother brought her up in that kindly error .
She could write a good letter , and was swift with her pen .
She had but an indifferent ear for music , but her tongue took to languages with an easy facility .
She never allowed her Italian , French , and German to get rusty through neglect .
A month ago I was writing bubbling and hilarious articles for magazines yet to appear , and now I am writing -- this .
And in a closet she had hidden a surprise for me -- a thing I have often wished I owned : a noble big globe .
I could n't see it for the tears .
She will never know the pride I take in it , and the pleasure .
Today the mails are full of loving remembrances for her : full of those old , old kind words she loved so well , `` Merry Christmas to Jean ! ''
If she could only have lived one day longer !
If the stranger had n't been there !
Such vast events -- each a link in the HUMAN RACE'S life-chain ; each event producing the next one , and that one the next one , and so on : the destruction of the republic ; the founding of the empire ; the breaking up of the empire ; the rise of Christianity upon its ruins ; the spread of the religion to other lands -- and so on ; link by link took its appointed place at its appointed time , the discovery of America being one of them ; our Revolution another ; the inflow of English and other immigrants another ; their drift westward ( my ancestors among them ) another ; the settlement of certain of them in Missouri , which resulted in ME .
For I was one of the unavoidable results of the crossing of the Rubicon .
If the stranger , with his trumpet blast , had stayed away ( which he COULD N'T , for he was an appointed link ) Caesar would not have crossed .
What would have happened , in that case , we can never guess .
We only know that the things that did happen would not have happened .
They might have been replaced by equally prodigious things , of course , but their nature and results are beyond our guessing .
But the matter that interests me personally is that I would not be HERE now , but somewhere else ; and probably black -- there is no telling .
Very well , I am glad he crossed .
And very really and thankfully glad , too , though I never cared anything about it before .
This was a turning-point of my life .
( Link number one . )
For when I got well my mother closed my school career and apprenticed me to a printer .
She was tired of trying to keep me out of mischief , and the adventure of the measles decided her to put me into more masterful hands than hers .
And so I became a journalist -- another link .
By and by Circumstance and the Sacramento UNION sent me to the Sandwich Islands for five or six months , to write up sugar .
I did it ; and threw in a good deal of extraneous matter that had n't anything to do with sugar .
But it was this extraneous matter that helped me to another link .
Now what interests me , as regards these details , is not the details themselves , but the fact that none of them was foreseen by me , none of them was planned by me , I was the author of none of them .
Circumstance , working in harness with my temperament , created them all and compelled them all .
I often offered help , and with the best intentions , but it was rejected -- as a rule , uncourteously .
I could never plan a thing and get it to come out the way I planned it .
It came out some other way -- some way I had not counted upon .
Circumstances do the planning for us all , no doubt , by help of our temperaments .
I see no great difference between a man and a watch , except that the man is conscious and the watch is n't , and the man TRIES to plan things and the watch does n't .
The watch does n't wind itself and does n't regulate itself -- these things are done exteriorly .
Outside influences , outside circumstances , wind the MAN and regulate him .
Left to himself , he would n't get regulated at all , and the sort of time he would keep would not be valuable .
Some rare men are wonderful watches , with gold case , compensation balance , and all those things , and some men are only simple and sweet and humble Waterburys .
I am a Waterbury .
A Waterbury of that kind , some say .
A nation is only an individual multiplied .
It makes plans and Circumstance comes and upsets them -- or enlarges them .
Some patriots throw the tea overboard ; some other patriots destroy a Bastille .
The PLANS stop there ; then Circumstance comes in , quite unexpectedly , and turns these modest riots into a revolution .
`` AT THAT TIME IT WAS A CUSTOM -- ''
They initialed the brief divisions of the lecture and protected me against skipping .
But they all looked about alike on the page ; they formed no picture ; I had them by heart , but I could never with certainty remember the order of their succession ; therefore I always had to keep those notes by me and look at them every little while .
Once I mislaid them ; you will not be able to imagine the terrors of that evening .
I now saw that I must invent some other protection .
So I got ten of the initial letters by heart in their proper order -- I , A , B , and so on -- and I went on the platform the next night with these marked in ink on my ten finger-nails .
But it did n't answer .
I kept track of the fingers for a while ; then I lost it , and after that I was never quite sure which finger I had used last .
I could n't lick off a letter after using it , for while they would have made success certain it would also have provoked too much curiosity .
There was curiosity enough without that .
To the audience I seemed more interested in my fingernails than I was in my subject ; one or two persons asked me afterward what was the matter with my hands .
Next I thought I would measure off the French reigns , and peg them alongside the English ones , so that we could always have contemporaneous French history under our eyes as we went our English rounds .
We pegged them down to the Hundred Years ' War , then threw the idea aside , I do not now remember why .
After that we made the English pegs fence in European and American history as well as English , and that answered very well .
English and alien poets , statesmen , artists , heroes , battles , plagues , cataclysms , revolutions -- we shoveled them all into the English fences according to their dates .
We gave Washington 's birth to George II .
's pegs and his death to George III .
's ; George II .
got the Lisbon earthquake and George III .
the Declaration of Independence .
Goethe , Shakespeare , Napoleon , Savonarola , Joan of Arc , the French Revolution , the Edict of Nantes , Clive , Wellington , Waterloo , Plassey , Patay , Cowpens , Saratoga , the Battle of the Boyne , the invention of the logarithms , the microscope , the steam-engine , the telegraph -- anything and everything all over the world -- we dumped it all in among the English pegs according to its date and regardless of its nationality .
Now the truth is that whenever you have copied a picture and its inscription once from my sample and two or three times from memory the details will stay with you and be hard to forget .
After that , if you like , you may make merely the whale 's HEAD and WATER-SPOUT for the Conqueror till you end his reign , each time SAYING the inscription in place of writing it ; and in the case of William II .
make the HARPOON alone , and say over the inscription each time you do it .
You see , it will take nearly twice as long to do the first set as it will to do the second , and that will give you a marked sense of the difference in length of the two reigns .
Next do Henry I. on thirty-five squares of RED paper .
Stephen of Blois comes next .
He requires nineteen two-inch squares of YELLOW paper .
Next comes Henry II .
Give him thirty-five squares of RED paper .
These hens must face west , like the former ones .
That is a lion .
His office is to remind you of the lion-hearted Richard .
There is something the matter with his legs , but I do not quite know what it is , they do not seem right .
I think the hind ones are the most unsatisfactory ; the front ones are well enough , though it would be better if they were rights and lefts .
We now come to Henry III .
; RED squares again , of course -- fifty-six of them .
We must make all the Henrys the same color ; it will make their long reigns show up handsomely on the wall .
Among all the eight Henrys there were but two short ones .
A lucky name , as far as longevity goes .
The reigns of six of the Henrys cover 227 years .
It might have been well to name all the royal princes Henry , but this was overlooked until it was too late .
That thing behind his ear is his pencil .
Whenever he finds a bright thing in your manuscript he strikes it out with that .
That does him good , and makes him smile and show his teeth , the way he is doing in the picture .
This one has just been striking out a smart thing , and now he is sitting there with his thumbs in his vest-holes , gloating .
They are full of envy and malice , editors are .
This picture will serve to remind you that Edward II .
was the first English king who was DEPOSED .
Upon demand , he signed his deposition himself .
He had found kingship a most aggravating and disagreeable occupation , and you can see by the look of him that he is glad he resigned .
He has put his blue pencil up for good now .
He had struck out many a good thing with it in his time .
next ; fifty RED squares .
; fourteen squares of YELLOW paper .
This hen has laid the egg of a new dynasty and realizes the imposing magnitude of the event .
She is giving notice in the usual way .
You notice I am improving in the construction of hens .
At first I made them too much like other animals , but this one is orthodox .
I mention this to encourage you .
You will find that the more you practice the more accurate you will become .
I could always draw animals , but before I was educated I could not tell what kind they were when I got them done , but now I can .
Keep up your courage ; it will be the same with you , although you may not think it .
This Henry died the year after Joan of Arc was born .
That is a society editor , sitting there elegantly dressed , with his legs crossed in that indolent way , observing the clothes the ladies wear , so that he can describe them for his paper and make them out finer than they are and get bribes for it and become wealthy .
That flower which he is wearing in his buttonhole is a rose -- a white rose , a York rose -- and will serve to remind us of the War of the Roses , and that the white one was the winning color when Edward got the throne and dispossessed the Lancastrian dynasty .
His uncle Richard had him murdered in the tower .
When you get the reigns displayed upon the wall this one will be conspicuous and easily remembered .
It is the shortest one in English history except Lady Jane Grey 's , which was only nine days .
She is never officially recognized as a monarch of England , but if you or I should ever occupy a throne we should like to have proper notice taken of it ; and it would be only fair and right , too , particularly if we gained nothing by it and lost our lives besides .
It is an event which confers a curious distinction upon every individual now living in the world : he has stood alive and breathing in the presence of an event such as has not fallen within the experience of any traceable or untraceable ancestor of his for twenty centuries , and it is not likely to fall within the experience of any descendant of his for twenty more .
Time has made some great changes since the Roman days .
The murder of an empress then -- even the assassination of Caesar himself -- could not electrify the world as this murder has electrified it .
For one reason , there was then not much of a world to electrify ; it was a small world , as to known bulk , and it had rather a thin population , besides ; and for another reason , the news traveled so slowly that its tremendous initial thrill wasted away , week by week and month by month , on the journey , and by the time it reached the remoter regions there was but little of it left .
It was no longer a fresh event , it was a thing of the far past ; it was not properly news , it was history .
But the world is enormous now , and prodigiously populated -- that is one change ; and another is the lightning swiftness of the flight of tidings , good and bad .
`` The Empress is murdered ! ''
When those amazing words struck upon my ear in this Austrian village last Saturday , three hours after the disaster , I knew that it was already old news in London , Paris , Berlin , New York , San Francisco , Japan , China , Melbourne , Cape Town , Bombay , Madras , Calcutta , and that the entire globe with a single voice , was cursing the perpetrator of it .
Since the telegraph first began to stretch itself wider and wider about the earth , larger and increasingly larger areas of the world have , as time went on , received simultaneously the shock of a great calamity ; but this is the first time in history that the entire surface of the globe has been swept in a single instant with the thrill of so gigantic an event .
One of the commonest forms of madness is the desire to be noticed , the pleasure derived from being noticed .
Perhaps it is not merely common , but universal .
In its mildest form it doubtless is universal .
Every child is pleased at being noticed ; many intolerable children put in their whole time in distressing and idiotic effort to attract the attention of visitors ; boys are always `` showing off '' ; apparently all men and women are glad and grateful when they find that they have done a thing which has lifted them for a moment out of obscurity and caused wondering talk .
This common madness can develop , by nurture , into a hunger for notoriety in one , for fame in another .
It is this madness for being noticed and talked about which has invented kingship and the thousand other dignities , and tricked them out with pretty and showy fineries ; it has made kings pick one another 's pockets , scramble for one another 's crowns and estates , slaughter one another 's subjects ; it has raised up prize-fighters , and poets , and village mayors , and little and big politicians , and big and little charity-founders , and bicycle champions , and banditti chiefs , and frontier desperadoes , and Napoleons .
Anything to get notoriety ; anything to set the village , or the township , or the city , or the State , or the nation , or the planet shouting , `` Look -- there he goes -- that is the man ! ''
And in five minutes ' time , at no cost of brain , or labor , or genius this mangy Italian tramp has beaten them all , transcended them all , outstripped them all , for in time their names will perish ; but by the friendly help of the insane newspapers and courts and kings and historians , his is safe to live and thunder in the world all down the ages as long as human speech shall endure !
Oh , if it were not so tragic how ludicrous it would be !
I saw the stately pageant pass : In her high place I saw the Empress-Queen : I could not take my eyes away From that fair vision , spirit-like and pure , That rose serene , sublime , and figured to my sense A noble Alp far lighted in the blue , That in the flood of morning rends its veil of cloud And stands a dream of glory to the gaze Of them that in the Valley toil and plod .
In our village we had our Ravochals , our Henrys , our Vaillants ; and in a humble way our Cesario -- I hope I have spelled this name wrong .
Fifty years ago we passed through , in all essentials , what France has been passing through during the past two or three years , in the matter of periodical frights , horrors , and shudderings .
The village weekly journal had lately gone into new hands .
The new man was an enterprising fellow , and he made the most of the tragedy .
He issued an extra .
Then he put up posters promising to devote his whole paper to matters connected with the great event -- there would be a full and intensely interesting biography of the murderer , and even a portrait of him .
He was as good as his word .
He carved the portrait himself , on the back of a wooden type -- and a terror it was to look at .
It made a great commotion , for this was the first time the village paper had ever contained a picture .
The village was very proud .
The output of the paper was ten times as great as it had ever been before , yet every copy was sold .
They always spoke of Hardy as `` the Martyr , '' and every little while they moved through the principal street in procession -- at midnight , black-robed , masked , to the measured tap of the solemn drum -- on pilgrimage to the Martyr 's grave , where they went through with some majestic fooleries and swore vengeance upon his murderers .
They gave previous notice of the pilgrimage by small posters , and warned everybody to keep indoors and darken all houses along the route , and leave the road empty .
These warnings were obeyed , for there was a skull and crossbones at the top of the poster .
It is peaceful here and pleasant at Interlaken .
Nothing going on -- at least nothing but brilliant life-giving sunshine .
There are floods and floods of that .
One may properly speak of it as `` going on , '' for it is full of the suggestion of activity ; the light pours down with energy , with visible enthusiasm .
This is a good atmosphere to be in , morally as well as physically .
After trying the political atmosphere of the neighboring monarchies , it is healing and refreshing to breathe in air that has known no taint of slavery for six hundred years , and to come among a people whose political history is great and fine , and worthy to be taught in all schools and studied by all races and peoples .
For the struggle here throughout the centuries has not been in the interest of any private family , or any church , but in the interest of the whole body of the nation , and for shelter and protection of all forms of belief .
This fact is colossal .
If one would realize how colossal it is , and of what dignity and majesty , let him contrast it with the purposes and objects of the Crusades , the siege of York , the War of the Roses , and other historic comedies of that sort and size .
The first walk he took was into France and Germany , missionarying -- for missionarying was a better thing in those days than it is in ours .
All you had to do was to cure the head savage 's sick daughter by a `` miracle '' -- a miracle like the miracle of Lourdes in our day , for instance -- and immediately that head savage was your convert , and filled to the eyes with a new convert 's enthusiasm .
You could sit down and make yourself easy , now .
He would take an ax and convert the rest of the nation himself .
Charlemagne was that kind of a walking delegate .
`` I was only going to say I am off on my vacation now . ''
`` I think it is doubtful ; very doubtful . ''
It was at Nuremberg that we struck the inundation of music-mad strangers that was rolling down upon Bayreuth .
It had been long since we had seen such multitudes of excited and struggling people .
It took a good half-hour to pack them and pair them into the train -- and it was the longest train we have yet seen in Europe .
Nuremberg had been witnessing this sort of experience a couple of times a day for about two weeks .
It gives one an impressive sense of the magnitude of this biennial pilgrimage .
For a pilgrimage is what it is .
The devotees come from the very ends of the earth to worship their prophet in his own Kaaba in his own Mecca .
Finally , out of darkness and distance and mystery soft rich notes rose upon the stillness , and from his grave the dead magician began to weave his spells about his disciples and steep their souls in his enchantments .
There was something strangely impressive in the fancy which kept intruding itself that the composer was conscious in his grave of what was going on here , and that these divine sounds were the clothing of thoughts which were at this moment passing through his brain , and not recognized and familiar ones which had issued from it at some former time .
During the evening there was an intermission of three-quarters of an hour after the first act and one an hour long after the second .
In both instances the theater was totally emptied .
People who had previously engaged tables in the one sole eating-house were able to put in their time very satisfactorily ; the other thousand went hungry .
The opera was concluded at ten in the evening or a little later .
When we reached home we had been gone more than seven hours .
Seven hours at five dollars a ticket is almost too much for the money .
In a moment or so the first bugles blew , and the multitude began to crumble apart and melt into the theater .
I will explain that this bugle-call is one of the pretty features here .
You see , the theater is empty , and hundreds of the audience are a good way off in the feeding-house ; the first bugle-call is blown about a quarter of an hour before time for the curtain to rise .
This company of buglers , in uniform , march out with military step and send out over the landscape a few bars of the theme of the approaching act , piercing the distances with the gracious notes ; then they march to the other entrance and repeat .
Presently they do this over again .
Yesterday only about two hundred people were still left in front of the house when the second call was blown ; in another half-minute they would have been in the house , but then a thing happened which delayed them -- the only solitary thing in this world which could be relied on with certainty to accomplish this , I suppose -- an imperial princess appeared in the balcony above them .
They stopped dead in their tracks and began to gaze in a stupor of gratitude and satisfaction .
The lady presently saw that she must disappear or the doors would be closed upon these worshipers , so she returned to her box .
This daughter-in-law of an emperor was pretty ; she had a kind face ; she was without airs ; she is known to be full of common human sympathies .
There are many kinds of princesses , but this kind is the most harmful of all , for wherever they go they reconcile people to monarchy and set back the clock of progress .
The valuable princes , the desirable princes , are the czars and their sort .
By their mere dumb presence in the world they cover with derision every argument that can be invented in favor of royalty by the most ingenious casuist .
In his time the husband of this princess was valuable .
He led a degraded life , he ended it with his own hand in circumstances and surroundings of a hideous sort , and was buried like a god .
A prince is not to us what he is to a European , of course .
We have not been taught to regard him as a god , and so one good look at him is likely to so nearly appease our curiosity as to make him an object of no greater interest the next time .
We want a fresh one .
But it is not so with the European .
I am quite sure of it .
The same old one will answer ; he never stales .
Eighteen years ago I was in London and I called at an Englishman 's house on a bleak and foggy and dismal December afternoon to visit his wife and married daughter by appointment .
I waited half an hour and then they arrived , frozen .
They explained that they had been delayed by an unlooked-for circumstance : while passing in the neighborhood of Marlborough House they saw a crowd gathering and were told that the Prince of Wales was about to drive out , so they stopped to get a sight of him .
They had waited half an hour on the sidewalk , freezing with the crowd , but were disappointed at last -- the Prince had changed his mind .
I said , with a good deal of surprise , `` Is it possible that you two have lived in London all your lives and have never seen the Prince of Wales ? ''
They had seen him hundreds of times , yet they had waited half an hour in the gloom and the bitter cold , in the midst of a jam of patients from the same asylum , on the chance of seeing him again .
It was a stupefying statement , but one is obliged to believe the English , even when they say a thing like that .
I fumbled around for a remark , and got out this one :
But by no means do I ever overlook or minify the fact that this is one of the most extraordinary experiences of my life .
I have never seen anything like this before .
I have never seen anything so great and fine and real as this devotion .
-- Yesterday 's opera was `` Parsifal '' again .
The others went and they show marked advance in appreciation ; but I went hunting for relics and reminders of the Margravine Wilhelmina , she of the imperishable `` Memoirs . ''
I am properly grateful to her for her ( unconscious ) satire upon monarchy and nobility , and therefore nothing which her hand touched or her eye looked upon is indifferent to me .
I am her pilgrim ; the rest of this multitude here are Wagner 's .
I will got back to the paper on Machiavelli now , and ask the reader to examine this passage from it which I append .
I do not mean examine it in a bird's-eye way ; I mean search it , study it .
And , of course , read it aloud .
I may be wrong , still it is my conviction that one can not get out of finely wrought literature all that is in it by reading it mutely :
Mr. Howells 's pictures are not mere stiff , hard , accurate photographs ; they are photographs with feeling in them , and sentiment , photographs taken in a dream , one might say .
`` ... she said , laughing nervously . ''
`` ... murmured Gladys , blushing . ''
`` ... responded the undertaker , with a laugh . ''
`` No , my dear , it was not so . ''
ALIAS , a good man in the Bible .
AMMONIA , the food of the gods .
EUCHARIST , one who plays euchre .
IDOLATER , a very idle person .
IPECAC , a man who likes a good dinner .
MERCENARY , one who feels for another .
TENACIOUS , ten acres of land .
You should take caution and be precarious .
There are a good many donkeys in theological gardens .
Under the head of `` Grammar '' the little scholars furnish the following information :
Gender is the distinguishing nouns without regard to sex .
The capital of the United States is Long Island .
Cape Hateras is a vast body of water surrounded by land and flowing into the Gulf of Mexico .
Mason and Dixon 's line is the Equator .
One of the leading industries of the United States is mollasses , book-covers , numbers , gas , teaching , lumber , manufacturers , paper-making , publishers , coal .
Sicily is one of the Sandwich Islands .
The man who rode on the horse performed the whip and an instrument made of steel alone with strong ardor not diminishing , for , being tired from the time passed with hard labor overworked with anger and ignorant with weariness , while every breath for labor he drew with cries full of sorrow , the young deer made imperfect who worked hard filtered in sight .
Washington wrote the Declaration of Independence in 1492 .
Henry Eight was famous for being a great widower haveing lost several wives .
Luther introduced Christianity into England a good many thousand years ago .
His birthday was November 1883 .
He was once a Pope .
He lived at the time of the Rebellion of Worms .
Cleopatra was caused by the death of an asp which she dissolved in a wine cup .
The only form of government in Greece was a limited monkey .
By the Salic law no woman or descendant of a woman could occupy the throne .
To show how far a child can travel in history with judicious and diligent boosting in the public school , we select the following mosaic :
Snow Bound was written by Peter Cooper .
Cotton Mather was a writer who invented the cotten gin and wrote histories .
Shakspere translated the Scriptures and it was called St. James because he did it .
Here are two or three miscellaneous facts that may be of value , if taken in moderation :
Holmes is a very profligate and amusing writer .
The Constitution of the United States was established to ensure domestic hostility .
An interval in music is the distance on the keyboard from one piano to the next .
The Chyle flows up the middle of the backbone and reaches the heart where it meets the oxygen and is purified .
The salivary glands are used to salivate the body .
In the stomach starch is changed to cane sugar and cane sugar to sugar cane .
The theory that intuitive truths are discovered by the light of nature originated from St. John 's interpretation of a passage in the Gospel of Plato .
Specific gravity is the weight to be compared weight of an equal volume of or that is the weight of a body compared with the weight of an equal volume .
First of all , we could spell DEFINITELY -- and correctly -- any word you please , just by the SOUND of it .
We ca n't do that with our present alphabet .
For instance , take a simple , every-day word PHTHISIS .
If we tried to spell it by the sound of it , we should make it TYSIS , and be laughed at by every educated person .
To write that word ( with vowels ) with the phonographic alphabet , the pen has to make only SEVENTEEN strokes .
We make five pen-strokes in writing an m. Thus : ( Figure 5 ) a stroke down ; a stroke up ; a second stroke down ; a second stroke up ; a final stroke down .
The phonographic alphabet accomplishes the m with a single stroke -- a curve , like a parenthesis that has come home drunk and has fallen face down right at the front door where everybody that goes along will see him and say , Alas !
The da ma ov koars kum when the publik ma be expektd to get rekonsyled to the bezair asspekt of the Simplified Kombynashuns , but -- if I may be allowed the expression -- is it worth the wasted time ?
Very well , what I am offering for acceptance and adoption is not shorthand , but longhand , written with the SHORTHAND ALPHABET UNREDUCED .
You can write three times as many words in a minute with it as you can write with our alphabet .
And so , in a way , it IS properly a shorthand .
It has a pleasant look , too ; a beguiling look , an inviting look .
I will write something in it , in my rude and untaught way : ( Figure 9 )
Even when _I_ do it it comes out prettier than it does in Simplified Spelling .
Yes , and in the Simplified it costs one hundred and twenty-three pen-strokes to write it , whereas in the phonographic it costs only twenty-nine .
Here is another difficult text : ( Figure 2 )
Five hundred years before Henry 's time some forecasts of the Lord's purposes were furnished by a pope , who perceived , by certain perfectly trustworthy signs furnished by the Deity for the information of His familiars , that the end of the world was
Still , the end was so near that these signs were `` sent before that we may be careful for our souls and be found prepared to meet the impending judgment . ''
( Written about 1893 ; not before published )
The Expert got out at last , brought four assistants with him .
It was a good idea .
These four held the graceful cobweb upright while I climbed into the saddle ; then they formed in column and marched on either side of me while the Expert pushed behind ; all hands assisted at the dismount .
I can steer as well as I want to , now , and I will catch that boy out one of these days and run over HIM if he does n't reform .
You will not regret it , if you live .
Did he have something to say -- this Shakespeare-adoring Mississippi pilot -- anent Delia Bacon 's book ?
That was always the idea .
I answered as my readings of the champions of my side of the great controversy had taught me to answer : that a man ca n't handle glibly and easily and comfortably and successfully the argot of a trade at which he has not personally served .
He will make mistakes ; he will not , and can not , get the trade-phrasings precisely and exactly right ; and the moment he departs , by even a shade , from a common trade-form , the reader who has served that trade will know the writer HAS N'T .
Ealer would not be convinced ; he said a man could learn how to correctly handle the subtleties and mysteries and free-masonries of ANY trade by careful reading and studying .
But when I got him to read again the passage from Shakespeare with the interlardings , he perceived , himself , that books could n't teach a student a bewildering multitude of pilot-phrases so thoroughly and perfectly that he could talk them off in book and play or conversation and make no mistake that a pilot would not immediately discover .
It was a triumph for me .
He was silent awhile , and I knew what was happening -- he was losing his temper .
And I knew he would presently close the session with the same old argument that was always his stay and his support in time of need ; the same old argument , the one I couldn't answer , because I das n't -- the argument that I was an ass , and better shut up .
He delivered it , and I obeyed .
When I was a Sunday-school scholar , something more than sixty years ago , I became interested in Satan , and wanted to find out all I could about him .
I began to ask questions , but my class-teacher , Mr. Barclay , the stone-mason , was reluctant about answering them , it seemed to me .
I was anxious to be praised for turning my thoughts to serious subjects when there was n't another boy in the village who could be hired to do such a thing .
I was greatly interested in the incident of Eve and the serpent , and thought Eve 's calmness was perfectly noble .
I asked Mr. Barclay if he had ever heard of another woman who , being approached by a serpent , would not excuse herself and break for the nearest timber .
He did not answer my question , but rebuked me for inquiring into matters above my age and comprehension .
I will say for Mr. Barclay that he was willing to tell me the facts of Satan 's history , but he stopped there : he wouldn't allow any discussion of them .
In the course of time we exhausted the facts .
There were only five or six of them ; you could set them all down on a visiting-card .
I had been meditating a biography , and was grieved to find that there were no materials .
I said as much , with the tears running down .
Mr. Barclay 's sympathy and compassion were aroused , for he was a most kind and gentle-spirited man , and he patted me on the head and cheered me up by saying there was a whole vast ocean of materials !
I can still feel the happy thrill which these blessed words shot through me .
I assured him , in earnest and sincere words , that he had wholly misconceived my attitude ; that I had the highest respect for Satan , and that my reverence for him equaled , and possibly even exceeded , that of any member of any church .
I said it wounded me deeply to perceive by his words that he thought I would make fun of Satan , and deride him , laugh at him , scoff at him ; whereas in truth I had never thought of such a thing , but had only a warm desire to make fun of those others and laugh at THEM .
`` What others ? ''
`` Why , the Supposers , the Perhapsers , the Might-Have-Beeners , the Could-Have-Beeners , the Must-Have-Beeners , the Without-a-Shadow-of-Doubters , the We-Are-Warranted-in-Believingers , and all that funny crop of solemn architects who have taken a good solid foundation of five indisputable and unimportant facts and built upon it a Conjectural Satan thirty miles high . ''
How true were his words , and how wise !
How fortunate it would have been for me if I had heeded them .
But I was young , I was but seven years of age , and vain , foolish , and anxious to attract attention .
I wrote the biography , and have never been in a respectable house since .
Of good farmer-class parents who could not read , could not write , could not sign their names .
On the 27th of November ( 1582 ) William Shakespeare took out a license to marry Anne Whateley .
Meantime his name , liberally and variously spelt , had become associated with a number of great plays and poems , as ( ostensibly ) author of the same .
The will mentioned NOT A PLAY , NOT A POEM , NOT AN UNFINISHED LITERARY WORK , NOT A SCRAP OF MANUSCRIPT OF ANY KIND .
SO FAR AS ANYBODY KNOWS AND CAN PROVE , he never wrote a letter to anybody in his life .
However , it is `` conjectured '' that he accomplished all this and more , much more : learned law and its intricacies ; and the complex procedure of the law-courts ; and all about soldiering , and sailoring , and the manners and customs and ways of royal courts and aristocratic society ; and likewise accumulated in his one head every kind of knowledge the learned then possessed , and every kind of humble knowledge possessed by the lowly and the ignorant ; and added thereto a wider and more intimate knowledge of the world 's great literatures , ancient and modern , than was possessed by any other man of his time -- for he was going to make brilliant and easy and admiration-compelling use of these splendid treasures the moment he got to London .
And according to the surmisers , that is what he did .
Yes , although there was no one in Stratford able to teach him these things , and no library in the little village to dig them out of .
His father could not read , and even the surmisers surmise that he did not keep a library .
In the usual way : by surmise .
It is SURMISED that he traveled in Italy and Germany and around , and qualified himself to put their scenic and social aspects upon paper ; that he perfected himself in French , Italian , and Spanish on the road ; that he went in Leicester 's expedition to the Low Countries , as soldier or sutler or something , for several months or years -- or whatever length of time a surmiser needs in his business -- and thus became familiar with soldiership and soldier-ways and soldier-talk and generalship and general-ways and general-talk , and seamanship and sailor-ways and sailor-talk .
Good friend for Iesus sake forbeare To digg the dust encloased heare : Blest be ye man yt spares thes stones And curst be he yt moves my bones .
Other things change , with time , and the student can not trace back with certainty the changes that various trades and their processes and technicalities have undergone in the long stretch of a century or two and find out what their processes and technicalities were in those early days , but with the law it is different : it is mile-stoned and documented all the way back , and the master of that wonderful trade , that complex and intricate trade , that awe-compelling trade , has competent ways of knowing whether Shakespeare-law is good law or not ; and whether his law-court procedure is correct or not , and whether his legal shop-talk is the shop-talk of a veteran practitioner or only a machine-made counterfeit of it gathered from books and from occasional loiterings in Westminster .
If a man should write a book and in it make one of his characters say , `` Here , devil , empty the quoins into the standing galley and the imposing-stone into the hell-box ; assemble the comps around the frisket and let them jeff for takes and be quick about it , '' I should recognize a mistake or two in the phrasing , and would know that the writer was only a printer theoretically , not practically .
I know several other trades and the argot that goes with them ; and whenever a person tries to talk the talk peculiar to any of them without having learned it at its source I can trap him always before he gets far on his road .
Shakespeare as a Lawyer ( 1 )
Upon this Lord Penzance comments : `` It can not be doubted that Lord Campbell was right in this .
No young man could have been at work in an attorney 's office without being called upon continually to act as a witness , and in many other ways leaving traces of his work and name . ''
There is not a single fact or incident in all that is known of Shakespeare , even by rumor or tradition , which supports this notion of a clerkship .
And after much argument and surmise which has been indulged in on this subject , we may , I think , safely put the notion on one side , for no less an authority than Mr. Grant White says finally that the idea of his having been clerk to an attorney has been `` blown to pieces . ''
This is a charming specimen of Stratfordian argument .
There is , as we have seen , a very old tradition that Shakespeare was a butcher's apprentice .
John Dowdall , who made a tour in Warwickshire in 1693 , testifies to it as coming from the old clerk who showed him over the church , and it is unhesitatingly accepted as true by Mr. Halliwell-Phillipps .
I , p. 11 , and Vol .
71 , 72 . )
Mr. Sidney Lee sees nothing improbable in it , and it is supported by Aubrey , who must have written his account some time before 1680 , when his manuscript was completed .
Of the attorney 's clerk hypothesis , on the other hand , there is not the faintest vestige of a tradition .
It has been evolved out of the fertile imaginations of embarrassed Stratfordians , seeking for some explanation of the Stratford rustic's marvelous acquaintance with law and legal terms and legal life .
But Mr. Churton Collins has not the least hesitation in throwing over the tradition which has the warrant of antiquity and setting up in its stead this ridiculous invention , for which not only is there no shred of positive evidence , but which , as Lord Campbell and Lord Penzance point out , is really put out of court by the negative evidence , since `` no young man could have been at work in an attorney 's office without being called upon continually to act as a witness , and in many other ways leaving traces of his work and name . ''
And as Mr. Edwards further points out , since the day when Lord Campbell 's book was published ( between forty and fifty years ago ) , `` every old deed or will , to say nothing of other legal papers , dated during the period of William Shakespeare's youth , has been scrutinized over half a dozen shires , and not one signature of the young man has been found . ''
There has been only one Shakespeare .
There could n't be two ; certainly there could n't be two at the same time .
It takes ages to bring forth a Shakespeare , and some more ages to match him .
This one was not matched before his time ; nor during his time ; and has n't been matched since .
The prospect of matching him in our time is not bright .
The Baconians claim that the Stratford Shakespeare was not qualified to write the Works , and that Francis Bacon was .
They claim that Bacon possessed the stupendous equipment -- both natural and acquired -- for the miracle ; and that no other Englishman of his day possessed the like ; or , indeed , anything closely approaching it .
Next , the young Bacon took up the study of law , and mastered that abstruse science .
From that day to the end of his life he was daily in close contact with lawyers and judges ; not as a casual onlooker in intervals between holding horses in front of a theater , but as a practicing lawyer -- a great and successful one , a renowned one , a Launcelot of the bar , the most formidable lance in the high brotherhood of the legal Table Round ; he lived in the law 's atmosphere thenceforth , all his years , and by sheer ability forced his way up its difficult steeps to its supremest summit , the Lord-Chancellorship , leaving behind him no fellow-craftsman qualified to challenge his divine right to that majestic place .
The WISDOM OF THE ANCIENTS , a work which , if it had proceeded from any other writer , would have been considered as a masterpiece of wit and learning , was printed in 1609 .
In the mean time the NOVUM ORGANUM was slowly proceeding .
Several distinguished men of learning had been permitted to see portions of that extraordinary book , and they spoke with the greatest admiration of his genius .
Even Sir Thomas Bodley , after perusing the COGITATA ET VISA , one of the most precious of those scattered leaves out of which the great oracular volume was afterward made up , acknowledged that `` in all proposals and plots in that book , Bacon showed himself a master workman '' ; and that `` it could not be gainsaid but all the treatise over did abound with choice conceits of the present state of learning , and with worthy contemplations of the means to procure it . ''
In 1612 a new edition of the ESSAYS appeared , with additions surpassing the original collection both in bulk and quality .
He commenced a digest of the laws of England , a History of England under the Princes of the House of Tudor , a body of National History , a Philosophical Romance .
He made extensive and valuable additions to his Essays .
He published the inestimable TREATISE DE AUGMENTIS SCIENTIARUM .
The trifles with which he amused himself in hours of pain and languor bore the mark of his mind .
THE BEST JEST-BOOK IN THE WORLD is that which he dictated from memory , without referring to any book , on a day on which illness had rendered him incapable of serious study .
The ESSAYS contain abundant proofs that no nice feature of character , no peculiarity in the ordering of a house , a garden , or a court-masque , could escape the notice of one whose mind was capable of taking in the whole world of knowledge .
The knowledge in which Bacon excelled all men was a knowledge of the mutual relations of all departments of knowledge .
No imagination was ever at once so strong and so thoroughly subjugated .
It stopped at the first check from good sense .
But what we most admire is the vast capacity of that intellect which , without effort , takes in at once all the domains of science -- all the past , the present and the future , all the errors of two thousand years , all the encouraging signs of the passing times , all the bright hopes of the coming age .
The cloud-cap 'd towers , the gorgeous palaces , The solemn temples , the great globe itself , Yea , all which it inherit , shall dissolve , And , like an insubstantial pageant faded , Leave not a rack behind .
We are such stuff As dreams are made on , and our little life Is rounded with a sleep .
It would be better if the privilege were limited to me alone .
I think so because I am the only sect that knows how to employ it gently , kindly , charitably , dispassionately .
The other sects lack the quality of self-restraint .
The Catholic Church says the most irreverent things about matters which are sacred to the Protestants , and the Protestant Church retorts in kind about the confessional and other matters which Catholics hold sacred ; then both of these irreverencers turn upon Thomas Paine and charge HIM with irreverence .
This is all unfortunate , because it makes it difficult for students equipped with only a low grade of mentality to find out what Irreverence really IS .
There will then be nothing sacred involved in this Bacon-Shakespeare controversy except what is sacred to me .
That will simplify the whole matter , and trouble will cease .
There will be irreverence no longer , because I will not allow it .
The first time those criminals charge me with irreverence for calling their Stratford myth an Arthur-Orton-Mary-Baker-Thompson-Eddy-Louis-the-Seventeenth-Veiled-Prophet -of-Khorassan will be the last .
Taught by the methods found effective in extinguishing earlier offenders by the Inquisition , of holy memory , I shall know how to quiet them .
Its quite plain significance -- to any but those thugs ( I do not use the term unkindly ) is , that Shakespeare had no prominence while he lived , and none until he had been dead two or three generations .
The Plays enjoyed high fame from the beginning ; and if he wrote them it seems a pity the world did not find it out .
He ought to have explained that he was the author , and not merely a NOM DE PLUME for another man to hide behind .
If he had been less intemperately solicitous about his bones , and more solicitous about his Works , it would have been better for his good name , and a kindness to us .
The bones were not important .
They will moulder away , they will turn to dust , but the Works will endure until the last sun goes down .
Miss Becca Blankenship died at the home of William Dickason , 408 Rock Street , at 2.30 o'clock yesterday afternoon , aged 72 years .
She had been a member of the Dickason family -- the housekeeper -- for nearly forty-five years , and was a highly respected lady .
For the past eight years she had been an invalid , but was as well cared for by Mr. Dickason and his family as if she had been a near relative .
She was a member of the Park Methodist Church and a Christian woman .
`` Yes -- maybe longer . ''
Sally 's excitement went down a degree or two , but he was not wholly appeased .
`` There 'll be twenty thousand profit coming from the ten a year from now .
We can spend that , can we , Aleck ? ''
`` Oh , jolly !
oh , thanks ! ''
and Sally jumped up and kissed his wife in gratitude .
`` It 'll be three thousand -- three whole thousand !
how much of it can we spend , Aleck ?
-- do , dear , that 's a good fellow . ''
Aleck was pleased ; so pleased that she yielded to the pressure and conceded a sum which her judgment told her was a foolish extravagance -- a thousand dollars .
Sally kissed her half a dozen times and even in that way could not express all his joy and thankfulness .
This new access of gratitude and affection carried Aleck quite beyond the bounds of prudence , and before she could restrain herself she had made her darling another grant -- a couple of thousand out of the fifty or sixty which she meant to clear within a year of the twenty which still remained of the bequest .
The happy tears sprang to Sally 's eyes , and he said :
`` I think -- well , to be on the safe side , about a hundred and eighty thousand clear , though it will probably be more . ''
Now , if they had but known it , they had been wronging Tilbury all the time .
Tilbury had kept faith , kept it to the letter ; he was dead , he had died to schedule .
He was dead more than four days now and used to it ; entirely dead , perfectly dead , as dead as any other new person in the cemetery ; dead in abundant time to get into that week 's SAGAMORE , too , and only shut out by an accident ; an accident which could not happen to a metropolitan journal , but which happens easily to a poor little village rag like the SAGAMORE .
On this occasion , just as the editorial page was being locked up , a gratis quart of strawberry ice-water arrived from Hostetter 's Ladies and Gents Ice-Cream Parlors , and the stickful of rather chilly regret over Tilbury 's translation got crowded out to make room for the editor 's frantic gratitude .
`` As long as you live , if it 's a hundred years , do n't you ever make an inquiry .
`` Then be grateful for what God is doing for us and stop worrying .
You do not believe we could have achieved these prodigious results without His special help and guidance , do you ? ''
And so , in privacy , he thought long and deeply over the matter , resolving to do what should seem best .
It was easy to PROMISE reform ; indeed he had already promised it .
But would that do any real good , any permanent good ?
No , it would be but temporary -- he knew his weakness , and confessed it to himself with sorrow -- he could not keep the promise .
Something surer and better must be devised ; and he devised it .
At cost of precious money which he had long been saving up , shilling by shilling , he put a lightning-rod on the house .
Indeed it was a memorable night .
Gradually the realization that they were rich sank securely home into the souls of the pair , then they began to place the money .
If we could have looked out through the eyes of these dreamers , we should have seen their tidy little wooden house disappear , and two-story brick with a cast-iron fence in front of it take its place ; we should have seen a three-globed gas-chandelier grow down from the parlor ceiling ; we should have seen the homely rag carpet turn to noble Brussels , a dollar and a half a yard ; we should have seen the plebeian fireplace vanish away and a recherche , big base-burner with isinglass windows take position and spread awe around .
And we should have seen other things , too ; among them the buggy , the lap-robe , the stove-pipe hat , and so on .
The dear woman , she knew he had talent ; and if affection made her over-estimate the size of it a little , surely it was a sweet and gentle crime , and forgivable for its source 's sake .
No , she had n't .
They must look the market over -- which they did .
To start with , they considered and discussed Brandish , rising young lawyer , and Fulton , rising young dentist .
Sally must invite them to dinner .
But not right away ; there was no hurry , Aleck said .
Keep an eye on the pair , and wait ; nothing would be lost by going slowly in so important a matter .
`` The suspense is over , Sally -- and we are worth a cold million ! ''
`` Somebody 's got to give in .
It 's up to me .
Consider that I 've named it -- never mind pronouncing it out aloud . ''
After that , they broke the Sabbaths right along as fast as they turned up .
It is the first wrong step that counts .
Every Sunday they put in the whole day , after morning service , on inventions -- inventions of ways to spend the money .
They got to continuing this delicious dissipation until past midnight ; and at every seance Aleck lavished millions upon great charities and religious enterprises , and Sally lavished like sums upon matters to which ( at first ) he gave definite names .
Later the names gradually lost sharpness of outline , and eventually faded into `` sundries , '' thus becoming entirely -- but safely -- undescriptive .
For Sally was crumbling .
The placing of these millions added seriously and most uncomfortably to the family expenses -- in tallow candles .
For a while Aleck was worried .
Then , after a little , she ceased to worry , for the occasion of it was gone .
She was pained , she was grieved , she was ashamed ; but she said nothing , and so became an accessory .
Sally was taking candles ; he was robbing the store .
It is ever thus .
Vast wealth , to the person unaccustomed to it , is a bane ; it eats into the flesh and bone of his morals .
When the Fosters were poor , they could have been trusted with untold candles .
But now they -- but let us not dwell upon it .
From candles to apples is but a step : Sally got to taking apples ; then soap ; then maple-sugar ; then canned goods ; then crockery .
How easy it is to go from bad to worse , when once we have started upon a downward course !
The liberal spendings of the Fosters upon their fancies began early in their prosperities , and grew in prodigality step by step with their advancing fortunes .
In time they became truly enormous .
Aleck built a university or two per Sunday ; also a hospital or two ; also a Rowton hotel or so ; also a batch of churches ; now and then a cathedral ; and once , with untimely and ill-chosen playfulness , Sally said , `` It was a cold day when she did n't ship a cargo of missionaries to persuade unreflecting Chinamen to trade off twenty-four carat Confucianism for counterfeit Christianity . ''
He instituted comparisons between her record and his own .
He had found fault with her -- so he mused -- HE !
And what could he say for himself ?
When she built her first church what was he doing ?
Gathering other blase multimillionaires into a Poker Club ; defiling his own palace with it ; losing hundreds of thousands to it at every sitting , and sillily vain of the admiring notoriety it made for him .
When she was building her first university , what was he doing ?
Polluting himself with a gay and dissipated secret life in the company of other fast bloods , multimillionaires in money and paupers in character .
When she was building her first foundling asylum , what was he doing ?
When she was projecting her noble Society for the Purifying of the Sex , what was he doing ?
Ah , what , indeed !
When she and the W. C. T. U. and the Woman with the Hatchet , moving with resistless march , were sweeping the fatal bottle from the land , what was he doing ?
Getting drunk three times a day .
When she , builder of a hundred cathedrals , was being gratefully welcomed and blest in papal Rome and decorated with the Golden Rose which she had so honorably earned , what was he doing ?
Breaking the bank at Monte Carlo .
`` SAY -- Aleck ? ''
`` Yes , dear . ''
`` Sally , what would you say to -- ROYALTY ? ''
`` Who is it , Aleck ? ''
`` What do they call it that for , Sally ? ''
`` Then we will insist upon it .
More -- I will compel it .
It is morganatic marriage or none . ''
`` I -- well , not that I know of , but we 've heard of him . ''
The editor was thankful , and resumed his composure .
Sally added : `` Is he -- is he -- well ? ''
`` Well , I should say !
I was one of the executors .
He had n't anything to leave but a wheelbarrow , and he left that to me .
It had n't any wheel , and was n't any good .
Still , it was something , and so , to square up , I scribbled off a sort of a little obituarial send-off for him , but it got crowded out . ''
The Fosters were not listening -- their cup was full , it could contain no more .
They sat with bowed heads , dead to all things but the ache at their hearts .
`` Money had brought him misery , and he took his revenge upon us , who had done him no harm .
He had his desire : with base and cunning calculation he left us but thirty thousand , knowing we would try to increase it , and ruin our life and break our hearts .
Without added expense he could have left us far above desire of increase , far above the temptation to speculate , and a kinder soul would have done it ; but in him was no generous spirit , no pity , no -- ''
You can see by these things that she was of a rather vain and frivolous character ; still , she had virtues , and enough to make up , I think .
She had a kind heart and gentle ways , and never harbored resentments for injuries done her , but put them easily out of her mind and forgot them ; and she taught her children her kindly way , and from her we learned also to be brave and prompt in time of danger , and not to run away , but face the peril that threatened friend or stranger , and help him the best we could without stopping to think what the cost might be to us .
And she taught us not by words only , but by example , and that is the best way and the surest and the most lasting .
Why , the brave things she did , the splendid things !
she was just a soldier ; and so modest about it -- well , you could n't help admiring her , and you could n't help imitating her ; not even a King Charles spaniel could remain entirely despicable in her society .
So , as you see , there was more to her than her education .
When I was well grown , at last , I was sold and taken away , and I never saw her again .
She was broken-hearted , and so was I , and we cried ; but she comforted me as well as she could , and said we were sent into this world for a wise and good purpose , and must do our duties without repining , take our life as we might find it , live it for the best good of others , and never mind about the results ; they were not our affair .
She said men who did like this would have a noble and beautiful reward by and by in another world , and although we animals would not go there , to do well and right without reward would give to our brief lives a worthiness and dignity which in itself would be a reward .
She had gathered these things from time to time when she had gone to the Sunday-school with the children , and had laid them up in her memory more carefully than she had done with those other words and phrases ; and she had studied them deeply , for her good and ours .
One may see by this that she had a wise and thoughtful head , for all there was so much lightness and vanity in it .
It was muffled by distance , but that could not take the terror out of it , and it was the most dreadful sound to me that I had ever heard .
It went all about , everywhere , down there : along the halls , through all the rooms , in both stories , and in the basement and the cellar ; then outside , and farther and farther away -- then back , and all about the house again , and I thought it would never , never stop .
But at last it did , hours and hours after the vague twilight of the garret had long ago been blotted out by black darkness .
Then in that blessed stillness my terrors fell little by little away , and I was at peace and slept .
It was a good rest I had , but I woke before the twilight had come again .
I was feeling fairly comfortable , and I could think out a plan now .
I made a very good one ; which was , to creep down , all the way down the back stairs , and hide behind the cellar door , and slip out and escape when the iceman came at dawn , while he was inside filling the refrigerator ; then I would hide all day , and start on my journey when night came ; my journey to -- well , anywhere where they would not know me and betray me to the master .
I was feeling almost cheerful now ; then suddenly I thought : Why , what would life be without my puppy !
Pretty soon it was spring , and sunny and pleasant and lovely , and the sweet mother and the children patted me and the puppy good-by , and went away on a journey and a visit to their kin , and the master was n't any company for us , but we played together and had good times , and the servants were kind and friendly , so we got along quite happily and counted the days and waited for the family .
But I hardly saw or heard these things , for I ran at once to my little darling , and snuggled close to it where it lay , and licked the blood , and it put its head against mine , whimpering softly , and I knew in my heart it was a comfort to it in its pain and trouble to feel its mother 's touch , though it could not see me .
Then it dropped down , presently , and its little velvet nose rested upon the floor , and it was still , and did not move any more .
`` You told a LIE ? ''
`` Helen , '' said the other aunt , impressively , `` tell your mother all .
Purge your soul ; leave nothing unconfessed . ''
There was a sound -- a warning -- the clearing of a throat .
The aunts glanced up , and withered in their clothes -- there stood the doctor , his face a thunder-cloud .
Mother and child knew nothing of his presence ; they lay locked together , heart to heart , steeped in immeasurable content , dead to all things else .
The physician stood many moments glaring and glooming upon the scene before him ; studying it , analyzing it , searching out its genesis ; then he put up his hand and beckoned to the aunts .
They came trembling to him , and stood humbly before him and waited .
He bent down and whispered :
`` Now , then ; '' he said , `` good-by , dear .
Go to your room , and keep away from your mother , and behave yourself .
But wait -- put out your tongue .
There , that will do -- you 're as sound as a nut ! ''
He patted her cheek and added , `` Run along now ; I want to talk to these aunts . ''
Hester looked appealing at Hannah ; Hannah returned a beseeching look at Hester -- neither wanted to dance to this unsympathetic orchestra .
The doctor came to their help .
The doctor glowered upon the woman a moment , and seemed to be trying to work up in his mind an understand of a wholly incomprehensible proposition ; then he stormed out :
`` Not even a friend ? ''
There was a hush -- a silence which endured a measurable interval -- then Hester answered , in a low voice , but with decision :
`` I ask you both -- why ? ''
The good old gentlewomen sat paralyzed , pulverized , outraged , insulted , and brooded in bitterness and indignation over these blasphemies .
They were hurt to the heart , poor old ladies , and said they could never forgive these injuries .
The ladies looked a little surprised , and not credulous ; and Hester said :
The twins colored , but did not speak .
`` THAT is not so ! ''
Hester , speaking for both , said ; coldly :
`` Ah , how soon you will fall !
In fact , you have fallen already ; for what you have just uttered is a lie .
One of you go to the sick-room now . ''
`` Oh , my God !
is she sick ? ''
Hester told this incident to Hannah , who received it with a rebuking look , and said , coldly :
It was a lie .
God will hold you to account for it . ''
In the morning she had a cruel report to bear to the mother , and she braced herself for the trial .
When she returned from her mission , Hester was waiting , pale and trembling , in the hall .
`` God forgive me , I told her the child was well ! ''
`` Are you -- no , you are not my mother .
I want her -- oh , I want her !
She was here a minute ago -- I did not see her go .
will she come quickly ?
will she come now ?
There are so many houses ... and they oppress me so ... and everything whirls and turns and whirls ... oh , my head , my head ! ''
-- and so she wandered on and on , in her pain , flitting from one torturing fancy to another , and tossing her arms about in a weary and ceaseless persecution of unrest .
`` She is well . ''
`` But you SEE her ? ''
that I may bear the message to the chancery of heaven and bring again the decree from which there is no appeal . ''
It can hardly be matched in fiction .
The full name is Ambulinia Valeer .
Marriage will presently round it out and perfect it .
Then it will be Mrs. Ambulinia Valeer Elfonzo .
It takes the chromo .
At last we begin to get the Major 's measure .
We are able to put this and that casual fact together , and build the man up before our eyes , and look at him .
And after we have got him built , we find him worth the trouble .
By the above comparison between his age and Ambulinia 's , we guess the war-worn veteran to be twenty-two ; and the other facts stand thus : he had grown up in the Cherokee country with the same equal proportions as one of the natives -- how flowing and graceful the language , and yet how tantalizing as to meaning !
-- he had been turned adrift by his father , to whom he had been `` somewhat of a dutiful son '' ; he wandered in distant lands ; came back frequently `` to the scenes of his boyhood , almost destitute of many of the comforts of life , '' in order to get into the presence of his father 's winter-worn locks , and spread a humid veil of darkness around his expectations ; but he was always promptly sent back to the cold charity of the combat again ; he learned to play the fiddle , and made a name for himself in that line ; he had dwelt among the wild tribes ; he had philosophized about the despoilers of the kingdoms of the earth , and found out -- the cunning creature -- that they refer their differences to the learned for settlement ; he had achieved a vast fame as a military chieftain , the Achilles of the Florida campaigns , and then had got him a spelling-book and started to school ; he had fallen in love with Ambulinia Valeer while she was teething , but had kept it to himself awhile , out of the reverential awe which he felt for the child ; but now at last , like the unyielding Deity who follows the storm to check its rage in the forest , he resolves to shake off his embarrassment , and to return where before he had only worshiped .
The Major , indeed , has made up his mind to rise up and shake his faculties together , and to see if HE ca n't do that thing himself .
This is not clear .
But no matter about that : there stands the hero , compact and visible ; and he is no mean structure , considering that his creator had never structure , considering that his creator had never created anything before , and had n't anything but rags and wind to build with this time .
It seems to me that no one can contemplate this odd creature , this quaint and curious blatherskite , without admiring McClintock , or , at any rate , loving him and feeling grateful to him ; for McClintock made him , he gave him to us ; without McClintock we could not have had him , and would now be poor .
It could not escape Ambulinia 's penetrating eye that he sought an interview with her , which she as anxiously avoided , and assumed a more distant calmness than before , seemingly to destroy all hope .
After many efforts and struggles with his own person , with timid steps the Major approached the damsel , with the same caution as he would have done in a field of battle .
`` Lady Ambulinia , '' said he , trembling , `` I have long desired a moment like this .
I dare not let it escape .
I fear the consequences ; yet I hope your indulgence will at least hear my petition .
Can you not anticipate what I would say , and what I am about to express ?
Will not you , like Minerva , who sprung from the brain of Jupiter , release me from thy winding chains or cure me -- '' `` Say no more , Elfonzo , '' answered Ambulinia , with a serious look , raising her hand as if she intended to swear eternal hatred against the whole world ; `` another lady in my place would have perhaps answered your question in bitter coldness .
I know not the little arts of my sex .
I care but little for the vanity of those who would chide me , and am unwilling as well as ashamed to be guilty of anything that would lead you to think 'all is not gold that glitters ' ; so be no rash in your resolution .
It is better to repent now , than to do it in a more solemn hour .
Yes , I know what you would say .
I know you have a costly gift for me -- the noblest that man can make -- YOUR HEART !
You should not offer it to one so unworthy .
Heaven , you know , has allowed my father 's house to be made a house of solitude , a home of silent obedience , which my parents say is more to be admired than big names and high-sounding titles .
Notwithstanding all this , let me speak the emotions of an honest heart -- allow me to say in the fullness of my hopes that I anticipate better days .
The bird may stretch its wings toward the sun , which it can never reach ; and flowers of the field appear to ascend in the same direction , because they can not do otherwise ; but man confides his complaints to the saints in whom he believes ; for in their abodes of light they know no more sorrow .
From your confession and indicative looks , I must be that person ; if so deceive not yourself . ''
Elfonzo replied , `` Pardon me , my dear madam , for my frankness .
I have loved you from my earliest days -- everything grand and beautiful hath borne the image of Ambulinia ; while precipices on every hand surrounded me , your GUARDIAN ANGEL stood and beckoned me away from the deep abyss .
In every trial , in every misfortune , I have met with your helping hand ; yet I never dreamed or dared to cherish thy love , till a voice impaired with age encouraged the cause , and declared they who acquired thy favor should win a victory .
I saw how Leos worshiped thee .
I felt my own unworthiness .
I began to KNOW JEALOUSLY , a strong guest -- indeed , in my bosom , -- yet I could see if I gained your admiration Leos was to be my rival .
I was aware that he had the influence of your parents , and the wealth of a deceased relative , which is too often mistaken for permanent and regular tranquillity ; yet I have determined by your permission to beg an interest in your prayers -- to ask you to animate my drooping spirits by your smiles and your winning looks ; for if you but speak I shall be conqueror , my enemies shall stagger like Olympus shakes .
And though earth and sea may tremble , and the charioteer of the sun may forget his dashing steed , yet I am assured that it is only to arm me with divine weapons which will enable me to complete my long-tried intention . ''
`` Return to yourself , Elfonzo , '' said Ambulinia , pleasantly : `` a dream of vision has disturbed your intellect ; you are above the atmosphere , dwelling in the celestial regions ; nothing is there that urges or hinders , nothing that brings discord into our present litigation .
I entreat you to condescend a little , and be a man , and forget it all .
When Homer describes the battle of the gods and noble men fighting with giants and dragons , they represent under this image our struggles with the delusions of our passions .
You have exalted me , an unhappy girl , to the skies ; you have called me a saint , and portrayed in your imagination an angel in human form .
Let her remain such to you , let her continue to be as you have supposed , and be assured that she will consider a share in your esteem as her highest treasure .
Think not that I would allure you from the path in which your conscience leads you ; for you know I respect the conscience of others , as I would die for my own .
Elfonzo , if I am worthy of thy love , let such conversation never again pass between us .
Go , seek a nobler theme !
we will seek it in the stream of time , as the sun set in the Tigris . ''
As she spake these words she grasped the hand of Elfonzo , saying at the same time -- '' Peace and prosperity attend you , my hero ; be up and doing ! ''
Closing her remarks with this expression , she walked slowly away , leaving Elfonzo astonished and amazed .
He ventured not to follow or detain her .
Here he stood alone , gazing at the stars ; confounded as he was , here he stood .
The lovers went to the play .
Elfonzo was one of the fiddlers .
He and Ambulinia must not been seen together , lest trouble follow with the girl 's malignant father ; we are made to understand that clearly .
So the two sit together in the orchestra , in the midst of the musicians .
This does not seem to be good art .
In the first place , the girl would be in the way , for orchestras are always packed closely together , and there is no room to spare for people 's girls ; in the next place , one can not conceal a girl in an orchestra without everybody taking notice of it .
There can be no doubt , it seems to me , that this is bad art .
Some correspondence follows now .
The bitter father and the distressed lovers write the letters .
They are idiotically planned , and they fail .
Then we have several pages of romantic powwow and confusion dignifying nothing .
Another elopement is planned ; it is to take place on Sunday , when everybody is at church .
But the `` hero '' can not keep the secret ; he tells everybody .
Another author would have found another instrument when he decided to defeat this elopement ; but that is not McClintock 's way .
He uses the person that is nearest at hand .
It will hardly be believed that after all this thunder and lightning not a drop of rain fell ; but such is the fact .
Elfonzo and his gang stood up and black-guarded Mr. Valeer with vigor all night , getting their outlay back with interest ; then in the early morning the army and its general retired from the field , leaving the victory with their solitary adversary and his crowbar .
This is the first time this has happened in romantic literature .
The invention is original .
Everything in this book is original ; there is nothing hackneyed about it anywhere .
Always , in other romances , when you find the author leading up to a climax , you know what is going to happen .
But in this book it is different ; the thing which seems inevitable and unavoidable never happens ; it is circumvented by the art of the author every time .
We have now arrived at the end .
But it is not exciting .
McClintock thinks it is ; but it is n't .
One day Elfonzo sent Ambulinia another note -- a note proposing elopement No .
This time the plan is admirable ; admirable , sagacious , ingenious , imaginative , deep -- oh , everything , and perfectly easy .
One wonders why it was never thought of before .
This is the scheme .
Ambulinia is to leave the breakfast-table , ostensibly to `` attend to the placing of those flowers , which should have been done a week ago '' -- artificial ones , of course ; the others wouldn't keep so long -- and then , instead of fixing the flowers , she is to walk out to the grove , and go off with Elfonzo .
The invention of this plan overstrained the author that is plain , for he straightway shows failing powers .
The details of the plan are not many or elaborate .
The author shall state them himself -- this good soul , whose intentions are always better than his English :
I begin this little work with an eulogy upon woman , who has ever been distinguished for her perseverance , her constancy , and her devoted attention to those upon whom she has been pleased to place her AFFECTIONS .
Many have been the themes upon which writers and public speakers have dwelt with intense and increasing interest .
Among these delightful themes stands that of woman , the balm to all our sighs and disappointments , and the most pre-eminent of all other topics .
Here the poet and orator have stood and gazed with wonder and with admiration ; they have dwelt upon her innocence , the ornament of all her virtues .
First viewing her external charms , such as set forth in her form and benevolent countenance , and then passing to the deep hidden springs of loveliness and disinterested devotion .
In every clime , and in every age , she has been the pride of her NATION .
Her watchfulness is untiring ; she who guarded the sepulcher was the first to approach it , and the last to depart from its awful yet sublime scene .
Even here , in this highly favored land , we look to her for the security of our institutions , and for our future greatness as a nation .
But , strange as it may appear , woman 's charms and virtues are but slightly appreciated by thousands .
Those who should raise the standard of female worth , and paint her value with her virtues , in living colors , upon the banners that are fanned by the zephyrs of heaven , and hand them down to posterity as emblematical of a rich inheritance , do not properly estimate them .
Firm and true to what she undertakes , and that which she requires by her own aggrandizement , and regards as being within the strict rules of propriety , she will remain stable and unflinching to the last .
A more genuine principle is not to be found in the most determined , resolute heart of man .
For this she deserves to be held in the highest commendation , for this she deserves the purest of all other blessings , and for this she deserves the most laudable reward of all others .
It is a noble characteristic and is worthy of imitation of any age .
And when we look at it in one particular aspect , it is still magnified , and grows brighter and brighter the more we reflect upon its eternal duration .
What will she not do , when her word as well as her affections and LOVE are pledged to her lover ?
Everything that is dear to her on earth , all the hospitalities of kind and loving parents , all the sincerity and loveliness of sisters , and the benevolent devotion of brothers , who have surrounded her with every comfort ; she will forsake them all , quit the harmony and sweet sound of the lute and the harp , and throw herself upon the affections of some devoted admirer , in whom she fondly hopes to find more than she has left behind , which is not often realized by many .
Truth and virtue all combined !
How deserving our admiration and love !
Ah cruel would it be in man , after she has thus manifested such an unshaken confidence in him , and said by her determination to abandon all the endearments and blandishments of home , to act a villainous part , and prove a traitor in the revolution of his mission , and then turn Hector over the innocent victim whom he swore to protect , in the presence of Heaven , recorded by the pen of an angel .
The road which led to the town presented many attractions .
Elfonzo had bid farewell to the youth of deep feeling , and was not wending his way to the dreaming spot of his fondness .
The south winds whistled through the woods , as the waters dashed against the banks , as rapid fire in the pent furnace roars .
This brought him to remember while alone , that he quietly left behind the hospitality of a father 's house , and gladly entered the world , with higher hopes than are often realized .
But as he journeyed onward , he was mindful of the advice of his father , who had often looked sadly on the ground when tears of cruelly deceived hope moistened his eye .
Elfonzo had been somewhat of a dutiful son ; yet fond of the amusements of life -- had been in distant lands -- had enjoyed the pleasure of the world and had frequently returned to the scenes of his boyhood , almost destitute of many of the comforts of life .
In this condition , he would frequently say to his father , `` Have I offended you , that you look upon me as a stranger , and frown upon me with stinging looks ?
Will you not favor me with the sound of your voice ?
If I have trampled upon your veneration , or have spread a humid veil of darkness around your expectations , send me back into the world where no heart beats for me -- where the foot of man has never yet trod ; but give me at least one kind word -- allow me to come into the presence sometimes of thy winter-worn locks . ''
`` Forbid it , Heaven , that I should be angry with thee , '' answered the father , `` my son , and yet I send thee back to the children of the world -- to the cold charity of the combat , and to a land of victory .
I read another destiny in thy countenance -- I learn thy inclinations from the flame that has already kindled in my soul a stranger sensation .
It will seek thee , my dear ELFONZO , it will find thee -- thou canst not escape that lighted torch , which shall blot out from the remembrance of men a long train of prophecies which they have foretold against thee .
I once thought not so .
Once , I was blind ; but now the path of life is plain before me , and my sight is clear ; yet Elfonzo , return to thy worldly occupation -- take again in thy hand that chord of sweet sounds -- struggle with the civilized world , and with your own heart ; fly swiftly to the enchanted ground -- let the night-OWL send forth its screams from the stubborn oak -- let the sea sport upon the beach , and the stars sing together ; but learn of these , Elfonzo , thy doom , and thy hiding-place .
Our most innocent as well as our most lawful DESIRES must often be denied us , that we may learn to sacrifice them to a Higher will . ''
One mild winter day as he walked along the streets toward the Academy , which stood upon a small eminence , surrounded by native growth -- some venerable in its appearance , others young and prosperous -- all seemed inviting , and seemed to be the very place for learning as well as for genius to spend its research beneath its spreading shades .
He entered its classic walls in the usual mode of southern manners .
The principal of the Institution begged him to be seated and listen to the recitations that were going on .
He accordingly obeyed the request , and seemed to be much pleased .
After the school was dismissed , and the young hearts regained their freedom , with the songs of the evening , laughing at the anticipated pleasures of a happy home , while others tittered at the actions of the past day , he addressed the teacher in a tone that indicated a resolution -- with an undaunted mind .
He said he had determined to become a student , if he could meet with his approbation .
`` Sir , '' said he , `` I have spent much time in the world .
I have traveled among the uncivilized inhabitants of America .
I have met with friends , and combated with foes ; but none of these gratify my ambition , or decide what is to be my destiny .
I see the learned would have an influence with the voice of the people themselves .
The despoilers of the remotest kingdoms of the earth refer their differences to this class of persons .
This the illiterate and inexperienced little dream of ; and now if you will receive me as I am , with these deficiencies -- with all my misguided opinions , I will give you my honor , sir , that I will never disgrace the Institution , or those who have placed you in this honorable station . ''
The instructor , who had met with many disappointments , knew how to feel for a stranger who had been thus turned upon the charities of an unfeeling community .
He looked at him earnestly , and said : `` Be of good cheer -- look forward , sir , to the high destination you may attain .
Remember , the more elevated the mark at which you aim , the more sure , the more glorious , the more magnificent the prize . ''
From wonder to wonder , his encouragement led the impatient listener .
A stranger nature bloomed before him -- giant streams promised him success -- gardens of hidden treasures opened to his view .
All this , so vividly described , seemed to gain a new witchery from his glowing fancy .
In 1842 he entered the class , and made rapid progress in the English and Latin departments .
Indeed , he continued advancing with such rapidity that he was like to become the first in his class , and made such unexpected progress , and was so studious , that he had almost forgotten the pictured saint of his affections .
The fresh wreaths of the pine and cypress had waited anxiously to drop once more the dews of Heavens upon the heads of those who had so often poured forth the tender emotions of their souls under its boughs .
He was aware of the pleasure that he had seen there .
So one evening , as he was returning from his reading , he concluded he would pay a visit to this enchanting spot .
Little did he think of witnessing a shadow of his former happiness , though no doubt he wished it might be so .
He continued sauntering by the roadside , meditating on the past .
The nearer he approached the spot , the more anxious he became .
At the moment a tall female figure flitted across his path , with a bunch of roses in her hand ; her countenance showed uncommon vivacity , with a resolute spirit ; her ivory teeth already appeared as she smiled beautifully , promenading -- while her ringlets of hair dangled unconsciously around her snowy neck .
Nothing was wanting to complete her beauty .
The tinge of the rose was in full bloom upon her cheek ; the charms of sensibility and tenderness were always her associates..
In Ambulinia 's bosom dwelt a noble soul -- one that never faded -- one that never was conquered .
Her heart yielded to no feeling but the love of Elfonzo , on whom she gazed with intense delight , and to whom she felt herself more closely bound , because he sought the hand of no other .
Elfonzo was roused from his apparent reverie .
His books no longer were his inseparable companions -- his thoughts arrayed themselves to encourage him in the field of victory .
He endeavored to speak to his supposed Ambulinia , but his speech appeared not in words .
No , his effort was a stream of fire , that kindled his soul into a flame of admiration , and carried his senses away captive .
Ambulinia had disappeared , to make him more mindful of his duty .
As she walked speedily away through the piny woods she calmly echoed : `` O !
Elfonzo , thou wilt now look from thy sunbeams .
Thou shalt now walk in a new path -- perhaps thy way leads through darkness ; but fear not , the stars foretell happiness . ''
Night had almost overtaken him when he arrived in town .
Colonel Elder , a noble-hearted , high-minded , and independent man , met him at his door as usual , and seized him by the hand .
`` Well , Elfonzo , '' said the Colonel , `` how does the world use you in your efforts ? ''
`` I have no objection to the world , '' said Elfonzo , `` but the people are rather singular in some of their opinions . ''
`` Aye , well , '' said the Colonel , `` you must remember that creation is made up of many mysteries ; just take things by the right handle ; be always sure you know which is the smooth side before you attempt your polish ; be reconciled to your fate , be it what it may ; and never find fault with your condition , unless your complaining will benefit it .
Perseverance is a principle that should be commendable in those who have judgment to govern it .
I should never had been so successful in my hunting excursions had I waited till the deer , by some magic dream , had been drawn to the muzzle of the gun before I made an attempt to fire at the game that dared my boldness in the wild forest .
The great mystery in hunting seems to be -- a good marksman , a resolute mind , a fixed determination , and my world for it , you will never return home without sounding your horn with the breath of a new victory .
And so with every other undertaking .
Be confident that your ammunition is of the right kind -- always pull your trigger with a steady hand , and so soon as you perceive a calm , touch her off , and the spoils are yours . ''
in this dead night , if loud winds arise ,
To lash the surge and bluster in the skies ,
Not the child of poverty , Gracia , or the heir of glory and peace , but of fate .
Remember , I have wealth more than wit can number ; I have had power more than kings could emcompass ; yet the world seems a desert ; all nature appears an afflictive spectacle of warring passions .
This blind fatality , that capriciously sports with the rules and lives of mortals , tells me that the mountains will never again send forth the water of their springs to my thirst .
Oh , that I might be freed and set at liberty from wretchedness !
But I fear , I fear this will never be .
Oh , see what woman 's woes and human wants require ,
ye mysterious men , of all the world , how few
Against earth and all jealous powers !
talk to me about giving security for the future -- what an insulting requisition !
Have you said your prayers tonight , Madam Amelia ?
F. If you bethink yourself of any crime , or of any fault , that is yet concealed from the courts of Heaven and the thrones of grace , I bid you ask and solicit forgiveness for it now .
F. Aye , he did .
Ask thy conscience , and it will speak with a voice of thunder to thy soul .
Then bid the hero his lover take .
In the region where scarcely the foot of man hath ever trod , where the woodman hath not found his way , lies a blooming grove , seen only by the sun when he mounts his lofty throne , visited only by the light of the stars , to whom are entrusted the guardianship of earth , before the sun sinks to rest in his rosy bed .
High cliffs of rocks surround the romantic place , and in the small cavity of the rocky wall grows the daffodil clear and pure ; and as the wind blows along the enchanting little mountain which surrounds the lonely spot , it nourishes the flowers with the dew-drops of heaven .
Here is the seat of Elfonzo ; darkness claims but little victory over this dominion , and in vain does she spread out her gloomy wings .
Here the waters flow perpetually , and the trees lash their tops together to bid the welcome visitor a happy muse .
Elfonzo , during his short stay in the country , had fully persuaded himself that it was his duty to bring this solemn matter to an issue .
A duty that he individually owed , as a gentleman , to the parents of Ambulinia , a duty in itself involving not only his own happiness and his own standing in society , but one that called aloud the act of the parties to make it perfect and complete .
How he should communicate his intentions to get a favorable reply , he was at a loss to know ; he knew not whether to address Esq .
Valeer in prose or in poetry , in a jocular or an argumentative manner , or whether he should use moral suasion , legal injunction , or seizure and take by reprisal ; if it was to do the latter , he would have no difficulty in deciding in his own mind , but his gentlemanly honor was at stake ; so he concluded to address the following letter to the father and mother of Ambulinia , as his address in person he knew would only aggravate the old gentleman , and perhaps his lady .
Cumming , Ga. , January 28 , 1844 .
But the hour had not come for this joyous reunion ; her friends struggled with Elfonzo for some time , and finally succeeded in arresting her from his hands .
He dared not injure them , because they were matrons whose courage needed no spur ; she was snatched from the arms of Elfonzo , with so much eagerness , and yet with such expressive signification , that he calmly withdrew from this lovely enterprise , with an ardent hope that he should be lulled to repose by the zephyrs which whispered peace to his soul .
Several long days and night passed unmolested , all seemed to have grounded their arms of rebellion , and no callidity appeared to be going on with any of the parties .
Other arrangements were made by Ambulinia ; she feigned herself to be entirely the votary of a mother 's care , and she , by her graceful smiles , that manhood might claim his stern dominion in some other region , where such boisterous love was not so prevalent .
This gave the parents a confidence that yielded some hours of sober joy ; they believed that Ambulinia would now cease to love Elfonzo , and that her stolen affections would now expire with her misguided opinions .
They therefore declined the idea of sending her to a distant land .
they dreamed not of the rapture that dazzled the fancy of Ambulinia , who would say , when alone , youth should not fly away on his rosy pinions , and leave her to grapple in the conflict with unknown admirers .
With this resolution fixed in her mind , one dark and dreary night , when the winds whistled and the tempest roared , she received intelligence that Elfonzo was then waiting , and every preparation was then ready , at the residence of Dr. Tully , and for her to make a quick escape while the family was reposing .
Accordingly she gathered her books , went the wardrobe supplied with a variety of ornamental dressing , and ventured alone in the streets to make her way to Elfonzo , who was near at hand , impatiently looking and watching her arrival .
`` What forms , '' said she , `` are those rising before me ?
What is that dark spot on the clouds ?
I do wonder what frightful ghost that is , gleaming on the red tempest ?
Oh , be merciful and tell me what region you are from .
Oh , tell me , ye strong spirits , or ye dark and fleeting clouds , that I yet have a friend . ''
`` A friend , '' said a low , whispering voice .
`` I am thy unchanging , thy aged , and thy disappointed mother .
Why brandish in that hand of thine a javelin of pointed steel ?
Why suffer that lip I have kissed a thousand times to equivocate ?
My daughter , let these tears sink deep into thy soul , and no longer persist in that which may be your destruction and ruin .
Come , my dear child , retract your steps , and bear me company to your welcome home . ''
Without one retorting word , or frown from her brow , she yielded to the entreaties of her mother , and with all the mildness of her former character she went along with the silver lamp of age , to the home of candor and benevolence .
Her father received her cold and formal politeness -- '' Where has Ambulinia been , this blustering evening , Mrs .
`` Oh , she and I have been taking a solitary walk , '' said the mother ; `` all things , I presume , are now working for the best . ''
Thirty-five years ago I was out prospecting on the Stanislaus , tramping all day long with pick and pan and horn , and washing a hatful of dirt here and there , always expecting to make a rich strike , and never doing it .
It was a lovely region , woodsy , balmy , delicious , and had once been populous , long years before , but now the people had vanished and the charming paradise was a solitude .
They went away when the surface diggings gave out .
In one place , where a busy little city with banks and newspapers and fire companies and a mayor and aldermen had been , was nothing but a wide expanse of emerald turf , with not even the faintest sign that human life had ever been present there .
This was down toward Tuttletown .
In the country neighborhood thereabouts , along the dusty roads , one found at intervals the prettiest little cottage homes , snug and cozy , and so cobwebbed with vines snowed thick with roses that the doors and windows were wholly hidden from sight -- sign that these were deserted homes , forsaken years ago by defeated and disappointed families who could neither sell them nor give them away .
Now and then , half an hour apart , one came across solitary log cabins of the earliest mining days , built by the first gold-miners , the predecessors of the cottage-builders .
In some few cases these cabins were still occupied ; and when this was so , you could depend upon it that the occupant was the very pioneer who had built the cabin ; and you could depend on another thing , too -- that he was there because he had once had his opportunity to go home to the States rich , and had not done it ; had rather lost his wealth , and had then in his humiliation resolved to sever all communication with his home relatives and friends , and be to them thenceforth as one dead .
Round about California in that day were scattered a host of these living dead men -- pride-smitten poor fellows , grizzled and old at forty , whose secret thoughts were made all of regrets and longings -- regrets for their wasted lives , and longings to be out of the struggle and done with it all .
`` When do you expect her back ? ''
I heard the words , but hardly noticed them , I was so deep in my thinkings and strugglings .
He left me , but I did n't know .
Presently he was back , with the picture case in his hand , and he held it open before me and said :
When Joe heard that there was a letter , he asked to have it read , and the loving messages in it for him broke the old fellow all up ; but he said he was such an old wreck that THAT would happen to him if she only just mentioned his name .
`` Lord , we miss her so ! ''
I felt caught , and a little embarrassed ; but I laughed , and said it was a habit of mine when I was in a state of expenctancy .
But he did n't seem quite satisfied ; and from that time on he began to show uneasiness .
Four times he walked me up the road to a point whence we could see a long distance ; and there he would stand , shading his eyes with his hand , and looking .
Several times he said :
`` I 'm getting worried , I 'm getting right down worried .
I know she 's not due till about nine o'clock , and yet something seems to be trying to warn me that something 's happened .
You do n't think anything has happened , do you ? ''
`` All hands stand by !
One more drink , and she 's here ! ''
Take the other . ''
One of the veterans answered , close to his ear : `` It was Jimmy Parish come to say the party got delayed , but they 're right up the road a piece , and coming along .
Her horse is lame , but she 'll be here in half an hour . ''
`` Oh , I 'm SO thankful nothing has happened ! ''
He was asleep almost before the words were out of his mouth .
In a moment those handy men had his clothes off , and had tucked him into his bed in the chamber where I had washed my hands .
They closed the door and came back .
Then they seemed preparing to leave ; but I said : `` Please do n't go , gentlemen .
She wo n't know me ; I am a stranger . ''
I have a letter of that kind by me , a very old one .
I yearn to print it , and where is the harm ?
The writer of it is dead years ago , no doubt , and if I conceal her name and address -- her this-world address -- I am sure her shade will not mind .
And with it I wish to print the answer which I wrote at the time but probably did not send .
If it went -- which is not likely -- it went in the form of a copy , for I find the original still here , pigeonholed with the said letter .
To that kind of letters we all write answers which we do not send , fearing to hurt where we have no desire to hurt ; I have done it many a time , and this is doubtless a case of the sort .
I appeal to you to grant me this favor .
With deepest gratitude I think you for your attention .
C. Yes -- I suppose so .
C. I believe I do not know .
H. Have you seen it ?
H. Well , what then ?
She had a reason of SOME sort for believing you competent to recommend her literature , and also under obligations to do it ?
C. NO , that is n't all , there are other ties .
I know the cabin her uncle lived in , in the mines ; I knew his partners , too ; also I came near knowing her husband before she married him , and I DID know the abandoned shaft where a premature blast went off and he went flying through the air and clear down to the trail and hit an Indian in the back with almost fatal consequences .
H. ( WITH A SIGH ) .
It certainly beats the band !
You do n't know HER , you do n't know her literature , you do n't know who got hurt when the blast went off , you do n't know a single thing for us to build an estimate of her book upon , so far as I --
When was all this ?
H. What a basis to judge a book upon !
As first you said you knew him , and now you do n't know whether you did or not .
H. What makes you think you thought you knew him ?
Dear madam , you see how it would happen if I went there .
He would ask me those questions , and I would try to answer them to suit him , and he would hunt me here and there and yonder and get me embarrassed more and more all the time , and at last he would look tired on account of overwork , and there it would end and nothing done .
I wish I could be useful to you , but , you see , they do not care for uncles or any of those things ; it does n't move them , it does n't have the least effect , they do n't care for anything but the literature itself , and they as good as despise influence .
But they do care for books , and are eager to get them and examine them , no matter whence they come , nor from whose pen .
If you will send yours to a publisher -- any publisher -- he will certainly examine it , I can assure you of that .
I turned it over with a backstitch on the selvage edge .
Well , what IS this world coming to ?
Was it right in CHURCH ?
And was her MOTHER there ?
Yes , I think so .
Four o'clock , then -- I 'll be ready .
( Hangs up the telephone and says , `` Oh , it DOES tire a person 's arm so ! ''
Times were hard , now , and they grew worse .
Edward moved his family into a garret , and walked the streets day and night , seeking work .
He begged for it , but it was really not to be had .
He was astonished to see how soon his face became unwelcome ; he was astonished and hurt to see how quickly the ancient interest which people had had in him faded out and disappeared .
Still , he MUST get work ; so he swallowed his chagrin , and toiled on in search of it .
At last he got a job of carrying bricks up a ladder in a hod , and was a grateful man in consequence ; but after that NOBODY knew him or cared anything about him .
He was not able to keep up his dues in the various moral organizations to which he belonged , and had to endure the sharp pain of seeing himself brought under the disgrace of suspension .
But the faster Edward died out of public knowledge and interest , the faster George rose in them .
He was found lying , ragged and drunk , in the gutter one morning .
A member of the Ladies ' Temperance Refuge fished him out , took him in hand , got up a subscription for him , kept him sober a whole week , then got a situation for him .
An account of it was published .
Now George Benton experienced religion .
The glad news flew all around .
From that time forth his cell was always full of girls and women and fresh flowers ; all the day long there was prayer , and hymn-singing , and thanksgiving , and homilies , and tears , with never an interruption , except an occasional five-minute intermission for refreshments .
The brave cashier 's head-stone has this inscription : `` Be pure , honest , sober , industrious , considerate , and you will never -- ''
`` Here are gifts .
Take one , leave the others .
And be wary , chose wisely ; oh , choose wisely !
for only one of them is valuable . ''
`` There is no need to consider '' ; and he chose Pleasure .
He went out into the world and sought out the pleasures that youth delights in .
But each in its turn was short-lived and disappointing , vain and empty ; and each , departing , mocked him .
In the end he said : `` These years I have wasted .
If I could but choose again , I would choose wisely . ''
`` Chose yet again . ''
It was the fairy 's voice .
`` Two gifts remain .
And do not despair .
In the beginning there was but one that was precious , and it is still here . ''
`` Curse all the world 's gifts , for mockeries and gilded lies !
And miscalled , every one .
They are not gifts , but merely lendings .
Pleasure , Love , Fame , Riches : they are but temporary disguises for lasting realities -- Pain , Grief , Shame , Poverty .
The fairy said true ; in all her store there was but one gift which was precious , only one that was not valueless .
How poor and cheap and mean I know those others now to be , compared with that inestimable one , that dear and sweet and kindly one , that steeps in dreamless and enduring sleep the pains that persecute the body , and the shames and griefs that eat the mind and heart .
I am weary , I would rest . ''
`` I gave it to a mother 's pet , a little child .
It was ignorant , but trusted me , asking me to choose for it .
You did not ask me to choose . ''
`` Please do not use my name in any way .
Please do not even divulge that fact that I own a machine .
I have entirely stopped using the typewriter , for the reason that I never could write a letter with it to anybody without receiving a request by return mail that I would not only describe the machine , but state what progress I had made in the use of it , etc.
I do n't like to write letters , and so I do n't want people to know I own this curiosity-breeding little joker . ''
By and by I hired a young woman , and did my first dictating ( letters , merely ) , and my last until now .
The machine did not do both capitals and lower case ( as now ) , but only capitals .
Gothic capitals they were , and sufficiently ugly .
I remember the first letter I dictated , it was to Edward Bok , who was a boy then .
I was not acquainted with him at that time .
His present enterprising spirit is not new -- he had it in that early day .
He was accumulating autographs , and was not content with mere signatures , he wanted a whole autograph LETTER .
I furnished it -- in type-written capitals , SIGNATURE AND ALL .
It was long ; it was a sermon ; it contained advice ; also reproaches .
I said writing was my TRADE , my bread-and-butter ; I said it was not fair to ask a man to give away samples of his trade ; would he ask the blacksmith for a horseshoe ?
would he ask the doctor for a corpse ?
It is almost a fortnight now that I am domiciled in a medieval villa in the country , a mile or two from Florence .
I can not speak the language ; I am too old not to learn how , also too busy when I am busy , and too indolent when I am not ; wherefore some will imagine that I am having a dull time of it .
But it is not so .
The `` help '' are all natives ; they talk Italian to me , I answer in English ; I do not understand them , they do not understand me , consequently no harm is done , and everybody is satisfied .
In order to be just and fair , I throw in an Italian word when I have one , and this has a good influence .
I get the word out of the morning paper .
I have to use it while it is fresh , for I find that Italian words do not keep in this climate .
They fade toward night , and next morning they are gone .
But it is no matter ; I get a new one out of the paper before breakfast , and thrill the domestics with it while it lasts .
I have no dictionary , and I do not want one ; I can select words by the sound , or by orthographic aspect .
Many of them have French or German or English look , and these are the ones I enslave for the day's service .
That is , as a rule .
If I find a learnable phrase that has an imposing look and warbles musically along I do not care to know the meaning of it ; I pay it out to the first applicant , knowing that if I pronounce it carefully HE will understand it , and that's enough .
During my first week in the deep and dreamy stillness of this woodsy and flowery place I was without news of the outside world , and was well content without it .
It has been four weeks since I had seen a newspaper , and this lack seemed to give life a new charm and grace , and to saturate it with a feeling verging upon actual delight .
Then came a change that was to be expected : the appetite for news began to rise again , after this invigorating rest .
I had to feed it , but I was not willing to let it make me its helpless slave again ; I determined to put it on a diet , and a strict and limited one .
So I examined an Italian paper , with the idea of feeding it on that , and on that exclusively .
On that exclusively , and without help of a dictionary .
In this way I should surely be well protected against overloading and indigestion .
Return of the sovereigns to Rome , you see .
Date of the telegram , Rome , November 24 , ten minutes before twenty-three o'clock .
The telegram seems to say , `` The Sovereigns and the Royal Children expect themselves at Rome tomorrow at fifty-one minutes after fifteen o'clock . ''
I do not know about Italian time , but I judge it begins at midnight and runs through the twenty-four hours without breaking bulk .
In the following ad , the theaters open at half-past twenty .
If these are not matinees , 20.30 must mean 8.30 P.M. , by my reckoning .
3 is a little obscure , but I think it says that the medico set the broken left leg -- right enough , since there was nothing the matter with the other one -- and that several are encouraged to hope that fifty days well fetch him around in quite giudicandolo-guaribile way , if no complications intervene .
Further examination , further inquiry , further reflection , confirmed this judgment , and established beyond peradventure the fact that the Verb was the storm-center .
This discovery made plain the right and wise course to pursue in order to acquire certainty and exactness in understanding the statements which the newspaper was daily endeavoring to convey to me : I must catch a Verb and tame it .
I must find out its ways , I must spot its eccentricities , I must penetrate its disguises , I must intelligently foresee and forecast at least the commoner of the dodges it was likely to try upon a stranger in given circumstances , I must get in on its main shifts and head them off , I must learn its game and play the limit .
`` Front -- face ! ''
`` EGLI HA UN CANE , he has a dog . ''
`` NOI ABBIAMO UN CANE , we have a dog . ''
`` What is chicken , in Italian ? ''
`` Pollo , PODERE . ''
( Podere is Italian for master .
It is a title of courtesy , and conveys reverence and admiration . )
`` Pollo is one chicken by itself ; when there are enough present to constitute a plural , it is POLLI . ''
`` Convey to them the conception that these are unprotected chickens . ''
He turned to me , saluting with his hand to his temple , and explained , `` It will inflame their interest in the poultry , sire . ''
A few minutes elapsed .
Then the squad marched in and formed up , their faces glowing with enthusiasm , and the file-leader shouted :
`` EBBE POLLI , he had chickens ! ''
`` EBBERO POLLI , they had chickens ! ''
`` IO AVENA , I had , TU AVEVI , thou hadst , EGLI AVENA , he had , NOI AV -- ''
`` Wait -- we 've just HAD the hads .
What are you giving me ? ''
Arthour Twain was a man of considerable note -- a solicitor on the highway in William Rufus 's time .
At about the age of thirty he went to one of those fine old English places of resort called Newgate , to see about something , and never returned again .
While there he died suddenly .
`` It ai n't no ( hic ) no use .
'At man 's so drunk he ca n't stan ' still long enough for a man to hit him .
I ( hic ) I ca n't 'ford to fool away any more am'nition on him . ''
That was why he stopped at the seventeenth round , and it was a good , plain , matter-of-fact reason , too , and one that easily commends itself to us by the eloquent , persuasive flavor of probability there is about it .
I also enjoyed the story-book narrative , but I felt a marring misgiving that every Indian at Braddock 's Defeat who fired at a soldier a couple of times ( two easily grows to seventeen in a century ) , and missed him , jumped to the conclusion that the Great Spirit was reserving that soldier for some grand mission ; and so I somehow feared that the only reason why Washington 's case is remembered and the others forgotten is , that in his the prophecy came true , and in that of the others it did n't .
There are not books enough on earth to contain the record of the prophecies Indians and other unauthorized parties have made ; but one may carry in his overcoat pockets the record of all the prophecies that have been fulfilled .
The humorous story may be spun out to great length , and may wander around as much as it pleases , and arrive nowhere in particular ; but the comic and witty stories must be brief and end with a point .
The humorous story bubbles gently along , the others burst .
`` It is true , sir , just as you have said . ''
Then after a pause he added , `` BUT HE TOLD ME IT WAS HIS LEG !
He tells it in the character of a dull-witted old farmer who has just heard it for the first time , thinks it is unspeakably funny , and is trying to repeat it to a neighbor .
But he ca n't remember it ; so he gets all mixed up and wanders helplessly round and round , putting in tedious details that do n't belong in the tale and only retard it ; taking them out conscientiously and putting in others that are just as useless ; making minor mistakes now and then and stopping to correct them and explain how he came to make them ; remembering things which he forgot to put in in their proper place and going back to put them in there ; stopping his narrative a good while in order to try to recall the name of the soldier that was hurt , and finally remembering that the soldier's name was not mentioned , and remarking placidly that the name is of no real importance , anyway -- better , of course , if one knew it , but not essential , after all -- and so on , and so on , and so on .
When it come midnight he could n't stan ' it no mo ' ; so he git up , he did , en tuck his lantern en shoved out thoo de storm en dug her up en got de golden arm ; en he bent his head down 'gin de 'win , en plowed en plowed en plowed thoo de snow .
Den all on a sudden he stop ( make a considerable pause here , and look startled , and take a listening attitude ) en say : `` My LAN ' , what 's dat ? ''
When he git to de pasture he hear it agin -- closter now , en A-COMIN ' !
-- a-comin ' back dah in de dark en de storm -- ( repeat the wind and the voice ) .
When he git to de house he rush upstairs en jump in de bed en kiver up , head and years , en lay da shiverin ' en shakin ' -- en den way out dah he hear it AGIN !
-- en a-COMIN ' !
En bimeby he hear ( pause -- awed , listening attitude ) -- pat -- pat -- pat HIT 'S A-COMIN' UPSTAIRS !
Den he hear de latch , en he KNOW it 's in de room !
On the Fourth of July , 1830 , and also of 1834 and 1836 , the subject of this sketch was exhibited in great state upon the rostrum of the orator of the day , and in November of 1840 he died again .
The St. Louis REPUBLICAN of the 25th of that month spoke as follows :
ANOTHER CHERISHED REMNANT OF THE REVOLUTION GONE
The faithful old servant is gone !
We shall never see him more until he turns up again .
He has closed his long and splendid career of dissolution , for the present , and sleeps peacefully , as only they sleep who have earned their rest .
He was in all respects a remarkable man .
He held his age better than any celebrity that has figured in history ; and the longer he lived the stronger and longer his memory grew .
If he lives to die again , he will distinctly recollect the discovery of America .
All infants appear to have an impertinent and disagreeable fashion nowadays of saying `` smart '' things on most occasions that offer , and especially on occasions when they ought not to be saying anything at all .
Judging by the average published specimens of smart sayings , the rising generation of children are little better than idiots .
And the parents must surely be but little better than the children , for in most cases they are the publishers of the sunbursts of infantile imbecility which dazzle us from the pages of our periodicals .
I may seem to speak with some heat , not to say a suspicion of personal spite ; and I do admit that it nettles me to hear about so many gifted infants in these days , and remember that I seldom said anything smart when I was a child .
I tried it once or twice , but it was not popular .
The family were not expecting brilliant remarks from me , and so they snubbed me sometimes and spanked me the rest .
But it makes my flesh creep and my blood run cold to think what might have happened to me if I had dared to utter some of the smart things of this generation 's `` four-year-olds '' where my father could hear me .
To have simply skinned me alive and considered his duty at an end would have seemed to him criminal leniency toward one so sinning .
He was a stern , unsmiling man , and hated all forms of precocity .
If I had said some of the things I have referred to , and said them in his hearing , he would have destroyed me .
He would , indeed .
He would , provided the opportunity remained with him .
But it would not , for I would have had judgment enough to take some strychnine first and say my smart thing afterward .
The fair record of my life has been tarnished by just one pun .
My father overheard that , and he hunted me over four or five townships seeking to take my life .
If I had been full-grown , of course he would have been right ; but , child as I was , I could not know how wicked a thing I had done .
`` Abraham is a good name .
Let us have Abraham for one of his names . ''
`` Father , I can not , can not wear the name of Samuel . ''
`` My son , this is unreasonable .
Many great and good men have been named Samuel . ''
With His own voice the Lord called him . ''
And then I sallied forth , and that stern old man sallied forth after me .
He overtook me at noon the following day , and when the interview was over I had acquired the name of Samuel , and a thrashing , and other useful information ; and by means of this compromise my father 's wrath was appeased and a misunderstanding bridged over which might have become a permanent rupture if I had chosen to be unreasonable .
But just judging by this episode , what would my father have done to me if I had ever uttered in his hearing one of the flat , sickly things these `` two-years-olds '' say in print nowadays ?
In my opinion there would have been a case of infanticide in our family .
We have become familiar with the Californians who were thrilled with terror by his burlesque of a newspaper reporter 's way of telling a story , and we have heard of the Pennsylvania clergyman who sadly returned his INNOCENTS ABROAD to the book-agent with the remark that `` the man who could shed tears over the tomb of Adam must be an idiot . ''
The SATURDAY REVIEW , in its number of October 8th , reviews his book of travels , which has been republished in England , and reviews it seriously .
We can imagine the delight of the humorist in reading this tribute to his power ; and indeed it is so amusing in itself that he can hardly do better than reproduce the article in full in his next monthly Memoranda .
( From the London `` Saturday Review . ''
A Book of Travels .
London : Hotten , publisher .
( Now that is graceful and handsome .
I take off my hat to my life-long friend and comrade , and with my feet together and my fingers spread over my heart , I say , in the language of Alabama , `` You do me proud . ''
-- I can not resist the temptation to toss in this most savory thing of all -- this easy , graceful , philosophical disquisition , with his happy , chirping confidence .
It is from the Cincinnati ENQUIRER :
In considering this matter , in view of my approaching change , it has seemed to me wise to take such measures as may be feasible , to acquire , by courtesy of the press , access to my standing obituaries , with the privilege -- if this is not asking too much -- of editing , not their Facts , but their Verdicts .
This , not for the present profit , further than as concerns my family , but as a favorable influence usable on the Other Side , where there are some who are not friendly to me .
It is my desire to leave these Amended Obituaries neatly bound behind me as a perennial consolation and entertainment to my family , and as an heirloom which shall have a mournful but definite commercial value for my remote posterity .
Some one has revealed to the TRIBUNE that I once suggested to Rev .
Thomas K. Beecher , of Elmira , New York , that we get up a monument to Adam , and that Mr. Beecher favored the project .
There is more to it than that .
The matter started as a joke , but it came somewhat near to materializing .
Very recently I began to build a book in which one of the minor characters touches incidentally upon a project for a monument to Adam , and now the TRIBUNE has come upon a trace of the forgotten jest of thirty years ago .
Apparently mental telegraphy is still in business .
It is odd ; but the freaks of mental telegraphy are usually odd .
In this world of uncertainties , there is , at any rate , one thing which may be pretty confidently set down as a certainty : and that is , that this celebrated little phrase-book will never die while the English language lasts .
Its delicious unconscious ridiculousness , and its enchanting naivete , as are supreme and unapproachable , in their way , as are Shakespeare 's sublimities .
Whatsoever is perfect in its kind , in literature , is imperishable : nobody can imitate it successfully , nobody can hope to produce its fellow ; it is perfect , it must and will stand alone : its immortality is secure .
It is not a fraud who speaks in the following paragraph of the author's Preface , but a good man , an honest man , a man whose conscience is at rest , a man who believes he has done a high and worthy work for his nation and his generation , and is well pleased with his performance :
One can not open this book anywhere and not find richness .
To prove that this is true , I will open it at random and copy the page I happen to stumble upon .
Here is the result :
We will first to see him in oudside , after we shall go in there for to look the interior .
The chasing of all they figures is astonishing ' indeed .
It is the town hall .
What are then the edifices the worthest to have seen ?
It is the arsnehal , the spectacle 's hall , the Cusiomhouse , and the Purse .
He is of the Saxony side .
You ought never to take your little brother 's `` chewing-gum '' away from him by main force ; it is better to rope him in with the promise of the first two dollars and a half you find floating down the river on a grindstone .
In the artless simplicity natural to this time of life , he will regard it as a perfectly fair transaction .
In all ages of the world this eminently plausible fiction has lured the obtuse infant to financial ruin and disaster .
No kisses drop upon my cheek , These lips are sealed to me .
Dear Lord , how could I give Clara up To any but to Thee ?
A child thus mourned could not die wholly discontented .
From the LEDGER of the same date I make the following extract , merely changing the surname , as before :
No kisses drop upon my cheek ; These lips are sealed to me .
Dear Lord , how could I give Johnnie up To any but to Thee ?
That merry shout no more I hear , No laughing child I see , No little arms are round my neck , No feet upon my knee ;
In the LEDGER ( same copy referred to above ) I find the following ( I alter surname , as usual ) :
-- On the 5th inst.
, Mary C. Welch , wife of William B. Welch , and daughter of Catharine and George W. Markland , in the 29th year of her age .
`` The man would be a fool who tried to add anything to that .
Let us pray ! ''
The man looked puzzled .
`` But it is for accident insurance , and if you are going to travel by rail -- ''
But I was mistaken .
There was never a prize in the the lot .
I could read of railway accidents every day -- the newspaper atmosphere was foggy with them ; but somehow they never came my way .
I found I had spent a good deal of money in the accident business , and had nothing to show for it .
My suspicions were aroused , and I began to hunt around for somebody that had won in this lottery .
I found plenty of people who had invested , but not an individual that had ever had an accident or made a cent .
I stopped buying accident tickets and went to ciphering .
The result was astounding .
THE PERIL LAY NOT IN TRAVELING , BUT IN STAYING AT HOME .
( One can see now why I answered that ticket-agent in the manner recorded at the top of this sketch . )
King William wears large bushy side-whiskers , and some critics have thought that this portrait would be more complete if they were added .
But it was not possible .
There was not room for side-whiskers and epaulets both , and so I let the whiskers go , and put in the epaulets , for the sake of style .
That thing on his hat is an eagle .
The Prussian eagle -- it is a national emblem .
When I say hat I mean helmet ; but it seems impossible to make a picture of a helmet that a body can have confidence in .
`` Many a time I 've had to listen without retort to an old saying that is irritatingly true , and until now seemed to offer no chance for a return jibe : 'An Englishman does dearly love a lord ' ; but after this I shall talk back , and say , 'How about the Americans ? '
That is to say , it envies the lord 's place .
On two accounts , I think : its Power and its Conspicuousness .
`` Do you see that gentleman going along there ?
The king , class G , is happy in the cold collation and the police parade provided for him by the king , class B , and goes home and tells the family all about it , and says :
When a queen whose qualities of mind and heart and character are able to add distinction to so distinguished a place as a throne , remembers with grateful exultation , after thirty years , honors and distinctions conferred upon her by the humble , wild creatures of the forest , we are helped to realize that complimentary attentions , homage , distinctions , are of no caste , but are above all cast -- that they are a nobility-conferring power apart .
We all like these things .
When the gate-guard at the railway-station passes me through unchallenged and examines other people 's tickets , I feel as the king , class A , felt when the emperor put the imperial hand on his shoulder , `` everybody seeing him do it '' ; and as the child felt when the random dog allowed her to pat his head and ostracized the others ; and as the princess felt when the wasps spared her and stung the rest ; and I felt just so , four years ago in Vienna ( and remember it yet ) , when the helmeted police shut me off , with fifty others , from a street which the Emperor was to pass through , and the captain of the squad turned and saw the situation and said indignantly to that guard :
Let him through ! ''
-- The new creature says its name is Eve .
That is all right , I have no objections .
Says it is to call it by , when I want it to come .
I said it was superfluous , then .
The word evidently raised me in its respect ; and indeed it is a large , good word and will bear repetition .
It says it is not an It , it is a She .
This is probably doubtful ; yet it is all one to me ; what she is were nothing to me if she would but go by herself and not talk .
I went over the Falls in a barrel -- not satisfactory to her .
Went over in a tub -- still not satisfactory .
Swam the Whirlpool and the Rapids in a fig-leaf suit .
It got much damaged .
Hence , tedious complaints about my extravagance .
I am too much hampered here .
What I need is a change of scene .
-- I believe I see what the week is for : it is to give time to rest up from the weariness of Sunday .
It seems a good idea .
... She has been climbing that tree again .
Clodded her out of it .
She said nobody was looking .
Seems to consider that a sufficient justification for chancing any dangerous thing .
The word justification moved her admiration -- and envy , too , I thought .
It is a good word .
-- She has taken up with a snake now .
The other animals are glad , for she was always experimenting with them and bothering them ; and I am glad because the snake talks , and this enables me to get a rest .
-- We have named it Cain .
She caught it while I was up country trapping on the North Shore of the Erie ; caught it in the timber a couple of miles from our dug-out -- or it might have been four , she isn't certain which .
It resembles us in some ways , and may be a relation .
That is what she thinks , but this is an error , in my judgment .
The difference in size warrants the conclusion that it is a different and new kind of animal -- a fish , perhaps , though when I put it in the water to see , it sank , and she plunged in and snatched it out before there was opportunity for the experiment to determine the matter .
I still think it is a fish , but she is indifferent about what it is , and will not let me have it to try .
I do not understand this .
The coming of the creature seems to have changed her whole nature and made her unreasonable about experiments .
She thinks more of it than she does of any of the other animals , but is not able to explain why .
Her mind is disordered -- everything shows it .
Sometimes she carries the fish in her arms half the night when it complains and wants to get to the water .
At such times the water comes out of the places in her face that she looks out of , and she pats the fish on the back and makes soft sounds with her mouth to soothe it , and betrays sorrow and solicitude in a hundred ways .
I have never seen her do like this with any other fish , and it troubles me greatly .
She used to carry the young tigers around so , and play with them , before we lost our property , but it was only play ; she never took on about them like this when their dinner disagreed with them .
-- She does n't work , Sundays , but lies around all tired out , and likes to have the fish wallow over her ; and she makes fool noises to amuse it , and pretends to chew its paws , and that makes it laugh .
I have not seen a fish before that could laugh .
This makes me doubt ... .
I have come to like Sunday myself .
Superintending all the week tires a body so .
There ought to be more Sundays .
In the old days they were tough , but now they come handy .
-- It is n't a fish .
I can not quite make out what it is .
It makes curious devilish noises when not satisfied , and says `` goo-goo '' when it is .
It is not one of us , for it does n't walk ; it is not a bird , for it does n't fly ; it is not a frog , for it does n't hop ; it is not a snake , for it does n't crawl ; I feel sure it is not a fish , though I can not get a chance to find out whether it can swim or not .
It merely lies around , and mostly on its back , with its feet up .
I have not seen any other animal do that before .
I said I believed it was an enigma ; but she only admired the word without understanding it .
In my judgment it is either an enigma or some kind of a bug .
If it dies , I will take it apart and see what its arrangements are .
I never had a thing perplex me so .
-- The perplexity augments instead of diminishing .
I sleep but little .
It has ceased from lying around , and goes about on its four legs now .
Yet it differs from the other four legged animals , in that its front legs are unusually short , consequently this causes the main part of its person to stick up uncomfortably high in the air , and this is not attractive .
It is built much as we are , but its method of traveling shows that it is not of our breed .
The short front legs and long hind ones indicate that it is a of the kangaroo family , but it is a marked variation of that species , since the true kangaroo hops , whereas this one never does .
Still it is a curious and interesting variety , and has not been catalogued before .
As I discovered it , I have felt justified in securing the credit of the discovery by attaching my name to it , and hence have called it KANGAROORUM ADAMIENSIS ... .
It must have been a young one when it came , for it has grown exceedingly since .
It must be five times as big , now , as it was then , and when discontented it is able to make from twenty-two to thirty-eight times the noise it made at first .
Coercion does not modify this , but has the contrary effect .
For this reason I discontinued the system .
She reconciles it by persuasion , and by giving it things which she had previously told me she would n't give it .
As already observed , I was not at home when it first came , and she told me she found it in the woods .
It seems odd that it should be the only one , yet it must be so , for I have worn myself out these many weeks trying to find another one to add to my collection , and for this to play with ; for surely then it would be quieter and we could tame it more easily .
But I find none , nor any vestige of any ; and strangest of all , no tracks .
It has to live on the ground , it can not help itself ; therefore , how does it get about without leaving a track ?
I have set a dozen traps , but they do no good .
I catch all small animals except that one ; animals that merely go into the trap out of curiosity , I think , to see what the milk is there for .
They never drink it .
-- I have been comparing the new one with the old one , and it is perfectly plain that they are of the same breed .
I was going to stuff one of them for my collection , but she is prejudiced against it for some reason or other ; so I have relinquished the idea , though I think it is a mistake .
It would be an irreparable loss to science if they should get away .
The old one is tamer than it was and can laugh and talk like a parrot , having learned this , no doubt , from being with the parrot so much , and having the imitative faculty in a high developed degree .
I shall be astonished if it turns out to be a new kind of parrot ; and yet I ought not to be astonished , for it has already been everything else it could think of since those first days when it was a fish .
The new one is as ugly as the old one was at first ; has the same sulphur-and-raw-meat complexion and the same singular head without any fur on it .
She calls it Abel .
-- They are BOYS ; we found it out long ago .
It was their coming in that small immature shape that puzzled us ; we were not used to it .
There are some girls now .
Abel is a good boy , but if Cain had stayed a bear it would have improved him .
After all these years , I see that I was mistaken about Eve in the beginning ; it is better to live outside the Garden with her than inside it without her .
At first I thought she talked too much ; but now I should be sorry to have that voice fall silent and pass out of my life .
Blessed be the chestnut that brought us near together and taught me to know the goodness of her heart and the sweetness of her spirit !
-- It is up there yet .
But that is a subterfuge : Sunday is n't the day of rest ; Saturday is appointed for that .
It looks to me like a creature that is more interested in resting than it anything else .
It would tire me to rest so much .
It tires me just to sit around and watch the tree .
I do wonder what it is for ; I never see it do anything .
-- All the week I tagged around after him and tried to get acquainted .
I had to do the talking , because he was shy , but I did n't mind it .
He seemed pleased to have me around , and I used the sociable `` we '' a good deal , because it seemed to flatter him to be included .
But when night came I could not bear the lonesomeness , and went to the new shelter which he has built , to ask him what I had done that was wrong and how I could mend it and get back his kindness again ; but he put me out in the rain , and it was my first sorrow .
He picked up one to examine it , but changed his mind and put it down again .
Then he went away .
We have made long excursions , and I have seen a great deal of the world ; almost all of it , I think ; and so I am the first traveler , and the only one .
When we are on the march , it is an imposing sight -- there 's nothing like it anywhere .
For comfort I ride a tiger or a leopard , because it is soft and has a round back that fits me , and because they are such pretty animals ; but for long distance or for scenery I ride the elephant .
He hoists me up with his trunk , but I can get off myself ; when we are ready to camp , he sits and I slide down the back way .
It is not on account of his chivalry that I love him -- no , it is not that .
He told on me , but I do not blame him ; it is a peculiarity of sex , I think , and he did not make his sex .
Of course I would not have told on him , I would have perished first ; but that is a peculiarity of sex , too , and I do not take credit for it , for I did not make my sex .
It is what I think .
But I am only a girl , the first that has examined this matter , and it may turn out that in my ignorance and inexperience I have not got it right .
The old captain looked steadily at this inquirer awhile , and then got up and walked aft without making any reply .
One passenger after another stole a furtive glance at the inquirer ; but failed to make him out , and so gave him up .
It took some little work to get the talk-machinery to running smoothly again after this derangement ; but at length a conversation sprang up about that important and jealously guarded instrument , a ship 's timekeeper , its exceeding delicate accuracy , and the wreck and destruction that have sometimes resulted from its varying a few seemingly trifling moments from the true time ; then , in due course , my comrade , the Reverend , got off on a yarn , with a fair wind and everything drawing .
It was a true story , too -- about Captain Rounceville 's shipwreck -- true in every detail .
It was to this effect :
5 P.M. Exit one husband and one bachelor .
These still had their infallible in cargo when they started , but arrived at the companionway without it .
The rout seems permanent ; hence the smallness of the company at table since the voyage began .
Our captain is a grave , handsome Hercules of thirty-five , with a brown hand of such majestic size that one can not eat for admiring it and wondering if a single kid or calf could furnish material for gloving it .
Grave stare from the captain , whose mighty jaws cease to work , and whose harpooned potato stops in midair on its way to his open , paralyzed mouth .
Presently he says in measured tones , `` Is it your idea that the engineer of this ship propels her by a crank turned by his own hands ? ''
The pale young man studies over this a moment , then lifts up his guileless eyes , and says , `` Do n't he ? ''
`` Come , belay there !
I have read this kind of rot all my life in poetry and tales and such-like rubbage .
Pity for the poor mariner !
sympathy for the poor mariner !
All right enough , but not in the way the poetry puts it .
Pity for the mariner 's wife !
all right again , but not in the way the poetry puts it .
whose life 's the safest in the whole world The poor mariner 's .
You look at the statistics , you 'll see .
So do n't you fool away any sympathy on the poor mariner 's dangers and privations and sufferings .
Leave that to the poetry muffs .
Now you look at the other side a minute .
Here is Captain Brace , forty years old , been at sea thirty .
On his way now to take command of his ship and sail south from Bermuda .
Next week he 'll be under way ; easy times ; comfortable quarters ; passengers , sociable company ; just enough to do to keep his mind healthy and not tire him ; king over his ship , boss of everything and everybody ; thirty years ' safety to learn him that his profession ai n't a dangerous one .
Now you look back at his home .
His wife 's a feeble woman ; she 's a stranger in New York ; shut up in blazing hot or freezing cold lodgings , according to the season ; do n't know anybody hardly ; no company but her lonesomeness and her thoughts ; husband gone six months at a time .
She has borne eight children ; five of them she has buried without her husband ever setting eyes on them .
She watches them all the long nights till they died -- he comfortable on the sea ; she followed them to the grave she heard the clods fall that broke her heart he comfortable on the sea ; she mourned at home , weeks and weeks , missing them every day and every hour -- he cheerful at sea , knowing nothing about it .
Now look at it a minute -- turn it over in your mind and size it : five children born , she among strangers , and him not by to hearten her ; buried , and him not by to comfort her ; think of that !
Sympathy for the poor mariner 's perils is rot ; give it to his wife 's hard lines , where it belongs !
Poetry makes out that all the wife worries about is the dangers her husband 's running .
She 's got substantialer things to worry over , I tell you .
Poetry 's always pitying the poor mariner on account of his perils at sea ; better a blamed sight pity him for the nights he can't sleep for thinking of how he had to leave his wife in her very birth pains , lonesome and friendless , in the thick of disease and trouble and death .
If there 's one thing that can make me madder than another , it's this sappy , damned maritime poetry ! ''
`` I judge it ai n't often , by the way you say it .
Now , you tackle it in dead earnest once , and you 'll find it 'll pay .
Do n't you get discouraged , but hang right on .
First , you wo n't understand it ; but by and by things will begin to clear up , and then you would n't lay it down to eat . ''
`` Own up now ; it stumped you .
Well , I do n't wonder .
You had n't had any experience in raveling such things out , and naturally it was too many for you .
Would you like to have me explain that thing to you , and show you how to get at the meat of these matters ? ''
`` Yes , sir , the country was full of it .
Isaac knew all about that .
You read the Bible .
Do n't you worry about the tough places .
They ai n't tough when you come to think them out and throw light on them .
There ai n't a thing in the Bible but what is true ; all you want is to go prayerfully to work and cipher out how 't was done . ''
We followed the narrow channel a long time , with land on both sides -- low hills that might have been green and grassy , but had a faded look instead .
However , the land-locked water was lovely , at any rate , with its glittering belts of blue and green where moderate soundings were , and its broad splotches of rich brown where the rocks lay near the surface .
Everybody was feeling so well that even the grave , pale young man ( who , by a sort of kindly common consent , had come latterly to be referred to as `` The Ass '' ) received frequent and friendly notice -- which was right enough , for there was no harm in him .
At last we steamed between two island points whose rocky jaws allowed only just enough room for the vessel 's body , and now before us loomed Hamilton on her clustered hillsides and summits , the whitest mass of terraced architecture that exists in the world , perhaps .
Several boats came off to the ship , bringing citizens .
One of these citizens was a faded , diminutive old gentleman , who approached our most ancient passenger with a childlike joy in his twinkling eyes , halted before him , folded his arms , and said , smiling with all his might and with all the simple delight that was in him , `` You do n't know me , John !
Come , out with it now ; you know you do n't ! ''
The Bermudian weeping over the departed exhausts praise when he says , `` He was an onion ! ''
The Bermudian extolling the living hero bankrupts applause when he says , `` He is an onion ! ''
The Bermudian setting his son upon the stage of life to dare and do for himself climaxes all counsel , supplication , admonition , comprehends all ambition , when he says , `` Be an onion ! ''
Considering these things , the question came up , Where do the poor live ?
No answer was arrived at .
Therefore , we agreed to leave this conundrum for future statesmen to wrangle over .
`` Was that the name of the cat ? ''
At this point we observed that an English flag had just been placed at half-mast on a building a hundred yards away .
I and my friends were busy in an instant trying to imagine whose death , among the island dignitaries , could command such a mark of respect as this .
Then a shudder shook them and me at the same moment , and I knew that we had jumped to one and the same conclusion : `` The governor has gone to England ; it is for the British admiral ! ''
`` But would they half-mast the flags here for a boarder , Mr .
`` Why , certainly they would , if he was dead . ''
We gasp , we close up together , and wait .
A vague shape glides out of the dusk and confronts us .
A voice speaks -- demands money !
We contribute with thankful avidity to the new Methodist church , and are happy to think how lucky it was that those little colored Sunday-school scholars did not seize upon everything we had with violence , before we recovered from our momentary helpless condition .
By the light of cigars we write down the names of weightier philanthropists than ourselves on the contribution cards , and then pass on into the farther darkness , saying , What sort of a government do they call this , where they allow little black pious children , with contribution cards , to plunge out upon peaceable strangers in the dark and scare them to death ?
`` Is it early , or is -- ''
I inquired , `` Did he get the shirt ? ''
Here and there on the country roads we found lemon , papaw , orange , lime , and fig trees ; also several sorts of palms , among them the cocoa , the date , and the palmetto .
We saw some bamboos forty feet high , with stems as thick as a man 's arm .
Jungles of the mangrove tree stood up out of swamps ; propped on their interlacing roots as upon a tangle of stilts .
In drier places the noble tamarind sent down its grateful cloud of shade .
Here and there the blossomy tamarisk adorned the roadside .
There was a curious gnarled and twisted black tree , without a single leaf on it .
It might have passed itself off for a dead apple tree but for the fact that it had a a star-like , red-hot flower sprinkled sparsely over its person .
It had the scattery red glow that a constellation might have when glimpsed through smoked glass .
It is possible that our constellations have been so constructed as to be invisible through smoked glass ; if this is so it is a great mistake .
We passed a roadside grocery with a sign up , `` Potatoes Wanted . ''
An ignorant stranger , doubtless .
He could not have gone thirty steps from his place without finding plenty of them .
In several fields the arrowroot crop was already sprouting .
Bermuda used to make a vast annual profit out of this staple before firearms came into such general use .
He shed an official glance upon the situation , and then began to give orders .
Two women-servants came out with pails and brooms and brushes , and gave the sidewalk a thorough scrubbing ; meanwhile two others scrubbed the four marble steps which led up to the door ; beyond these we could see some men-servants taking up the carpet of the grand staircase .
This carpet was carried away and the last grain of dust beaten and banged and swept out of it ; then brought back and put down again .
The brass stair-rods received an exhaustive polishing and were returned to their places .
Now a troop of servants brought pots and tubs of blooming plants and formed them into a beautiful jungle about the door and the base of the staircase .
Other servants adorned all the balconies of the various stories with flowers and banners ; others ascended to the roof and hoisted a great flag on a staff there .
Now came some more chamber-maids and retouched the sidewalk , and afterward wiped the marble steps with damp cloths and finished by dusting them off with feather brushes .
Now a broad black carpet was brought out and laid down the marble steps and out across the sidewalk to the curbstone .
The PORTIER cast his eye along it , and found it was not absolutely straight ; he commanded it to be straightened ; the servants made the effort -- made several efforts , in fact -- but the PORTIER was not satisfied .
He finally had it taken up , and then he put it down himself and got it right .
This hotel had a feature which was a decided novelty , and one which might be adopted with advantage by any house which is perched in a commanding situation .
This feature may be described as a series of glass-enclosed parlors CLINGING TO THE OUTSIDE OF THE HOUSE , one against each and every bed-chamber and drawing-room .
They are like long , narrow , high-ceiled bird-cages hung against the building .
My room was a corner room , and had two of these things , a north one and a west one .
From the north cage one looks up the Neckar gorge ; from the west one he looks down it .
This last affords the most extensive view , and it is one of the loveliest that can be imagined , too .
Out of a billowy upheaval of vivid green foliage , a rifle-shot removed , rises the huge ruin of Heidelberg Castle , [ 2 .
See Appendix B ] with empty window arches , ivy-mailed battlements , moldering towers -- the Lear of inanimate nature -- deserted , discrowned , beaten by the storms , but royal still , and beautiful .
It is a fine sight to see the evening sunlight suddenly strike the leafy declivity at the Castle 's base and dash up it and drench it as with a luminous spray , while the adjacent groves are in deep shadow .
The first night we were there , we went to bed and to sleep early ; but I awoke at the end of two or three hours , and lay a comfortable while listening to the soothing patter of the rain against the balcony windows .
I took it to be rain , but it turned out to be only the murmur of the restless Neckar , tumbling over her dikes and dams far below , in the gorge .
I got up and went into the west balcony and saw a wonderful sight .
Away down on the level under the black mass of the Castle , the town lay , stretched along the river , its intricate cobweb of streets jeweled with twinkling lights ; there were rows of lights on the bridges ; these flung lances of light upon the water , in the black shadows of the arches ; and away at the extremity of all this fairy spectacle blinked and glowed a massed multitude of gas-jets which seemed to cover acres of ground ; it was as if all the diamonds in the world had been spread out there .
I did not know before , that a half-mile of sextuple railway-tracks could be made such an adornment .
`` So he flew off and fetched another acorn and dropped it in , and tried to flirt his eye to the hole quick enough to see what become of it , but he was too late .
He held his eye there as much as a minute ; then he raised up and sighed , and says , 'Confound it , I do n't seem to understand this thing , no way ; however , I 'll tackle her again . '
He fetched another acorn , and done his level best to see what become of it , but he could n't .
He says , 'Well , I never struck no such a hole as this before ; I 'm of the opinion it 's a totally new kind of a hole . '
Then he begun to get mad .
He held in for a spell , walking up and down the comb of the roof and shaking his head and muttering to himself ; but his feelings got the upper hand of him , presently , and he broke loose and cussed himself black in the face .
I never see a bird take on so about a little thing .
When he got through he walks to the hole and looks in again for half a minute ; then he says , 'Well , you 're a long hole , and a deep hole , and a mighty singular hole altogether -- but I 've started in to fill you , and I 'm damned if I DO N'T fill you , if it takes a hundred years ! '
`` They called in more jays ; then more and more , till pretty soon this whole region 'peared to have a blue flush about it .
There must have been five thousand of them ; and such another jawing and disputing and ripping and cussing , you never heard .
Every jay in the whole lot put his eye to the hole and delivered a more chuckle-headed opinion about the mystery than the jay that went there before him .
They examined the house all over , too .
The door was standing half open , and at last one old jay happened to go and light on it and look in .
Of course , that knocked the mystery galley-west in a second .
There lay the acorns , scattered all over the floor..
He flopped his wings and raised a whoop .
he says , 'Come here , everybody ; hang 'd if this fool has n't been trying to fill up a house with acorns ! '
They all came a-swooping down like a blue cloud , and as each fellow lit on the door and took a glance , the whole absurdity of the contract that that first jay had tackled hit him home and he fell over backward suffocating with laughter , and the next jay took his place and done the same .
[ The Laborious Beer King ]
Nine-tenths of the Heidelberg students wore no badge or uniform ; the other tenth wore caps of various colors , and belonged to social organizations called `` corps . ''
There were five corps , each with a color of its own ; there were white caps , blue caps , and red , yellow , and green ones .
The famous duel-fighting is confined to the `` corps '' boys .
The `` KNEIP '' seems to be a specialty of theirs , too .
Kneips are held , now and then , to celebrate great occasions , like the election of a beer king , for instance .
The solemnity is simple ; the five corps assemble at night , and at a signal they all fall loading themselves with beer , out of pint-mugs , as fast as possible , and each man keeps his own count -- usually by laying aside a lucifer match for each mug he empties .
`` Gentlemen , '' -- then , without a smile , he corrected himself , saying --
Finally the doctor finished , and the men who were to fight the closing battle of the day came forth .
A good many dinners were not completed , yet , but no matter , they could be eaten cold , after the battle ; therefore everybody crowded forth to see .
This was not a love duel , but a `` satisfaction '' affair .
These two students had quarreled , and were here to settle it .
They did not belong to any of the corps , but they were furnished with weapons and armor , and permitted to fight here by the five corps as a courtesy .
Evidently these two young men were unfamiliar with the dueling ceremonies , though they were not unfamiliar with the sword .
When they were placed in position they thought it was time to begin -- and then did begin , too , and with a most impetuous energy , without waiting for anybody to give the word .
This vastly amused the spectators , and even broke down their studied and courtly gravity and surprised them into laughter .
Of course the seconds struck up the swords and started the duel over again .
At the word , the deluge of blows began , but before long the surgeon once more interfered -- for the only reason which ever permits him to interfere -- and the day 's war was over .
It was now two in the afternoon , and I had been present since half past nine in the morning .
The field of battle was indeed a red one by this time ; but some sawdust soon righted that .
There had been one duel before I arrived .
In it one of the men received many injuries , while the other one escaped without a scratch .
Illustrations taken from an 1880 First Edition
PORTRAIT OF THE AUTHOR 2 .
TITIAN 'S MOSES 3 .
THE AUTHOR 'S MEMORIES 32 .
THE CHALLENGE ACCEPTED 34 .
HE SWOONED PONDEROUSLY 36 .
I ROLLED HIM OVER 37 .
THE ONE I HIRED 36 .
THE MARCH TO THE FIELD 39 .
THE POST OF DANGER 40 .
AN OBJECT OF ADMIRATION 42 .
A CUSTOMARY THING 47 .
ONE OF THE `` REST '' 48 .
A CONTRIBUTION BOX 49 .
ONLY A SHRIEK 52 .
`` HE ONLY CRY '' 53 .
LATE COMERS CARED FOR 54 .
`` TURN ON MORE RAIN '' 56 .
HARRIS ATTENDING THE OPERA 57 .
PAINTING MY GREAT PICTURE 58 .
AN UNKNOWN COSTUME 60 .
SLOW BUT SURE 62 .
THE ROBBER CHIEF 63 .
AN HONEST MAN 64 .
THE TOWN BY NIGHT 65 .
GENERATIONS OF BAREFEET 66 .
A NIGHT 'S WORK 70 .
CHAPTER XIV A Famous Turn -- out -- Raftsmen on the Neckar -- The Log Rafts -- The Neckar -- A Sudden Idea -- To Heidelberg on a Raft -- Chartering a Raft -- Gloomy Feelings and Conversation -- Delicious Journeying -- View of the Banks -- Compared with Railroading
I said I supposed he would wish me to act as his second , and he said , `` Of course . ''
I said I must be allowed to act under a French name , so that I might be shielded from obloquy in my country , in case of fatal results .
He winced here , probably at the suggestion that dueling was not regarded with respect in America .
However , he agreed to my requirement .
This accounts for the fact that in all the newspaper reports M. Gambetta 's second was apparently a Frenchman .
First , we drew up my principal 's will .
I insisted upon this , and stuck to my point .
I said I had never heard of a man in his right mind going out to fight a duel without first making his will .
He said he had never heard of a man in his right mind doing anything of the kind .
When he had finished the will , he wished to proceed to a choice of his `` last words . ''
He wanted to know how the following words , as a dying exclamation , struck me :
`` I die for my God , for my country , for freedom of speech , for progress , and the universal brotherhood of man ! ''
`` That 's about the size of it , '' I said .
`` Now , if it is a fair question , what was your side proposing to shed ? ''
He came back presently and said his principal was charmed with the idea of brickbats at three-quarters of a mile , but must decline on account of the danger to disinterested parties passing between them .
`` Oh , without doubt , monsieur ! ''
So he fell to hunting in his pockets -- pocket after pocket , and he had plenty of them -- muttering all the while , `` Now , what could I have done with them ? ''
At last he was successful .
He fished out of his vest pocket a couple of little things which I carried to the light and ascertained to be pistols .
They were single-barreled and silver-mounted , and very dainty and pretty .
I was not able to speak for emotion .
I silently hung one of them on my watch-chain , and returned the other .
My companion in crime now unrolled a postage-stamp containing several cartridges , and gave me one of them .
I asked if he meant to signify by this that our men were to be allowed but one shot apiece .
He replied that the French code permitted no more .
I then begged him to go and suggest a distance , for my mind was growing weak and confused under the strain which had been put upon it .
He named sixty-five yards .
I nearly lost my patience .
`` Behold , I am calm , I am ready ; reveal to me the distance . ''
After a long silence he asked :
He now sank into a sort of stupor of reflection , which lasted some minutes ; after which he broke silence with :
I never heard of such a thing .
Nobody is abroad at such an hour . ''
`` That is the reason I named it .
Do you mean to say you want an audience ? ''
`` It is entirely agreeable to me , and I am obliged to you for mentioning the surgeons , for I am afraid I should not have thought of them .
How many shall I want ?
I supposed two or three will be enough ? ''
`` Tut , tut !
What words are these , my dear friend ?
Have I wounded you ?
Ah , forgive me ; I am overloading you with labor .
Therefore go on with the other details , and drop this one from your list .
The bloody-minded Fourtou will be sure to attend to it .
Or I myself -- yes , to make certain , I will drop a note to my journalistic friend , M. Noir -- ''
At this point the police noticed that the public had massed themselves together on the right and left of the field ; they therefore begged a delay , while they should put these poor people in a place of safety .
This speech had so good an effect that my principal immediately stretched forth his hand and said , `` I am myself again ; give me the weapon . ''
`` Why , madam , MY experience warrants me in stating that that tenor's voice is not a voice at all , but only a shriek -- the shriek of a hyena . ''
One evening on board a Mississippi steamboat , a boy of ten years lay asleep in a berth -- a long , slim-legged boy , he was , encased in quite a short shirt ; it was the first time he had ever made a trip on a steamboat , and so he was troubled , and scared , and had gone to bed with his head filled with impending snaggings , and explosions , and conflagrations , and sudden death .
About ten o'clock some twenty ladies were sitting around about the ladies ' saloon , quietly reading , sewing , embroidering , and so on , and among them sat a sweet , benignant old dame with round spectacles on her nose and her busy knitting-needles in her hands .
Now all of a sudden , into the midst of this peaceful scene burst that slim-shanked boy in the brief shirt , wild-eyed , erect-haired , and shouting , `` Fire , fire !
JUMP AND RUN , THE BOAT 'S AFIRE AND THERE AI N'T A MINUTE TO LOSE ! ''
All those ladies looked sweetly up and smiled , nobody stirred , the old lady pulled her spectacles down , looked over them , and said , gently :
Apparently nobody had ever done that .
There were ruined castles on the overhanging cliffs and crags all the way ; these were said to have their legends , like those on the Rhine , and what was better still , they had never been in print .
There was nothing in the books about that lovely region ; it had been neglected by the tourist , it was virgin soil for the literary pioneer .
And sure enough , not only she but her father and sister spoke English .
So after that we had all the talk we wanted ; and we wanted a good deal , for they were agreeable people .
They were greatly interested in our customs ; especially the alpenstocks , for they had not seen any before .
They said that the Neckar road was perfectly level , so we must be going to Switzerland or some other rugged country ; and asked us if we did not find the walking pretty fatiguing in such warm weather .
But we said no .
We reached Wimpfen -- I think it was Wimpfen -- in about three hours , and got out , not the least tired ; found a good hotel and ordered beer and dinner -- then took a stroll through the venerable old village .
It was very picturesque and tumble-down , and dirty and interesting .
It had queer houses five hundred years old in it , and a military tower 115 feet high , which had stood there more than ten centuries .
I made a little sketch of it .
I kept a copy , but gave the original to the Burgomaster .
A round table as large as King Arthur 's stood in the center of the room ; while the waiters were getting ready to serve our dinner on it we all went out to see the renowned clock on the front of the municipal buildings .
We went down by the river and saw the Square Tower .
It was a very venerable structure , very strong , and very ornamental .
There was no opening near the ground .
They had to use a ladder to get into it , no doubt .
Very well , presently the gates swung open and out filed those women carrying their HUSBANDS on their shoulders .
The besiegers , furious at the trick , rushed forward to slaughter the men , but the Duke stepped between and said :
Mr. X had ordered the dinner , and when the wine came on , he picked up a bottle , glanced at the label , and then turned to the grave , the melancholy , the sepulchral head waiter and said it was not the sort of wine he had asked for .
The head waiter picked up the bottle , cast his undertaker-eye on it and said :
We were in bed by ten , for we wanted to be up and away on our tramp homeward with the dawn .
I hung fire , but Harris went to sleep at once .
I hate a man who goes to sleep at once ; there is a sort of indefinable something about it which is not exactly an insult , and yet is an insolence ; and one which is hard to bear , too .
I lay there fretting over this injury , and trying to go to sleep ; but the harder I tried , the wider awake I grew .
I got to feeling very lonely in the dark , with no company but an undigested dinner .
My mind got a start by and by , and began to consider the beginning of every subject which has ever been thought of ; but it never went further than the beginning ; it was touch and go ; it fled from topic to topic with a frantic speed .
At the end of an hour my head was in a perfect whirl and I was dead tired , fagged out .
Well , what was done could not be helped ; I would go to sleep at once and make up the lost time .
That was a thoughtless thought .
Without intending it -- hardly knowing it -- I fell to listening intently to that sound , and even unconsciously counting the strokes of the mouse 's nutmeg-grater .
Presently I was deriving exquisite suffering from this employment , yet maybe I could have endured it if the mouse had attended steadily to his work ; but he did not do that ; he stopped every now and then , and I suffered more while waiting and listening for him to begin again than I did while he was gnawing .
Along at first I was mentally offering a reward of five -- six -- seven -- ten -- dollars for that mouse ; but toward the last I was offering rewards which were entirely beyond my means .
I close-reefed my ears -- that is to say , I bent the flaps of them down and furled them into five or six folds , and pressed them against the hearing-orifice -- but it did no good : the faculty was so sharpened by nervous excitement that it was become a microphone and could hear through the overlays without trouble .
At last all sleepiness forsook me .
I recognized the fact that I was hopelessly and permanently wide awake .
Wide awake , and feverish and thirsty .
When I had lain tossing there as long as I could endure it , it occurred to me that it would be a good idea to dress and go out in the great square and take a refreshing wash in the fountain , and smoke and reflect there until the remnant of the night was gone .
I made a sketch of the turnout .
It is not a Work , it is only what artists call a `` study '' -- a thing to make a finished picture from .
This sketch has several blemishes in it ; for instance , the wagon is not traveling as fast as the horse is .
Again , the person trying to get out of the way is too small ; he is out of perspective , as we say .
The two upper lines are not the horse 's back , they are the reigns ; there seems to be a wheel missing -- this would be corrected in a finished Work , of course .
This thing flying out behind is not a flag , it is a curtain .
That other thing up there is the sun , but I did n't get enough distance on it .
I do not remember , now , what that thing is that is in front of the man who is running , but I think it is a haystack or a woman .
This study was exhibited in the Paris Salon of 1879 , but did not take any medal ; they do not give medals for studies .
Their faces paled a little , but they assented with as good a grace as they could .
Harris wanted to cable his mother -- thought it his duty to do that , as he was all she had in this world -- so , while he attended to this , I went down to the longest and finest raft and hailed the captain with a hearty `` Ahoy , shipmate ! ''
which put us upon pleasant terms at once , and we entered upon business .
I said we were on a pedestrian tour to Heidelberg , and would like to take passage with him .
I said this partly through young Z , who spoke German very well , and partly through Mr. X , who spoke it peculiarly .
I can UNDERSTAND German as well as the maniac that invented it , but I TALK it best through an interpreter .
The captain hitched up his trousers , then shifted his quid thoughtfully .
Presently he said just what I was expecting he would say -- that he had no license to carry passengers , and therefore was afraid the law would be after him in case the matter got noised about or any accident happened .
So I CHARTERED the raft and the crew and took all the responsibilities on myself .
Only the men did this ; the women were too busy .
The women do all kinds of work on the continent .
They dig , they hoe , they reap , they sow , they bear monstrous burdens on their backs , they shove similar ones long distances on wheelbarrows , they drag the cart when there is no dog or lean cow to drag it -- and when there is , they assist the dog or cow .
Age is no matter -- the older the woman the stronger she is , apparently .
On the farm a woman 's duties are not defined -- she does a little of everything ; but in the towns it is different , there she only does certain things , the men do the rest .
For instance , a hotel chambermaid has nothing to do but make beds and fires in fifty or sixty rooms , bring towels and candles , and fetch several tons of water up several flights of stairs , a hundred pounds at a time , in prodigious metal pitchers .
She does not have to work more than eighteen or twenty hours a day , and she can always get down on her knees and scrub the floors of halls and closets when she is tired and needs a rest .
`` Three points off the weather bow ! ''
An Ancient Legend of the Rhine [ The Lorelei ]
It is not possible that it is much known in America , else I should have heard it there .
The fact that I never heard it there , is evidence that there are others in my country who have fared likewise ; therefore , for the sake of these , I mean to print the words and music in this chapter .
And I will refresh the reader 's memory by printing the legend of the Lorelei , too .
I have it by me in the LEGENDS OF THE RHINE , done into English by the wildly gifted Garnham , Bachelor of Arts .
I print the legend partly to refresh my own memory , too , for I have never read it before .
THE LEGEND Lore ( two syllables ) was a water nymph who used to sit on a high rock called the Ley or Lei ( pronounced like our word LIE ) in the Rhine , and lure boatmen to destruction in a furious rapid which marred the channel at that spot .
She so bewitched them with her plaintive songs and her wonderful beauty that they forgot everything else to gaze up at her , and so they presently drifted among the broken reefs and were lost .
`` An unintentional cry of Joy escaped the Youth , he let his Zither fall , and with extended arms he called out the name of the enigmatical Being , who seemed to stoop lovingly to him and beckon to him in a friendly manner ; indeed , if his ear did not deceive him , she called his name with unutterable sweet Whispers , proper to love .
Beside himself with delight the youth lost his Senses and sank senseless to the earth . ''
That Hermann should have gone to that place at all , was not wise ; that he should have gone with such a song as that in his mouth was a most serious mistake .
The Lorelei did not `` call his name in unutterable sweet Whispers '' this time .
No , that song naturally worked an instant and thorough `` changement '' in her ; and not only that , but it stirred the bowels of the whole afflicted region around about there -- for --
`` Scarcely had these tones sounded , everywhere there began tumult and sound , as if voices above and below the water .
On the Lei rose flames , the Fairy stood above , at that time , and beckoned with her right hand clearly and urgently to the infatuated Knight , while with a staff in her left hand she called the waves to her service .
They began to mount heavenward ; the boat was upset , mocking every exertion ; the waves rose to the gunwale , and splitting on the hard stones , the Boat broke into Pieces .
The youth sank into the depths , but the squire was thrown on shore by a powerful wave . ''
Here is the music , and the German words by Heinrich Heine .
This song has been a favorite in Germany for forty years , and will remain a favorite always , maybe .
If I were at home , no doubt I could get a translation of this poem , but I am abroad and ca n't ; therefore I will make a translation myself .
It may not be a good one , for poetry is out of my line , but it will serve my purpose -- which is , to give the unGerman young girl a jingle of words to hang the tune on until she can get hold of a good version , made by some one who is a poet and knows how to convey a poetical thought from one language to another .
So the most renowned knights came from the four corners of the earth and retired down the dragon 's throat one after the other .
A panic arose and spread .
The dragon became more destructive than ever .
The people lost all hope of succor , and fled to the mountains for refuge .
`` It is not a knapsack , '' and moved straight on .
`` Aye-aye , sir ! ''
`` What water have you got ? ''
`` Shoal , sir .
Two foot large , on the stabboard , two and a half scant on the labboard ! ''
`` Right aft the second row of logs . ''
Never mind the man !
Let him climb aboard or wade ashore ! ''
`` Stop that dashed bailing , or we shall be aground ! ''
The next moment we were all on shore weeping and embracing for joy , while the rain poured down in torrents .
The captain said he had been a mariner for forty years on the Neckar , and in that time had seen storms to make a man 's cheek blanch and his pulses stop , but he had never , never seen a storm that even approached this one .
How familiar that sounded !
For I have been at sea a good deal and have heard that remark from captains with a frequency accordingly .
`` The Naturalist Tavern '' was not a meaningless name ; for all the halls and all the rooms were lined with large glass cases which were filled with all sorts of birds and animals , glass-eyed , ably stuffed , and set up in the most natural eloquent and dramatic attitudes .
The moment we were abed , the rain cleared away and the moon came out .
I dozed off to sleep while contemplating a great white stuffed owl which was looking intently down on me from a high perch with the air of a person who thought he had met me before , but could not make out for certain .
We descended from the church by steep stone stairways which curved this way and that down narrow alleys between the packed and dirty tenements of the village .
It was a quarter well stocked with deformed , leering , unkempt and uncombed idiots , who held out hands or caps and begged piteously .
The people of the quarter were not all idiots , of course , but all that begged seemed to be , and were said to be .
`` There , do n't strain yourself -- it is of no consequence . ''
We changed our mind about taking a boat , so we did not have to go .
I have given Mr. X 's two remarks just as he made them .
Four of the five words in the first one were English , and that they were also German was only accidental , not intentional ; three out of the five words in the second remark were English , and English only , and the two German ones did not mean anything in particular , in such a connection .
Any European-born student can belong to it , except he be a Frenchman .
No student can belong to it who is not of noble blood .
No moneyless student can belong to it .
As we sat at a late breakfast in the hotel at Allerheiligen , next morning , these young people entered and took places near us without observing us ; but presently they saw us and at once bowed and smiled ; not ceremoniously , but with the gratified look of people who have found acquaintances where they were expecting strangers .
Then they spoke of the weather and the roads .
We also spoke of the weather and the roads .
Next , they said they had had an enjoyable walk , notwithstanding the weather .
We said that that had been our case , too .
Then they said they had walked thirty English miles the day before , and asked how many we had walked .
I could not lie , so I told Harris to do it .
Harris told them we had made thirty English miles , too .
That was true ; we had `` made '' them , though we had had a little assistance here and there .
Being safe , now , I began to puzzle through my sincere but ungrammatical thanks , when there was a sudden mutual recognition -- the benefactress and I had met at Allerheiligen .
Two weeks had not altered her good face , and plainly her heart was in the right place yet , but there was such a difference between these clothes and the clothes I had seen her in before , when she was walking thirty miles a day in the Black Forest , that it was quite natural that I had failed to recognize her sooner .
I had on MY other suit , too , but my German would betray me to a person who had heard it once , anyway .
She brought her brother and sister , and they made our way smooth for that evening .
We crossed over in a boat and began the ascent by a narrow , steep path which plunged us at once into the leafy deeps of the bushes .
But they were not cool deeps by any means , for the sun 's rays were weltering hot and there was little or no breeze to temper them .
As we panted up the sharp ascent , we met brown , bareheaded and barefooted boys and girls , occasionally , and sometimes men ; they came upon us without warning , they gave us good day , flashed out of sight in the bushes , and were gone as suddenly and mysteriously as they had come .
They were bound for the other side of the river to work .
This path had been traveled by many generations of these people .
They have always gone down to the valley to earn their bread , but they have always climbed their hill again to eat it , and to sleep in their snug town .
Our alpenstocks and muslin tails compelled attention , and as we moved through the village we gathered a considerable procession of little boys and girls , and so went in some state to the castle .
It proved to be an extensive pile of crumbling walls , arches , and towers , massive , properly grouped for picturesque effect , weedy , grass-grown , and satisfactory .
The children acted as guides ; they walked us along the top of the highest walls , then took us up into a high tower and showed us a wide and beautiful landscape , made up of wavy distances of woody hills , and a nearer prospect of undulating expanses of green lowlands , on the one hand , and castle-graced crags and ridges on the other , with the shining curves of the Neckar flowing between .
But the principal show , the chief pride of the children , was the ancient and empty well in the grass-grown court of the castle .
Its massive stone curb stands up three or four feet above-ground , and is whole and uninjured .
The children said that in the Middle Ages this well was four hundred feet deep , and furnished all the village with an abundant supply of water , in war and peace .
They said that in the old day its bottom was below the level of the Neckar , hence the water-supply was inexhaustible .
In a moment several people came , and grouped themselves about , talking in whispers .
Conrad looked up and scanned the faces about him wistfully .
`` 'T was a marvelous jest , and bravely carried out .
They gave you a heavy sleeping-draught before you went to bed , and in the night they bore you to a ruined chamber where all had fallen to decay , and placed these rags of clothing by you .
And when your sleep was spent and you came forth , two strangers , well instructed in their parts , were here to meet you ; and all we , your friends , in our disguises , were close at hand , to see and hear , you may be sure .
Ah , 't was a gallant jest !
Come , now , and make thee ready for the pleasures of the day .
How real was thy misery for the moment , thou poor lad !
Look up and have thy laugh , now ! ''
The seeker after information is referred to Appendix E for our captain 's legend of the `` Swallow 's Nest '' and `` The Brothers . ''
I was the only one of our party who saw this grand sight ; the others were attitudinizing , for the benefit of the long rank of young ladies who were promenading on the bank , and so they lost it .
But I helped to fish them out of the river , down below the bridge , and then described it to them as well as I could .
Among these was my Etruscan tear-jug .
I have made a little sketch of it here ; that thing creeping up the side is not a bug , it is a hole .
I bought this tear-jug of a dealer in antiquities for four hundred and fifty dollars .
It is very rare .
The man said the Etruscans used to keep tears or something in these things , and that it was very hard to get hold of a broken one , now .
`` Say , did n't I put you up right ? ''
When we reached our hotel and it seemed that he was about to lose the Reverend , he showed so much sorrow , and begged so hard and so earnestly that the Reverend 's heart was not hard enough to hold out against the pleadings -- so he went away with the parent-honoring student , like a right Christian , and took supper with him in his lodgings , and sat in the surf-beat of his slang and profanity till near midnight , and then left him -- left him pretty well talked out , but grateful `` clear down to his frogs , '' as he expressed it .
The Reverend said it had transpired during the interview that `` Cholley '' Adams 's father was an extensive dealer in horses in western New York ; this accounted for Cholley's choice of a profession .
The Reverend brought away a pretty high opinion of Cholley as a manly young fellow , with stuff in him for a useful citizen ; he considered him rather a rough gem , but a gem , nevertheless .
`` NACH BELIEBE '' ( what you please . )
-- and she calmly , indifferently , repeats :
You are getting angry , but you are trying not to show it ; you resolve to keep on asking your question till she changes her answer , or at least her annoyingly indifferent manner .
Therefore , if your case be like mine , you two fools stand there , and without perceptible emotion of any kind , or any emphasis on any syllable , you look blandly into each other's eyes , and hold the following idiotic conversation :
There is an interesting old cemetery in Baden-Baden , and we spent several pleasant hours in wandering through it and spelling out the inscriptions on the aged tombstones .
Apparently after a man has laid there a century or two , and has had a good many people buried on top of him , it is considered that his tombstone is not needed by him any longer .
I judge so from the fact that hundreds of old gravestones have been removed from the graves and placed against the inner walls of the cemetery .
What artists they had in the old times !
They chiseled angels and cherubs and devils and skeletons on the tombstones in the most lavish and generous way -- as to supply -- but curiously grotesque and outlandish as to form .
It is not always easy to tell which of the figures belong among the blest and which of them among the opposite party .
But there was an inscription , in French , on one of those old stones , which was quaint and pretty , and was plainly not the work of any other than a poet .
It was to this effect :
The walls of another room were covered with grotesquely and elaborately figured hand-wrought tapestry .
The musty ancient beds remained in the chambers , and their quilts and curtains and canopies were decorated with curious handwork , and the walls and ceilings frescoed with historical and mythological scenes in glaring colors .
There was enough crazy and rotten rubbish in the building to make a true brick-a-bracker green with envy .
A painting in the dining-hall verged upon the indelicate -- but then the Margravine was herself a trifle indelicate .
Illustrations taken from an 1880 First Edition
CHAPTER XXII The Black Forest -- A Grandee and his Family -- The Wealthy Nabob -- A New Standard of Wealth -- Skeleton for a New Novel -- Trying Situation -- The Common Council -- Choosing a New Member Studying Natural History -- The Ant a Fraud -- Eccentricities of the Ant -- His Deceit and Ignorance -- A German Dish -- Boiled Oranges
CHAPTER XXV Lucerne -- Beauty of its Lake -- The Wild Chamois -- A Great Error Exposed -- Methods of Hunting the Chamois -- Beauties of Lucerne -- The Alpenstock -- Marking Alpenstocks -- Guessing at Nationalities -- An American Party -- An Unexpected Acquaintance -- Getting Mixed Up -- Following Blind Trails -- A Happy Half -- hour -- Defeat and Revenge
Those woods stretch unbroken over a vast region ; and everywhere they are such dense woods , and so still , and so piney and fragrant .
The stems of the trees are trim and straight , and in many places all the ground is hidden for miles under a thick cushion of moss of a vivid green color , with not a decayed or ragged spot in its surface , and not a fallen leaf or twig to mar its immaculate tidiness .
A rich cathedral gloom pervades the pillared aisles ; so the stray flecks of sunlight that strike a trunk here and a bough yonder are strongly accented , and when they strike the moss they fairly seem to burn .
But the weirdest effect , and the most enchanting is that produced by the diffused light of the low afternoon sun ; no single ray is able to pierce its way in , then , but the diffused light takes color from moss and foliage , and pervades the place like a faint , green-tinted mist , the theatrical fire of fairyland .
The suggestion of mystery and the supernatural which haunts the forest at all times is intensified by this unearthly glow .
[ Interval of two weeks . ]
We took our noon meal of fried trout one day at the Plow Inn , in a very pretty village ( Ottenhoefen ) , and then went into the public room to rest and smoke .
There we found nine or ten Black Forest grandees assembled around a table .
They were the Common Council of the parish .
They had gathered there at eight o'clock that morning to elect a new member , and they had now been drinking beer four hours at the new member 's expense .
We followed the carriage-road , and had our usual luck ; we traveled under a beating sun , and always saw the shade leave the shady places before we could get to them .
In all our wanderings we seldom managed to strike a piece of road at its time for being shady .
We had a particularly hot time of it on that particular afternoon , and with no comfort but what we could get out of the fact that the peasants at work away up on the steep mountainsides above our heads were even worse off than we were .
By and by it became impossible to endure the intolerable glare and heat any longer ; so we struck across the ravine and entered the deep cool twilight of the forest , to hunt for what the guide-book called the `` old road . ''
`` Baked , they were tough ; and even boiled , they war n't things for a hungry man to hanker after . ''
`` No , no , you do n't get my meaning yet .
What I mean is , does he belong to any CHURCH ? ''
`` Well , if he done it a-purpose , I reckon he would n't stand no chance -- he OUGHT N'T to have no chance , anyway , I 'm most rotten certain 'bout that . ''
`` What is your name ? ''
A third joke was played upon Nicodemus a day or two later -- he walked up the middle aisle of the village church , Sunday night , with a staring handbill pinned between his shoulders .
The joker spent the remainder of the night , after church , in the cellar of a deserted house , and Nicodemus sat on the cellar door till toward breakfast-time to make sure that the prisoner remembered that if any noise was made , some rough treatment would be the consequence .
The cellar had two feet of stagnant water in it , and was bottomed with six inches of soft mud .
This was done -- about half past ten in the evening .
About Nicodemus's usual bedtime -- midnight -- the village jokers came creeping stealthily through the jimpson weeds and sunflowers toward the lonely frame den .
They reached the window and peeped in .
There sat the long-legged pauper , on his bed , in a very short shirt , and nothing more ; he was dangling his legs contentedly back and forth , and wheezing the music of `` Camptown Races '' out of a paper-overlaid comb which he was pressing against his mouth ; by him lay a new jewsharp , a new top , and solid india-rubber ball , a handful of painted marbles , five pounds of `` store '' candy , and a well-gnawed slab of gingerbread as big and as thick as a volume of sheet-music .
He had sold the skeleton to a traveling quack for three dollars and was enjoying the result !
[ I Protect the Empress of Germany ]
I lay abed and read and rested from my journey 's fatigues the remainder of that Sunday , but I sent my agent to represent me at the afternoon service , for I never allow anything to interfere with my habit of attending church twice every Sunday .
I suppose there are two kinds of music -- one kind which one feels , just as an oyster might , and another sort which requires a higher faculty , a faculty which must be assisted and developed by teaching .
Yet if base music gives certain of us wings , why should we want any other ?
We want it because the higher and better like it .
We want it without giving it the necessary time and trouble ; so we climb into that upper tier , that dress-circle , by a lie ; we PRETEND we like it .
I know several of that sort of people -- and I propose to be one of them myself when I get home with my fine European education .
[ Hunted by the Little Chamois ]
Thus it is his regimental flag , so to speak , and bears the record of his achievements .
It is worth three francs when he buys it , but a bonanza could not purchase it after his great deeds have been inscribed upon it .
There are artisans all about Switzerland whose trade it is to burn these things upon the alpenstock of the tourist .
And observe , a man is respected in Switzerland according to his alpenstock .
I found I could get no attention there , while I carried an unbranded one .
However , branding is not expected , so I soon remedied that .
The effect upon the next detachment of tourists was very marked .
I felt repaid for my trouble .
Harris said , sarcastically , `` Certainly , that is the thing to do .
All you need to do is to use the common formula over here : go and say , 'I 'm an American ! '
Of course she will be glad to see you . ''
I said , `` I was only talking -- I did n't intend to approach her , but I see that you do not know what an intrepid person I am .
I am not afraid of any woman that walks .
I will go and speak to this young girl . ''
`` I KNEW I was n't mistaken -- I told John it was you !
John said it probably was n't , but I knew I was right .
I said you would recognize me presently and come over ; and I 'm glad you did , for I should n't have felt much flattered if you had gone out of this room without recognizing me .
Sit down , sit down -- how odd it is -- you are the last person I was ever expecting to see again . ''
`` Indeed I do ! ''
`` Dear me , how it all comes back ! ''
`` Indeed he did .
He said he did not believe she was half as much to blame as her father was , and I thought he was right .
Did n't you ? ''
`` So he was , but then they always had a great affection for him , although he had so many eccentricities .
You remember that when the weather was the least cold , he would try to come into the house . ''
He had a thousand ! ''
I did not quite know what to say , so I only said :
`` Yes he was .
And what a pretty little thing his child was ! ''
`` You named it .
What WAS that name ?
I ca n't call it to mind . ''
`` From a relative , I suppose ?
But you named the one that died , too -- one that I never saw .
What did you call that one ? ''
`` I called that one Thomas Henry . ''
Your delicacy is beyond praise .
Go on , go on -- do n't mind my apparent misery -- I always look so when I am steeped in a profound and reverent joy .
Go on -- she told you her age ? ''
`` Did she volunteer these statistics ? ''
`` No , not exactly that .
I asked the questions and she answered them . ''
`` Has she any children . ''
`` Yes -- seven and a half . ''
`` There is a child which she had by another husband -- not this one but another one -- so it is a stepchild , and they do not count in full measure . ''
Has she another husband ? ''
`` No , that is her son .
He is her youngest .
He is not as old as he looked ; he is only eleven and a half . ''
`` There is one man who is deeply grateful for that .
How did you find out ?
You asked , I suppose ? ''
`` No , along at first I inquired into their plans , in a general way , and they said they were going to be here a week , and make trips round about ; but toward the end of the interview , when I said you and I would tour around with them with pleasure , and offered to bring you over and introduce you , they hesitated a little , and asked if you were from the same establishment that I was .
I said you were , and then they said they had changed their mind and considered it necessary to start at once and visit a sick relative in Siberia . ''
[ The Nest of the Cuckoo-clock ]
Around about are green trees and grass .
The place is a sheltered , reposeful woodland nook , remote from noise and stir and confusion -- and all this is fitting , for lions do die in such places , and not on granite pedestals in public squares fenced with fancy iron railings .
The Lion of Lucerne would be impressive anywhere , but nowhere so impressive as where he is .
What I meant , was , that I would break one of his legs , or something of that sort ; but in Lucerne I instantly saw that I could impair his mind .
That would be more lasting , and more satisfactory every way .
So I bought the cuckoo clock ; and if I ever get home with it , he is `` my meat , '' as they say in the mines .
I thought of another candidate -- a book-reviewer whom I could name if I wanted to -- but after thinking it over , I didn't buy him a clock .
I could n't injure his mind .
The lake is alive with fishes , plainly visible to the eye , for the water is very clear .
The parapets in front of the hotels were usually fringed with fishers of all ages .
One day I thought I would stop and see a fish caught .
The result brought back to my mind , very forcibly , a circumstance which I had not thought of before for twelve years .
`` I am Mr. Riley .
Did you happen to be looking for me ? ''
`` Yes ... yes , '' said Riley , meditatively , `` you are right again .
Then you take the train for New York in the evening , and the steamer for San Francisco next morning ? ''
`` Well , about eleven o'clock that night he came back and ordered a bed and told them to put the horses up -- said he would collect the claim in the morning .
This was in January , you understand -- January , 1834 -- the 3d of January -- Wednesday .
`` On the 13th of December he sold another horse -- said two warn't necessary to drag that old light vehicle with -- in fact , one could snatch it along faster than was absolutely necessary , now that it was good solid winter weather and the roads in splendid condition .
`` On the 1st August he sold the buggy and bought the remains of an old sulky -- said he just wanted to see those green Tennesseans stare and gawk when they saw him come a-ripping along in a sulky -- did n't believe they'd ever heard of a sulky in their lives .
`` Well , on the 29th of August he sold his colored coachman -- said he did n't need a coachman for a sulky -- would n't be room enough for two in it anyway -- and , besides , it was n't every day that Providence sent a man a fool who was willing to pay nine hundred dollars for such a third-rate negro as that -- been wanting to get rid of the creature for years , but did n't like to THROW him away .
The stranger broke it :
`` That is all . ''
`` Well , where 's the point of it ? ''
It took a mighty force to churn these big lumps of stone around in that vigorous way .
The neighboring country had a very different shape , at that time -- the valleys have risen up and become hills , since , and the hills have become valleys .
The boulders discovered in the pots had traveled a great distance , for there is no rock like them nearer than the distant Rhone Glacier .
`` Have you felt bored , on this trip ? ''
`` I think so . ''
`` Do n't you do it !
You stop at one of those big hotels over the bridge -- they 're packed full of Americans . ''
`` Yes , I know -- but I had an idea there war n't any Americans there . ''
`` That 's what I call it .
I like this knocking around , loose and easy , and making acquaintances and talking .
I know an American , soon as I see him ; so I go and speak to him and make his acquaintance .
I ai n't ever bored , on a trip like this , if I can make new acquaintances and talk .
I 'm awful fond of talking when I can get hold of the right kind of a person , ain't you ? ''
`` VILLE DE PARIS . ''
Half an hour later I was sitting on a bench inspecting , with strong interest , a noble monolith which we were skimming by -- a monolith not shaped by man , but by Nature 's free great hand -- a massy pyramidal rock eighty feet high , devised by Nature ten million years ago against the day when a man worthy of it should need it for his monument .
The time came at last , and now this grand remembrancer bears Schiller 's name in huge letters upon its face .
Curiously enough , this rock was not degraded or defiled in any way .
It is said that two years ago a stranger let himself down from the top of it with ropes and pulleys , and painted all over it , in blue letters bigger than those in Schiller 's name , these words : `` Try Sozodont ; '' `` Buy Sun Stove Polish ; '' `` Helmbold 's Buchu ; '' `` Try Benzaline for the Blood . ''
He was captured and it turned out that he was an American .
Upon his trial the judge said to him :
`` Only to one of us ; they are mine ; my friend is not married . ''
`` No -- my husband is with us . ''
`` Well , then you stop at the Schreiber -- it 's full of Americans .
What ship did you come over in ? ''
`` Yes -- generally .
But there are exception to the rule . ''
Presently we came upon half a dozen sheep nibbling grass in the spray of a stream of clear water that sprang from a rock wall a hundred feet high , and all at once our ears were startled with a melodious `` Lul ... l ... l l l llul-lul-LAhee-o-o-o ! ''
pealing joyously from a near but invisible source , and recognized that we were hearing for the first time the famous Alpine JODEL in its own native wilds .
And we recognized , also , that it was that sort of quaint commingling of baritone and falsetto which at home we call `` Tyrolese warbling . ''
In the morning we both awoke and leaped out of bed at the same instant and ran and stripped aside the window-curtains ; but we suffered a bitter disappointment again : it was already half past three in the afternoon .
We were in a bleak , unsheltered place , now , and had to trudge right along , in order to keep warm , though we rather expected to go over a precipice , sooner or later .
About nine o'clock we made an important discovery -- that we were not in any path .
We groped around a while on our hands and knees , but we could not find it ; so we sat down in the mud and the wet scant grass to wait .
`` And have you done any better , I 'd like to know ?
I 've always used to get up with the lark , till I came under the petrifying influence of your turgid intellect . ''
`` YOU used to get up with the lark -- Oh , no doubt -- you 'll get up with the hangman one of these days .
But you ought to be ashamed to be jawing here like this , in a red blanket , on a forty-foot scaffold on top of the Alps .
And no end of people down here to boot ; this is n't any place for an exhibition of temper . ''
And so the customary quarrel went on .
When the sun was fairly down , we slipped back to the hotel in the charitable gloaming , and went to bed again .
We had encountered the horn-blower on the way , and he had tried to collect compensation , not only for announcing the sunset , which we did see , but for the sunrise , which we had totally missed ; but we said no , we only took our solar rations on the `` European plan '' -- pay for what you get .
He promised to make us hear his horn in the morning , if we were alive .
A TRAMP ABROAD , Part 5 .
CHAPTER XXXIII The Giesbach Falls -- The Spirit of the Alps -- Why People Visit Them -- Whey and Grapes as Medicines -- The Kursaal -- A Formidable Undertaking -- From Interlaken to Zermatt on Foot -- We Concluded to take a Buggy -- A Pair of Jolly Drivers -- We meet with Companions -- A Cheerful Ride -- Kandersteg Valley -- An Alpine Parlor -- Exercise and Amusement -- A Race with a Log
`` Oh , this is luck !
We sha n't have to go out at all -- yonder are the mountains , in full view . ''
There was no level ground at the Kaltbad station ; the railbed was as steep as a roof ; I was curious to see how the stop was going to be managed .
But it was very simple ; the train came sliding down , and when it reached the right spot it just stopped -- that was all there was `` to it '' -- stopped on the steep incline , and when the exchange of passengers and baggage had been made , it moved off and went sliding down again .
The train can be stopped anywhere , at a moment 's notice .
By the time one reaches Kaltbad , he has acquired confidence in the railway , and he now ceases to try to ease the locomotive by holding back .
Thenceforth he smokes his pipe in serenity , and gazes out upon the magnificent picture below and about him with unfettered enjoyment .
There is nothing to interrupt the view or the breeze ; it is like inspecting the world on the wing .
However -- to be exact -- there is one place where the serenity lapses for a while ; this is while one is crossing the Schnurrtobel Bridge , a frail structure which swings its gossamer frame down through the dizzy air , over a gorge , like a vagrant spider-strand .
OF A VISIT TO THE FURKA REGION .
`` What is 'GNILLIC ' ?
`` What does 'MMBGLX ' stand for ? ''
It 's Choctaw . ''
That is Choctaw , also . ''
`` That is Chinese for 'hill . '
`` 'But we were again overtaken by bad HOGGLEBUMGULLUP . '
What does 'HOGGLEBUMGULLUP ' mean ? ''
`` And 'DINGBLATTER ' and 'GNILLIC , ' and 'BOPPLE , ' and 'SCHNAWP ' -- are they better than the English words ? ''
Everybody that writes elegantly .
Anybody has a right to that wants to . ''
We got away pretty early in the morning , after a hot breakfast , and went bowling over a hard , smooth road , through the summer loveliness of Switzerland , with near and distant lakes and mountains before and about us for the entertainment of the eye , and the music of multitudinous birds to charm the ear .
Sometimes there was only the width of the road between the imposing precipices on the right and the clear cool water on the left with its shoals of uncatchable fish skimming about through the bars of sun and shadow ; and sometimes , in place of the precipices , the grassy land stretched away , in an apparently endless upward slant , and was dotted everywhere with snug little chalets , the peculiarly captivating cottage of Switzerland .
In the course of the morning we passed the spot where Pontius Pilate is said to have thrown himself into the lake .
The legend goes that after the Crucifixion his conscience troubled him , and he fled from Jerusalem and wandered about the earth , weary of life and a prey to tortures of the mind .
Eventually , he hid himself away , on the heights of Mount Pilatus , and dwelt alone among the clouds and crags for years ; but rest and peace were still denied him , so he finally put an end to his misery by drowning himself .
Our talk was mostly anticipatory of what we should see on the down-grade of the Bruenig , by and by , after we should pass the summit .
All our friends in Lucerne had said that to look down upon Meiringen , and the rushing blue-gray river Aar , and the broad level green valley ; and across at the mighty Alpine precipices that rise straight up to the clouds out of that valley ; and up at the microscopic chalets perched upon the dizzy eaves of those precipices and winking dimly and fitfully through the drifting veil of vapor ; and still up and up , at the superb Oltschiback and the other beautiful cascades that leap from those rugged heights , robed in powdery spray , ruffled with foam , and girdled with rainbows -- to look upon these things , they say , was to look upon the last possibility of the sublime and the enchanting .
Therefore , as I say , we talked mainly of these coming wonders ; if we were conscious of any impatience , it was to get there in favorable season ; if we felt any anxiety , it was that the day might remain perfect , and enable us to see those marvels at their best .
Up to this point we had been in the heart of the William Tell region .
The hero is not forgotten , by any means , or held in doubtful veneration .
His wooden image , with his bow drawn , above the doors of taverns , was a frequent feature of the scenery .
`` It IS nahsty . ''
`` No , it IS N'T nahsty . ''
Then the question was , what she must have .
She said he knew very well that she never drank anything but champagne .
`` Well , you would HAVE me -- nothing else would do -- so you 'll have to make the best of a bad bargain .
DO order the champagne , I 'm Oful dry . ''
We heard two or three different languages spoken by people at the table and guessed out the nationalities of most of the guests to our satisfaction , but we failed with an elderly gentleman and his wife and a young girl who sat opposite us , and with a gentleman of about thirty-five who sat three seats beyond Harris .
We did not hear any of these speak .
But finally the last-named gentleman left while we were not noticing , but we looked up as he reached the far end of the table .
He stopped there a moment , and made his toilet with a pocket comb .
So he was a German ; or else he had lived in German hotels long enough to catch the fashion .
When the elderly couple and the young girl rose to leave , they bowed respectfully to us .
So they were Germans , too .
This national custom is worth six of the other one , for export .
We located ourselves at the Jungfrau Hotel , one of those huge establishments which the needs of modern travel have created in every attractive spot on the continent .
There was a great gathering at dinner , and , as usual , one heard all sorts of languages .
There was a small piano in this room , a clattery , wheezy , asthmatic thing , certainly the very worst miscarriage in the way of a piano that the world has seen .
In turn , five or six dejected and homesick ladies approached it doubtingly , gave it a single inquiring thump , and retired with the lockjaw .
But the boss of that instrument was to come , nevertheless ; and from my own country -- from Arkansaw .
The bride fetched a swoop with her fingers from one end of the keyboard to the other , just to get her bearings , as it were , and you could see the congregation set their teeth with the agony of it .
Then , without any more preliminaries , she turned on all the horrors of the `` Battle of Prague , '' that venerable shivaree , and waded chin-deep in the blood of the slain .
She made a fair and honorable average of two false notes in every five , but her soul was in arms and she never stopped to correct .
The audience stood it with pretty fair grit for a while , but when the cannonade waxed hotter and fiercer , and the discord average rose to four in five , the procession began to move .
A few stragglers held their ground ten minutes longer , but when the girl began to wring the true inwardness out of the `` cries of the wounded , '' they struck their colors and retired in a kind of panic .
Walking down the street of shops , in the fore-noon , I was attracted by a large picture , carved , frame and all , from a single block of chocolate-colored wood .
There are people who know everything .
Some of these had told us that continental shopkeepers always raise their prices on English and Americans .
Many people had told us it was expensive to buy things through a courier , whereas I had supposed it was just the reverse .
When I saw this picture , I conjectured that it was worth more than the friend I proposed to buy it for would like to pay , but still it was worth while to inquire ; so I told the courier to step in and ask the price , as if he wanted it for himself ; I told him not to speak in English , and above all not to reveal the fact that he was a courier .
Then I moved on a few yards , and waited .
The courier came presently and reported the price .
I said to myself , `` It is a hundred francs too much , '' and so dismissed the matter from my mind .
But in the afternoon I was passing that place with Harris , and the picture attracted me again .
We stepped in , to see how much higher broken German would raise the price .
The shopwoman named a figure just a hundred francs lower than the courier had named .
This was a pleasant surprise .
I said I would take it .
After I had given directions as to where it was to be shipped , the shopwoman said , appealingly :
`` If you please , do not let your courier know you bought it . ''
`` Oh , I begin to see .
You would have had to pay the courier a percentage . ''
At custom-houses the multitude file tediously through , hot and irritated , and look on while the officers burrow into the trunks and make a mess of everything ; but you hand your keys to the courier and sit still .
Perhaps you arrive at your destination in a rain-storm at ten at night -- you generally do .
The multitude spend half an hour verifying their baggage and getting it transferred to the omnibuses ; but the courier puts you into a vehicle without a moment 's loss of time , and when you reach your hotel you find your rooms have been secured two or three days in advance , everything is ready , you can go at once to bed .
Some of those other people will have to drift around to two or three hotels , in the rain , before they find accommodations .
He said that men cured in this way , and enabled to discard the grape system , never afterward got over the habit of talking as if they were dictating to a slow amanuensis , because they always made a pause between each two words while they sucked the substance out of an imaginary grape .
He said these were tedious people to talk with .
He said that men who had been cured by the other process were easily distinguished from the rest of mankind because they always tilted their heads back , between every two words , and swallowed a swig of imaginary whey .
He said it was an impressive thing to observe two men , who had been cured by the two processes , engaged in conversation -- said their pauses and accompanying movements were so continuous and regular that a stranger would think himself in the presence of a couple of automatic machines .
One finds out a great many wonderful things , by traveling , if he stumbles upon the right person .
The summer departed with the sun , and winter came with the stars .
It grew to be a bitter night in that little hotel , backed up against a precipice that had no visible top to it , but we kept warm , and woke in time in the morning to find that everybody else had left for Gemmi three hours before -- so our little plan of helping that German family ( principally the old man ) over the pass , was a blocked generosity .
Close at hand , now , was a chance for a blood-curdling Alpine adventure .
Close at hand was the snowy mass of the Great Altels cooling its topknot in the sky and daring us to an ascent .
I was fired with the idea , and immediately made up my mind to procure the necessary guides , ropes , etc.
, and undertake it .
I instructed Harris to go to the landlord of the inn and set him about our preparations .
Meantime , I went diligently to work to read up and find out what this much-talked-of mountain-climbing was like , and how one should go about it -- for in these matters I was ignorant .
I opened Mr. Hinchliff 's SUMMER MONTHS AMONG THE ALPS ( published 1857 ) , and selected his account of his ascent of Monte Rosa .
`` Slowly and steadily we kept on our way over this dangerous part of the ascent , and I dare say it was fortunate for some of us that attention was distracted from the head by the paramount necessity of looking after the feet ; FOR , WHILE ON THE LEFT THE INCLINE OF ICE WAS SO STEEP THAT IT WOULD BE IMPOSSIBLE FOR ANY MAN TO SAVE HIMSELF IN CASE OF A SLIP , UNLESS THE OTHERS COULD HOLD HIM UP , ON THE RIGHT WE MIGHT DROP A PEBBLE FROM THE HAND OVER PRECIPICES OF UNKNOWN EXTENT DOWN UPON THE TREMENDOUS GLACIER BELOW .
Every few hundred yards , at particularly bad places , one came across a panel or so of plank fencing ; but they were always old and weak , and they generally leaned out over the chasm and did not make any rash promises to hold up people who might need support .
There was one of these panels which had only its upper board left ; a pedestrianizing English youth came tearing down the path , was seized with an impulse to look over the precipice , and without an instant 's thought he threw his weight upon that crazy board .
It bent outward a foot !
I never made a gasp before that came so near suffocating me .
The English youth 's face simply showed a lively surprise , but nothing more .
He went swinging along valleyward again , as if he did not know he had just swindled a coroner by the closest kind of a shave .
`` And MY mind is made up .
He goes to the Museum . ''
`` The widow may save herself the trouble of whistling , for I will see that she never gets him . ''
`` It seems to me that you are taking on a good many airs about these remains .
I do n't quite see what YOU 'VE got to say about them ? ''
PORTRAIT OF THE AUTHOR 2 .
TITIAN 'S MOSES 3 .
THE AUTHOR 'S MEMORIES 236 .
A SUNDAY MORNING 'S DEMON 237 .
SCENE IN VALLEY OF ZERMATT 239 .
ARRIVAL AT ZERMATT 240 .
A FEARFUL FALL 242 .
THE DISABLED CHAPLAIN 248 .
TWENTY MINUTES WORK 251 .
THE BLACK RAM 252 .
THE NEW GUIDE 251 .
OCCASIONLY MET WITH 258 .
SUMMIT OF THE GORNER GRAT 259 .
CHIEFS OF THE ADVANCE GUARD 260 .
MY PICTURE OF THE MATTERHORN 261 .
EVERYBODY HAD AN EXCUSE 262 .
SPRUNG A LEAK 263 .
A SCIENTIFIC QUESTION 264 .
A TERMINAL MORAINE 265 .
FRONT OF GLACIER 266 .
AN OLD MORAINE 267 .
GLACIER OF ZERMATT WITH LATERAL MORAINE 269 .
UNEXPECTED MEETING OF FRIENDS 269 .
VILLAGE OF CHAMONIX 270 .
ON THE SUMMIT 272 .
ACCIDENT ON THE MATTERHORN ( 1865 ) 273 .
STORAGE OF ANCESTORS 275 .
FALLING OUT OF HIS FARM 276 .
CHILD LIFE IN SWITZERLAND 277 .
A SUNDAY PLAY 278 .
THE TETE NOIR 281 .
MONT BLANC 'S NEIGHBORS 282 .
AN EXQUISITE THING 283 .
A WILD RIDE 284 .
CHAPTER XXXVIII Our Expedition Continued -- Experiments with the Barometer -- Boiling Thermometer -- Barometer Soup -- An Interesting Scientific Discovery -- Crippling a Latinist -- A Chaplain Injured -- Short of Barkeepers -- Digging a Mountain Cellar -- A Young American Specimen -- Somebody 's Grandson -- Arrival at Riffelberg Botel -- Ascent of Gorner Grat -- Faith in Thermometers -- The Matterhorn
[ The Fiendish Fun of Alp-climbing ]
To me , that mighty glacier was very beautiful .
I did not imagine that anybody could find fault with it ; but I was mistaken .
Harris had been snarling for several days .
He was a rabid Protestant , and he was always saying :
But I concealed the feeling , and asked :
`` They would whitewash it .
They always do . ''
I cheered the noble fellow with praises , and soon his fears were forgotten and he was eager for the adventure .
He wanted to summon the guides at once and leave at two in the morning , as he supposed the custom was ; but I explained that nobody was looking at that hour ; and that the start in the dark was not usually made from the village but from the first night 's resting-place on the mountain side .
I said we would leave the village at 3 or 4 P.M. on the morrow ; meantime he could notify the guides , and also let the public know of the attempt which we proposed to make .
Myself 1 Veterinary Surgeon Mr. Harris 1 Butler 17 Guides 12 Waiters 4 Surgeons 1 Footman 1 Geologist 1 Barber 1 Botanist 1 Head Cook 3 Chaplains 9 Assistants 2 Draftsman 4 Pastry Cooks 15 Barkeepers 1 Confectionery Artist 1 Latinist
It was full four o'clock in the afternoon before my cavalcade was entirely ready .
At that hour it began to move .
In point of numbers and spectacular effect , it was the most imposing expedition that had ever marched from Zermatt .
Clearly it was no time to show weakness .
So I made a speech in which I said that other Alp-climbers had been in as perilous a position as this , and yet by courage and perseverance had escaped .
I promised to stand by them , I promised to rescue them .
I closed by saying we had plenty of provisions to maintain us for quite a siege -- and did they suppose Zermatt would allow half a mile of men and mules to mysteriously disappear during any considerable time , right above their noses , and make no inquiries ?
No , Zermatt would send out searching-expeditions and we should be saved .
We were puzzled for a while ; then somebody thought of the ladders .
One of these was leaned against the rock , and the men went up it tied together in couples .
Another ladder was sent up for use in descending .
At the end of half an hour everybody was over , and that rock was conquered .
We gave our first grand shout of triumph .
But the joy was short-lived , for somebody asked how we were going to get the animals over .
Whenever a climber tried to assist himself by the rope , it yielded and let him tumble backward .
The frequency of this result suggested an idea to me .
I ordered the caravan to 'bout face and form in marching order ; I then made the tow-rope fast to the rear mule , and gave the command :
The procession began to move , to the impressive strains of a battle-chant , and I said to myself , `` Now , if the rope do n't break I judge THIS will fetch that guide into the camp . ''
I watched the rope gliding down the hill , and presently when I was all fixed for triumph I was confronted by a bitter disappointment ; there was no guide tied to the rope , it was only a very indignant old black ram .
The fury of the baffled Expedition exceeded all bounds .
They even wanted to wreak their unreasoning vengeance on this innocent dumb brute .
But I stood between them and their prey , menaced by a bristling wall of ice-axes and alpenstocks , and proclaimed that there was but one road to this murder , and it was directly over my corpse .
Even as I spoke I saw that my doom was sealed , except a miracle supervened to divert these madmen from their fell purpose .
I see the sickening wall of weapons now ; I see that advancing host as I saw it then , I see the hate in those cruel eyes ; I remember how I drooped my head upon my breast , I feel again the sudden earthquake shock in my rear , administered by the very ram I was sacrificing myself to save ; I hear once more the typhoon of laughter that burst from the assaulting column as I clove it from van to rear like a Sepoy shot from a Rodman gun .
We lived to find out that that guide had deserted us as soon as he had placed a half-mile between himself and us .
To avert suspicion , he had judged it best that the line should continue to move ; so he caught that ram , and at the time that he was sitting on it making the rope fast to it , we were imagining that he was lying in a swoon , overcome by fatigue and distress .
When he allowed the ram to get up it fell to plunging around , trying to rid itself of the rope , and this was the signal which we had risen up with glad shouts to obey .
We had followed this ram round and round in a circle all day -- a thing which was proven by the discovery that we had watered the Expedition seven times at one and same spring in seven hours .
As expert a woodman as I am , I had somehow failed to notice this until my attention was called to it by a hog .
This hog was always wallowing there , and as he was the only hog we saw , his frequent repetition , together with his unvarying similarity to himself , finally caused me to reflect that he must be the same hog , and this led me to the deduction that this must be the same spring , also -- which indeed it was .
We went into camp on that wild spot to which that ram had brought us .
The men were greatly fatigued .
Their conviction that we were lost was forgotten in the cheer of a good supper , and before the reaction had a chance to set in , I loaded them up with paregoric and put them to bed .
I hunted up another barometer ; it was new and perfect .
I boiled it half an hour in a pot of bean soup which the cooks were making .
The result was unexpected : the instrument was not affecting at all , but there was such a strong barometer taste to the soup that the head cook , who was a most conscientious person , changed its name in the bill of fare .
The dish was so greatly liked by all , that I ordered the cook to have barometer soup every day .
It was believed that the barometer might eventually be injured , but I did not care for that .
I had demonstrated to my satisfaction that it could not tell how high a mountain was , therefore I had no real use for it .
Changes in the weather I could take care of without it ; I did not wish to know when the weather was going to be good , what I wanted to know was when it was going to be bad , and this I could find out from Harris 's corns .
Harris had had his corns tested and regulated at the government observatory in Heidelberg , and one could depend upon them with confidence .
So I transferred the new barometer to the cooking department , to be used for the official mess .
It was found that even a pretty fair article of soup could be made from the defective barometer ; so I allowed that one to be transferred to the subordinate mess .
H. Yes , I find it exceeds all my dreams .
( With a dainty gesture of the hand signifying `` Spare me your callow enthusiasms , good friend . ''
) Yes , _I_ know , I know ; you go to cathedrals , and exclaim ; and you drag through league-long picture-galleries and exclaim ; and you stand here , and there , and yonder , upon historic ground , and continue to exclaim ; and you are permeated with your first crude conceptions of Art , and are proud and happy .
Ah , yes , proud and happy -- that expresses it .
Yes-yes , enjoy it -- it is right -- it is an innocent revel .
Presently the Grandson rose to leave -- discovered he had an appointment with some Emperor , perhaps .
He did his graces over again : gripped me with one talon , at arm's-length , pressed his hat against his stomach with the other , bent his body in the middle three times , murmuring :
Yes , I had made the grand ascent ; but it was a mistake to do it in evening dress .
The plug hats were battered , the swallow-tails were fluttering rags , mud added no grace , the general effect was unpleasant and even disreputable .
Cavilers object that water boils at a lower and lower temperature the higher and higher you go , and hence the apparent anomaly .
I answer that I do not base my theory upon what the boiling water does , but upon what a boiled thermometer says .
You ca n't go behind the thermometer .
The next thing was , how to get down the glacier comfortably -- for the mule-road to it was long , and winding , and wearisome .
I set my mind at work , and soon thought out a plan .
One looks straight down upon the vast frozen river called the Gorner Glacier , from the Gorner Grat , a sheer precipice twelve hundred feet high .
We had one hundred and fifty-four umbrellas -- and what is an umbrella but a parachute ?
I said these words did him extreme credit , but that he must not throw away the imperishable distinction of being the first man to descend an Alp per parachute , simply to save the feelings of some envious underlings .
No , I said , he MUST accept the appointment -- it was no longer an invitation , it was a command .
Upon a discussion of the subject with him , it appeared that he considered the project distinctly and decidedly dangerous .
I was not convinced , yet I was not willing to try the experiment in any risky way -- that is , in a way that might cripple the strength and efficiency of the Expedition .
I was about at my wits ' end when it occurred to me to try it on the Latinist .
I awoke about half past ten next morning , and looked around .
We hadn't budged a peg !
At first I could not understand it ; then it occurred to me that the old thing must be aground .
So I cut down some trees and rigged a spar on the starboard and another on the port side , and fooled away upward of three hours trying to spar her off .
But it was no use .
She was half a mile wide and fifteen or twenty miles long , and there was no telling just whereabouts she WAS aground .
The men began to show uneasiness , too , and presently they came flying to me with ashy faces , saying she had sprung a leak .
When I revealed to Harris the fact that the passenger part of this glacier -- the central part -- the lightning-express part , so to speak -- was not due in Zermatt till the summer of 2378 , and that the baggage , coming along the slow edge , would not arrive until some generations later , he burst out with :
`` Well , then , it 's a government glacier , '' said Harris .
`` It 's all the same .
Over here the government runs everything -- so everything 's slow ; slow , and ill-managed .
But with us , everything 's done by private enterprise -- and then there ai n't much lolling around , you can depend on it .
I wish Tom Scott could get his hands on this torpid old slab once -- you 'd see it take a different gait from this . ''
I said I was sure he would increase the speed , if there was trade enough to justify it .
I am not so ignorant about glacial movement , now , as I was when I took passage on the Gorner Glacier .
I have `` read up '' since .
I am aware that these vast bodies of ice do not travel at the same rate of speed ; while the Gorner Glacier makes less than an inch a day , the Unter-Aar Glacier makes as much as eight ; and still other glaciers are said to go twelve , sixteen , and even twenty inches a day .
One writer says that the slowest glacier travels twenty-five feet a year , and the fastest four hundred .
Two ropes were made fast to his leather belt and he bore the end of a third one in his hand to tie to the victim in case he found him .
He was lowered into the crevice , he descended deeper and deeper between the clear blue walls of solid ice , he approached a bend in the crack and disappeared under it .
Down , and still down , he went , into this profound grave ; when he had reached a depth of eighty feet he passed under another bend in the crack , and thence descended eighty feet lower , as between perpendicular precipices .
Arrived at this stage of one hundred and sixty feet below the surface of the glacier , he peered through the twilight dimness and perceived that the chasm took another turn and stretched away at a steep slant to unknown deeps , for its course was lost in darkness .
What a place that was to be in -- especially if that leather belt should break !
The compression of the belt threatened to suffocate the intrepid fellow ; he called to his friends to draw him up , but could not make them hear .
They still lowered him , deeper and deeper .
Then he jerked his third cord as vigorously as he could ; his friends understood , and dragged him out of those icy jaws of death .
`` One can form some idea of the altitude of this barrier of ice when it is mentioned that from Hofdabrekka farm , which lies high up on a fjeld , one could not see Hjorleifshofdi opposite , which is a fell six hundred and forty feet in height ; but in order to do so had to clamber up a mountain slope east of Hofdabrekka twelve hundred feet high . ''
The Alpine glaciers move -- that is granted , now , by everybody .
But there was a time when people scoffed at the idea ; they said you might as well expect leagues of solid rock to crawl along the ground as expect leagues of ice to do it .
But proof after proof was furnished , and the finally the world had to believe .
The ring-finger had suffered a slight abrasion , and the stain of the blood was still visible and unchanged after forty-one years .
A left foot , the flesh white and fresh .
No portions of the body of Tairraz , other than a piece of the skull , had been found .
A diligent search was made , but without result .
However , another search was instituted a year later , and this had better success .
Many fragments of clothing which had belonged to the lost guides were discovered ; also , part of a lantern , and a green veil with blood-stains on it .
But the interesting feature was this :
`` I overheard your name .
Are you from Chamonix , Monsieur Balmat ? ''
Croz now took the tent-pole , and planted it in the highest snow .
`` Yes , '' we said , `` there is the flag-staff , but where is the flag ? ''
`` Here it is , '' he answered , pulling off his blouse and fixing it to the stick .
It made a poor flag , and there was no wind to float it out , yet it was seen all around .
They saw it at Zermatt -- at the Riffel -- in the Val Tournanche ... .
A few minutes afterward I tied myself to young Peter , ran down after the others , and caught them just as they were commencing the descent of the difficult part .
Great care was being taken .
Only one man was moving at a time ; when he was firmly planted the next advanced , and so on .
They had not , however , attached the additional rope to rocks , and nothing was said about it .
The suggestion was not made for my own sake , and I am not sure that it ever occurred to me again .
For some little distance we two followed the others , detached from them , and should have continued so had not Lord Douglas asked me , about 3 P.M. , to tie on to old Peter , as he feared , he said , that Taugwalder would not be able to hold his ground if a slip occurred .
For more than two hours afterward I thought almost every moment that the next would be my last ; for the Taugwalders , utterly unnerved , were not only incapable of giving assistance , but were in such a state that a slip might have been expected from them at any moment .
After a time we were able to do that which should have been done at first , and fixed rope to firm rocks , in addition to being tied together .
These ropes were cut from time to time , and were left behind .
Even with their assurance the men were afraid to proceed , and several times old Peter turned , with ashy face and faltering limbs , and said , with terrible emphasis , `` I CAN NOT ! ''
It was during this walk from St. Nicholas , in the shadow of the majestic Alps , that we came across some little children amusing themselves in what seemed , at first , a most odd and original way -- but it was n't ; it was in simply a natural and characteristic way .
They were roped together with a string , they had mimic alpenstocks and ice-axes , and were climbing a meek and lowly manure-pile with a most blood-curdling amount of care and caution .
The `` guide '' at the head of the line cut imaginary steps , in a laborious and painstaking way , and not a monkey budged till the step above was vacated .
If we had waited we should have witnessed an imaginary accident , no doubt ; and we should have heard the intrepid band hurrah when they made the summit and looked around upon the `` magnificent view , '' and seen them throw themselves down in exhausted attitudes for a rest in that commanding situation .
In Nevada I used to see the children play at silver-mining .
Of course , the great thing was an accident in a mine , and there were two `` star '' parts ; that of the man who fell down the mimic shaft , and that of the daring hero who was lowered into the depths to bring him up .
I knew one small chap who always insisted on playing BOTH of these parts -- and he carried his point .
He would tumble into the shaft and die , and then come to the surface and go back after his own remains .
Next morning we left with a family of English friends and went by train to Brevet , and thence by boat across the lake to Ouchy ( Lausanne ) .
He spoke in French , and punctuated with hiccoughs .
His friend was French , too , but spoke in German -- using the same system of punctuation , however .
The friend called himself the `` Captain of Mont Blanc , '' and wanted us to make the ascent with him .
He said he had made more ascents than any other man -- forty seven -- and his brother had made thirty-seven .
His brother was the best guide in the world , except himself -- but he , yes , observe him well -- he was the `` Captain of Mont Blanc '' -- that title belonged to none other .
CHAPTER XLVII Geneva -- Shops of Geneva -- Elasticity of Prices -- Persistency of Shop-Women -- The High Pressure System -- How a Dandy was brought to Grief -- American Manners -- Gallantry -- Col Baker of London -- Arkansaw Justice -- Safety of Women in America -- Town of Chambery -- A Lively Place -- At Turin -- A Railroad Companion -- An Insulted Woman -- City of Turin -- Italian Honesty -- A Small Mistake -- Robbing a Beggar Woman
CHAPTER L Why Some things Are -- Art in Rome and Florence -- The Fig Leaf Mania -- Titian 's Venus -- Difference between Seeing and Describing A Real work of Art -- Titian 's Moses -- Home
The hotel was by the side of a booming torrent , whose music was loud and strong ; we could not see this torrent , for it was dark , now , but one could locate it without a light .
There was a large enclosed yard in front of the hotel , and this was filled with groups of villagers waiting to see the diligences arrive , or to hire themselves to excursionists for the morrow .
A telescope stood in the yard , with its huge barrel canted up toward the lustrous evening star .
The long porch of the hotel was populous with tourists , who sat in shawls and wraps under the vast overshadowing bulk of Mont Blanc , and gossiped or meditated .
The daylight passed away .
Presently the moon rose up behind some of those sky-piercing fingers or pinnacles of bare rock of which I have spoken -- they were a little to the left of the crest of Mont Blanc , and right over our heads -- but she could n't manage to climb high enough toward heaven to get entirely above them .
She would show the glittering arch of her upper third , occasionally , and scrape it along behind the comblike row ; sometimes a pinnacle stood straight up , like a statuette of ebony , against that glittering white shield , then seemed to glide out of it by its own volition and power , and become a dim specter , while the next pinnacle glided into its place and blotted the spotless disk with the black exclamation-point of its presence .
The top of one pinnacle took the shapely , clean-cut form of a rabbit 's head , in the inkiest silhouette , while it rested against the moon .
The unillumined peaks and minarets , hovering vague and phantom-like above us while the others were painfully white and strong with snow and moonlight , made a peculiar effect .
While strolling around , we kept the run of the moon all the time , and we still kept an eye on her after we got back to the hotel portico .
I had a theory that the gravitation of refraction , being subsidiary to atmospheric compensation , the refrangibility of the earth 's surface would emphasize this effect in regions where great mountain ranges occur , and possibly so even-handed impact the odic and idyllic forces together , the one upon the other , as to prevent the moon from rising higher than 12,200 feet above sea-level .
This daring theory had been received with frantic scorn by some of my fellow-scientists , and with an eager silence by others .
Among the former I may mention Prof. H -- -- y ; and among the latter Prof. T -- -- l. Such is professional jealousy ; a scientist will never show any kindness for a theory which he did not start himself .
There is no feeling of brotherhood among these people .
Indeed , they always resent it when I call them brother .
To show how far their ungenerosity can carry them , I will state that I offered to let Prof. H -- -- y publish my great theory as his own discovery ; I even begged him to do it ; I even proposed to print it myself as his theory .
Instead of thanking me , he said that if I tried to fasten that theory on him he would sue me for slander .
I was going to offer it to Mr. Darwin , whom I understood to be a man without prejudices , but it occurred to me that perhaps he would not be interested in it since it did not concern heraldry .
Eight or nine months after the distress of the torrents had departed from me , the roar and thunder of the streets of Paris brought it all back again .
I moved to the sixth story of the hotel to hunt for peace .
About midnight the noises dulled away , and I was sinking to sleep , when I heard a new and curious sound ; I listened : evidently some joyous lunatic was softly dancing a `` double shuffle '' in the room over my head .
I had to wait for him to get through , of course .
Five long , long minutes he smoothly shuffled away -- a pause followed , then something fell with a thump on the floor .
I said to myself `` There -- he is pulling off his boots -- thank heavens he is done . ''
Another slight pause -- he went to shuffling again !
I said to myself , `` Is he trying to see what he can do with only one boot on ? ''
Presently came another pause and another thump on the floor .
I said `` Good , he has pulled off his other boot -- NOW he is done . ''
But he was n't .
The next moment he was shuffling again .
I said , `` Confound him , he is at it in his slippers ! ''
After a little came that same old pause , and right after it that thump on the floor once more .
I said , `` Hang him , he had on TWO pair of boots ! ''
For an hour that magician went on shuffling and pulling off boots till he had shed as many as twenty-five pair , and I was hovering on the verge of lunacy .
I got my gun and stole up there .
The fellow was in the midst of an acre of sprawling boots , and he had a boot in his hand , shuffling it -- no , I mean POLISHING it .
The mystery was explained .
He had n't been dancing .
He was the `` Boots '' of the hotel , and was attending to business .
I then said we would start immediately .
I believe I said it calmly , though I was conscious of a shudder and of a paling cheek , in view of the nature of the exploit I was so unreflectingly engaged in .
But the old daredevil spirit was upon me , and I said that as I had committed myself I would not back down ; I would ascend Mont Blanc if it cost me my life .
I told the man to slant his machine in the proper direction and let us be off .
A frightful tragedy was once witnessed through the Chamonix telescopes .
Think of questions and answers like these , on an inquest :
W. In the main street of Chamonix .
Evidently , they had tripped and been shot down an almost perpendicular slope of ice to a point where it joined the border of the upper glacier .
Naturally , the distant witness supposed they were now looking upon three corpses ; so they could hardly believe their eyes when they presently saw two of the men rise to their feet and bend over the third .
During two hours and a half they watched the two busying themselves over the extended form of their brother , who seemed entirely inert .
Chamonix's affairs stood still ; everybody was in the street , all interest was centered upon what was going on upon that lofty and isolated stage five miles away .
Finally the two -- one of them walking with great difficulty -- were seen to begin descent , abandoning the third , who was no doubt lifeless .
Their movements were followed , step by step , until they reached the `` Corridor '' and disappeared behind its ridge .
Before they had had time to traverse the `` Corridor '' and reappear , twilight was come , and the power of the telescope was at an end .
After having been on his feet twenty-four hours , in the exhausting work of mountain-climbing , Sir George began the reascent at the head of the relief party of six guides , to recover the corpse of his brother .
This was considered a new imprudence , as the number was too few for the service required .
Another relief party presently arrived at the cabin on the Grands Mulets and quartered themselves there to await events .
Ten hours after Sir George 's departure toward the summit , this new relief were still scanning the snowy altitudes above them from their own high perch among the ice deserts ten thousand feet above the level of the sea , but the whole forenoon had passed without a glimpse of any living thing appearing up there .
However , I value it less as a work of art than as a fashion-plate .
Miss d'Angeville put on a pair of men 's pantaloons to climb it , which was wise ; but she cramped their utility by adding her petticoat , which was idiotic .
From the hotel we could view the huge glacier at very close range .
After a rest we followed down a path which had been made in the steep inner frontage of the moraine , and stepped upon the glacier itself .
One of the shows of the place was a tunnel-like cavern , which had been hewn in the glacier .
The proprietor of this tunnel took candles and conducted us into it .
It was three or four feet wide and about six feet high .
Its walls of pure and solid ice emitted a soft and rich blue light that produced a lovely effect , and suggested enchanted caves , and that sort of thing .
When we had proceeded some yards and were entering darkness , we turned about and had a dainty sunlit picture of distant woods and heights framed in the strong arch of the tunnel and seen through the tender blue radiance of the tunnel 's atmosphere .
The cavern was nearly a hundred yards long , and when we reached its inner limit the proprietor stepped into a branch tunnel with his candles and left us buried in the bowels of the glacier , and in pitch-darkness .
We judged his purpose was murder and robbery ; so we got out our matches and prepared to sell our lives as dearly as possible by setting the glacier on fire if the worst came to the worst -- but we soon perceived that this man had changed his mind ; he began to sing , in a deep , melodious voice , and woke some curious and pleasing echoes .
By and by he came back and pretended that that was what he had gone behind there for .
We believed as much of that as we wanted to .
I was so stung by this brutal remark that I took my custom elsewhere .
We descended a ticklish path in the steep side of the moraine , and invaded the glacier .
There were tourists of both sexes scattered far and wide over it , everywhere , and it had the festive look of a skating-rink .
It was seven weeks after the first fall of the Empire , and poor Marie Louise , ex-Empress was a fugitive .
She came at night , and in a storm , with only two attendants , and stood before a peasant 's hut , tired , bedraggled , soaked with rain , `` the red print of her lost crown still girdling her brow , '' and implored admittance -- and was refused !
A few days before , the adulations and applauses of a nation were sounding in her ears , and now she was come to this !
We crossed the Mer de Glace in safety , but we had misgivings .
The crevices in the ice yawned deep and blue and mysterious , and it made one nervous to traverse them .
The huge round waves of ice were slippery and difficult to climb , and the chances of tripping and sliding down them and darting into a crevice were too many to be comfortable .
Chicago , deaths in 1,000 population annually , 16 ; Philadelphia , 18 ; St. Louis , 18 ; San Francisco , 19 ; New York ( the Dublin of America ) , 23 .
Edinburgh is as healthy as New York -- 23 ; but there is no CITY in the entire list which is healthier , except Frankfort-on-the-Main -- 20 .
But Frankfort is not as healthy as Chicago , San Francisco , St. Louis , or Philadelphia .
We reached the restaurant on the height called the Chapeau at four in the afternoon .
It was a memento-factory , and the stock was large , cheap , and varied .
I bought the usual paper-cutter to remember the place by , and had Mont Blanc , the Mauvais Pas , and the rest of the region branded on my alpenstock ; then we descended to the valley and walked home without being tied together .
This was not dangerous , for the valley was five miles wide , and quite level .
`` Well , I am satisfied , I have seen the principal features of Swiss scenery -- Mont Blanc and the goiter -- now for home ! ''
`` MON DIEU , they shall even go for twenty-six !
There , I have said it .
`` Monsieur shall have them for twenty-five !
Take them to the hotel -- he shall send me the money tomorrow -- next day -- when he likes . ''
Then to the child : `` When thy father sends me the money , come thou also , my angel , and thou shall have something oh so pretty ! ''
Even the most degraded woman can walk our streets unmolested , her sex and her weakness being her sufficient protection .
She will encounter less polish than she would in the old world , but she will run across enough humanity to make up for it .
`` Good heavens , madam , why did n't you say that at first !
I offer a thousand pardons .
And I offer them most sincerely .
I did not know -- I COULD not know -- anything was the matter .
You are most welcome to the seat , and would have been from the first if I had only known .
I am truly sorry it all happened , I do assure you . ''
`` I know it 's Swiss , but you 'll take that or none .
I have n't any other . ''
He tried to put the coin in my hand , and spoke again .
I drew my hand away , and said :
`` You are misunderstanding the boy .
He does not mean any harm .
He did not suppose you gave him so much money purposely , so he hurried back to return you the coin lest you might get away before you discovered your mistake .
Take it , and give him a penny -- that will make everything smooth again . ''
That experience has been of priceless value and benefit to me ; for I resolved then , that as long as I lived I would never again rob a blind beggar-woman in a church ; and I have always kept my word .
The most permanent lessons in morals are those which come , not of booky teaching , but of experience .
I found more pleasure in contemplating the Old Masters this time than I did when I was in Europe in former years , but still it was a calm pleasure ; there was nothing overheated about it .
When I was in Venice before , I think I found no picture which stirred me much , but this time there were two which enticed me to the Doge 's palace day after day , and kept me there hours at a time .
One of these was Tintoretto 's three-acre picture in the Great Council Chamber .
When I saw it twelve years ago I was not strongly attracted to it -- the guide told me it was an insurrection in heaven -- but this was an error .
The movement of this great work is very fine .
There are ten thousand figures , and they are all doing something .
There is a wonderful `` go '' to the whole composition .
Some of the figures are driving headlong downward , with clasped hands , others are swimming through the cloud-shoals -- some on their faces , some on their backs -- great processions of bishops , martyrs , and angels are pouring swiftly centerward from various outlying directions -- everywhere is enthusiastic joy , there is rushing movement everywhere .
There are fifteen or twenty figures scattered here and there , with books , but they can not keep their attention on their reading -- they offer the books to others , but no one wishes to read , now .
The Lion of St. Mark is there with his book ; St. Mark is there with his pen uplifted ; he and the Lion are looking each other earnestly in the face , disputing about the way to spell a word -- the Lion looks up in rapt admiration while St. Mark spells .
This is wonderfully interpreted by the artist .
It is the master-stroke of this imcomparable painting .
I visited the place daily , and never grew tired of looking at that grand picture .
As I have intimated , the movement is almost unimaginably vigorous ; the figures are singing , hosannahing , and many are blowing trumpets .
So vividly is noise suggested , that spectators who become absorbed in the picture almost always fall to shouting comments in each other 's ears , making ear-trumpets of their curved hands , fearing they may not otherwise be heard .
One often sees a tourist , with the eloquent tears pouring down his cheeks , funnel his hands at his wife 's ear , and hears him roar through them , `` OH , TO BE THERE AND AT REST ! ''
At the extreme left end of the picture are a couple of women , one of them with a child looking over her shoulder at a wounded man sitting with bandaged head on the ground .
These people seem needless , but no , they are there for a purpose ; one can not look at them without seeing the gorgeous procession of grandees , bishops , halberdiers , and banner-bearers which is passing along behind them ; one can not see the procession without feeling the curiosity to follow it and learn whither it is going ; it leads him to the Pope , in the center of the picture , who is talking with the bonnetless Doge -- talking tranquilly , too , although within twelve feet of them a man is beating a drum , and not far from the drummer two persons are blowing horns , and many horsemen are plunging and rioting about -- indeed , twenty-two feet of this great work is all a deep and happy holiday serenity and Sunday-school procession , and then we come suddenly upon eleven and one-half feet of turmoil and racket and insubordination .
This latter state of things is not an accident , it has its purpose .
But for it , one would linger upon the Pope and the Doge , thinking them to be the motive and supreme feature of the picture ; whereas one is drawn along , almost unconsciously , to see what the trouble is about .
Now at the very END of this riot , within four feet of the end of the picture , and full thirty-six feet from the beginning of it , the Hair Trunk bursts with an electrifying suddenness upon the spectator , in all its matchless perfection , and the great master's triumph is sweeping and complete .
From that moment no other thing in those forty feet of canvas has any charm ; one sees the Hair Trunk , and the Hair Trunk only -- and to see it is to worship it .
Bassano even placed objects in the immediate vicinity of the Supreme Feature whose pretended purpose was to divert attention from it yet a little longer and thus delay and augment the surprise ; for instance , to the right of it he has placed a stooping man with a cap so red that it is sure to hold the eye for a moment -- to the left of it , some six feet away , he has placed a red-coated man on an inflated horse , and that coat plucks your eye to that locality the next moment -- then , between the Trunk and the red horseman he has intruded a man , naked to his waist , who is carrying a fancy flour-sack on the middle of his back instead of on his shoulder -- this admirable feat interests you , of course -- keeps you at bay a little longer , like a sock or a jacket thrown to the pursuing wolf -- but at last , in spite of all distractions and detentions , the eye of even the most dull and heedless spectator is sure to fall upon the World 's Masterpiece , and in that moment he totters to his chair or leans upon his guide for support .
One lingers about the Cathedral a good deal , in Venice .
There is a strong fascination about it -- partly because it is so old , and partly because it is so ugly .
Too many of the world 's famous buildings fail of one chief virtue -- harmony ; they are made up of a methodless mixture of the ugly and the beautiful ; this is bad ; it is confusing , it is unrestful .
One has a sense of uneasiness , of distress , without knowing why .
But one is calm before St. Mark 's , one is calm within it , one would be calm on top of it , calm in the cellar ; for its details are masterfully ugly , no misplaced and impertinent beauties are intruded anywhere ; and the consequent result is a grand harmonious whole , of soothing , entrancing , tranquilizing , soul-satisfying ugliness .
One's admiration of a perfect thing always grows , never declines ; and this is the surest evidence to him that it IS perfect .
St. Mark 's is perfect .
To me it soon grew to be so nobly , so augustly ugly , that it was difficult to stay away from it , even for a little while .
Every time its squat domes disappeared from my view , I had a despondent feeling ; whenever they reappeared , I felt an honest rapture -- I have not known any happier hours than those I daily spent in front of Florian 's , looking across the Great Square at it .
Propped on its long row of low thick-legged columns , its back knobbed with domes , it seemed like a vast warty bug taking a meditative walk .
St. Mark 's is not the oldest building in the world , of course , but it seems the oldest , and looks the oldest -- especially inside .
He could have gone home much the richest citizen of his country , and it might have been years before the plunder was missed ; but he was human -- he could not enjoy his delight alone , he must have somebody to talk about it with .
So he exacted a solemn oath from a Candian noble named Crioni , then led him to his lodgings and nearly took his breath away with a sight of his glittering hoard .
He detected a look in his friend 's face which excited his suspicion , and was about to slip a stiletto into him when Crioni saved himself by explaining that that look was only an expression of supreme and happy astonishment .
Stammato made Crioni a present of one of the state 's principal jewels -- a huge carbuncle , which afterward figured in the Ducal cap of state -- and the pair parted .
Crioni went at once to the palace , denounced the criminal , and handed over the carbuncle as evidence .
Stammato was arrested , tried , and condemned , with the old-time Venetian promptness .
He was hanged between the two great columns in the Piazza -- with a gilded rope , out of compliment to his love of gold , perhaps .
He got no good of his booty at all -- it was ALL recovered .
Next comes the European bread -- fair enough , good enough , after a fashion , but cold ; cold and tough , and unsympathetic ; and never any change , never any variety -- always the same tiresome thing .
Then there is the beefsteak .
They have it in Europe , but they do n't know how to cook it .
Neither will they cut it right .
It comes on the table in a small , round pewter platter .
It lies in the center of this platter , in a bordering bed of grease-soaked potatoes ; it is the size , shape , and thickness of a man 's hand with the thumb and fingers cut off .
It is a little overdone , is rather dry , it tastes pretty insipidly , it rouses no enthusiasm .
Roast -- mutton or beef -- tasteless -- and some last year 's potatoes .
A pate , or some other made dish -- usually good -- '' considering . ''
Roast chicken , as tasteless as paper .
The grapes are generally good , and sometimes there is a tolerably good peach , by mistake .
I have a neat talent in matters pertaining to nourishment .
This has met with professional recognition .
I have often furnished recipes for cook-books .
Here are some designs for pies and things , which I recently prepared for a friend 's projected cook-book , but as I forgot to furnish diagrams and perspectives , they had to be left out , of course .
I wonder why some things are ?
For instance , Art is allowed as much indecent license today as in earlier times -- but the privileges of Literature in this respect have been sharply curtailed within the past eighty or ninety years .
Fielding and Smollett could portray the beastliness of their day in the beastliest language ; we have plenty of foul subjects to deal with in our day , but we are not allowed to approach them very near , even with nice and guarded forms of speech .
But not so with Art .
The brush may still deal freely with any subject , however revolting or indelicate .
It makes a body ooze sarcasm at every pore , to go about Rome and Florence and see what this last generation has been doing with the statues .
These works , which had stood in innocent nakedness for ages , are all fig-leaved now .
Yes , every one of them .
Nobody noticed their nakedness before , perhaps ; nobody can help noticing it now , the fig-leaf makes it so conspicuous .
But the comical thing about it all , is , that the fig-leaf is confined to cold and pallid marble , which would be still cold and unsuggestive without this sham and ostentatious symbol of modesty , whereas warm-blood paintings which do really need it have in no case been furnished with it .
On the whole , I think that short visits to Europe are better for us than long ones .
The former preserve us from becoming Europeanized ; they keep our pride of country intact , and at the same time they intensify our affection for our country and our people ; whereas long visits have the effect of dulling those feelings -- at least in the majority of cases .
I think that one who mixes much with Americans long resident abroad must arrive at this conclusion .
A ruin must be rightly situated , to be effective .
This one could not have been better placed .
It stands upon a commanding elevation , it is buried in green woods , there is no level ground about it , but , on the contrary , there are wooded terraces upon terraces , and one looks down through shining leaves into profound chasms and abysses where twilight reigns and the sun can not intrude .
Nature knows how to garnish a ruin to get the best effect .
One of these old towers is split down the middle , and one half has tumbled aside .
It tumbled in such a way as to establish itself in a picturesque attitude .
Then all it lacked was a fitting drapery , and Nature has furnished that ; she has robed the rugged mass in flowers and verdure , and made it a charm to the eye .
The standing half exposes its arched and cavernous rooms to you , like open , toothless mouths ; there , too , the vines and flowers have done their work of grace .
The rear portion of the tower has not been neglected , either , but is clothed with a clinging garment of polished ivy which hides the wounds and stains of time .
Even the top is not left bare , but is crowned with a flourishing group of trees and shrubs .
Misfortune has done for this old tower what it has done for the human character sometimes -- improved it .
I do not see any wisdom in building a monster cask to hoard up emptiness in , when you can get a better quality , outside , any day , free of expense .
What could this cask have been built for ?
The more one studies over that , the more uncertain and unhappy he becomes .
Some historians say that thirty couples , some say thirty thousand couples , can dance on the head of this cask at the same time .
Even this does not seem to me to account for the building of it .
It does not even throw light on it .
A profound and scholarly Englishman -- a specialist -- who had made the great Heidelberg Tun his sole study for fifteen years , told me he had at last satisfied himself that the ancients built it to make German cream in .
He said that the average German cow yielded from one to two and half teaspoons of milk , when she was not worked in the plow or the hay-wagon more than eighteen or nineteen hours a day .
This milk was very sweet and good , and a beautiful transparent bluish tint ; but in order to get cream from it in the most economical way , a peculiar process was necessary .
Now he believed that the habit of the ancients was to collect several milkings in a teacup , pour it into the Great Tun , fill up with water , and then skim off the cream from time to time as the needs of the German Empire demanded .
It was plain that the Englishman had studied the matter from all sides .
Still I thought I might catch him on one point ; so I asked him why the modern empire did not make the nation 's cream in the Heidelberg Tun , instead of leaving it to rot away unused .
But he answered as one prepared --
`` Two weeks ago the public peace had the honor to be disturbed by you . ''
You are sentenced to two days ' solitary confinement in the College prison , and I am sent to fetch you . ''
`` No , I am going to the opera , tomorrow . ''
This one is terse .
There were many uncomplimentary references , on the walls , to a certain unpopular dignitary .
One sufferer had got three days for not saluting him .
Another had `` here two days slept and three nights lain awake , '' on account of this same `` Dr. K. '' In one place was a picture of Dr. K. hanging on a gallows .
When he at last became a free man again , he said he believed he would hunt up a brisker seat of learning ; the Heidelberg lectures might be good , but the opportunities of attending them were too rare , the educational process too slow ; he said he had come to Europe with the idea that the acquirement of an education was only a matter of time , but if he had averaged the Heidelberg system correctly , it was rather a matter of eternity .
A little learning makes the whole world kin .
-- Proverbs xxxii , 7 .
I went often to look at the collection of curiosities in Heidelberg Castle , and one day I surprised the keeper of it with my German .
I spoke entirely in that language .
He was greatly interested ; and after I had talked a while he said my German was very rare , possibly a `` unique '' ; and wanted to add it to his museum .
Surely there is not another language that is so slipshod and systemless , and so slippery and elusive to the grasp .
One is washed about in it , hither and thither , in the most helpless way ; and when at last he thinks he has captured a rule which offers firm ground to take a rest on amid the general rage and turmoil of the ten parts of speech , he turns over the page and reads , `` Let the pupil make careful note of the following EXCEPTIONS . ''
He runs his eye down and finds that there are more exceptions to the rule than instances of it .
So overboard he goes again , to hunt for another Ararat and find another quicksand .
Such has been , and continues to be , my experience .
Every time I think I have got one of these four confusing `` cases '' where I am master of it , a seemingly insignificant preposition intrudes itself into my sentence , clothed with an awful and unsuspected power , and crumbles the ground from under me .
For instance , my book inquires after a certain bird -- ( it is always inquiring after things which are of no sort of consequence to anybody ) : `` Where is the bird ? ''
Now the answer to this question -- according to the book -- is that the bird is waiting in the blacksmith shop on account of the rain .
Of course no bird would do that , but then you must stick to the book .
Very well , I begin to cipher out the German for that answer .
I begin at the wrong end , necessarily , for that is the German idea .
I say to myself , `` REGEN ( rain ) is masculine -- or maybe it is feminine -- or possibly neuter -- it is too much trouble to look now .
Therefore , it is either DER ( the ) Regen , or DIE ( the ) Regen , or DAS ( the ) Regen , according to which gender it may turn out to be when I look .
In the interest of science , I will cipher it out on the hypothesis that it is masculine .
Very well -- then THE rain is DER Regen , if it is simply in the quiescent state of being MENTIONED , without enlargement or discussion -- Nominative case ; but if this rain is lying around , in a kind of a general way on the ground , it is then definitely located , it is DOING SOMETHING -- that is , RESTING ( which is one of the German grammar's ideas of doing something ) , and this throws the rain into the Dative case , and makes it DEM Regen .
However , this rain is not resting , but is doing something ACTIVELY , -- it is falling -- to interfere with the bird , likely -- and this indicates MOVEMENT , which has the effect of sliding it into the Accusative case and changing DEM Regen into DEN Regen . ''
Having completed the grammatical horoscope of this matter , I answer up confidently and state in German that the bird is staying in the blacksmith shop `` wegen ( on account of ) DEN Regen . ''
Then the teacher lets me softly down with the remark that whenever the word `` wegen '' drops into a sentence , it ALWAYS throws that subject into the GENITIVE case , regardless of consequences -- and therefore this bird stayed in the blacksmith shop `` wegen DES Regens . ''
-- I was informed , later , by a higher authority , that there was an `` exception '' which permits one to say `` wegen DEN Regen '' in certain peculiar and complex circumstances , but that this exception is not extended to anything BUT rain .
However , it is not well to dwell too much on the separable verbs .
One is sure to lose his temper early ; and if he sticks to the subject , and will not be warned , it will at last either soften his brain or petrify it .
Personal pronouns and adjectives are a fruitful nuisance in this language , and should have been left out .
For instance , the same sound , SIE , means YOU , and it means SHE , and it means HER , and it means IT , and it means THEY , and it means THEM .
Think of the ragged poverty of a language which has to make one word do the work of six -- and a poor little weak thing of only three letters at that .
But mainly , think of the exasperation of never knowing which of these meanings the speaker is trying to convey .
This explains why , whenever a person says SIE to me , I generally try to kill him , if a stranger .
The inventor of the language seems to have taken pleasure in complicating it in every way he could think of .
For instance , if one is casually referring to a house , HAUS , or a horse , PFERD , or a dog , HUND , he spells these words as I have indicated ; but if he is referring to them in the Dative case , he sticks on a foolish and unnecessary E and spells them HAUSE , PFERDE , HUNDE .
So , as an added E often signifies the plural , as the S does with us , the new student is likely to go on for a month making twins out of a Dative dog before he discovers his mistake ; and on the other hand , many a new student who could ill afford loss , has bought and paid for two dogs and only got one of them , because he ignorantly bought that dog in the Dative singular when he really supposed he was talking plural -- which left the law on the seller 's side , of course , by the strict rules of grammar , and therefore a suit for recovery could not lie .
Where is the accomplished and beautiful English maiden ?
Now , the foreigner , equipped with these three noble words , is master of the situation .
Let him talk right along , fearlessly ; let him pour his indifferent German forth , and when he lacks for a word , let him heave a SCHLAG into the vacuum ; all the chances are that it fits it like a plug , but if it does n't let him promptly heave a ZUG after it ; the two together can hardly fail to bung the hole ; but if , by a miracle , they SHOULD fail , let him simply say ALSO !
and this will give him a moment's chance to think of the needful word .
In Germany , when you load your conversational gun it is always best to throw in a SCHLAG or two and a ZUG or two , because it does n't make any difference how much the rest of the charge may scatter , you are bound to bag something with THEM .
Then you blandly say ALSO , and load up again .
Nothing gives such an air of grace and elegance and unconstraint to a German or an English conversation as to scatter it full of `` Also 's '' or `` You knows . ''
-- In the hospital yesterday , a word of thirteen syllables was successfully removed from a patient -- a North German from near Hamburg ; but as most unfortunately the surgeons had opened him in the wrong place , under the impression that he contained a panorama , he died .
The sad event has cast a gloom over the whole community .
If I had not shown that the German is a difficult language , I have at least intended to do so .
I have heard of an American student who was asked how he was getting along with his German , and who answered promptly : `` I am not getting along at all .
I have worked at it hard for three level months , and all I have got to show for it is one solitary German phrase -- 'ZWEI GLAS ' '' ( two glasses of beer ) .
He paused for a moment , reflectively ; then added with feeling : `` But I 've got that SOLID ! ''
The Germans do not seem to be afraid to repeat a word when it is the right one .
They repeat it several times , if they choose .
But in English , when we have used a word a couple of times in a paragraph , we imagine we are growing tautological , and so we are weak enough to exchange it for some other word which only approximates exactness , to escape what we wrongly fancy is a greater blemish .
Repetition may be bad , but surely inexactness is worse .
Fourthly , I would reorganizes the sexes , and distribute them accordingly to the will of the creator .
This as a tribute of respect , if nothing else .
Meantime Herr Givenaught and Herr Heartless were having an early breakfast in the former 's castle -- the Sparrow 's Nest -- and flavoring it with a quarrel ; for although these twins bore a love for each other which almost amounted to worship , there was one subject upon which they could not touch without calling each other hard names -- and yet it was the subject which they oftenest touched upon .
Half an hour later , Hildegarde was standing in the presence of Herr Givenaught .
He heard her story , and said --
Next day the people assembled in the great hall of the Ritter tavern , to witness the auction -- for the proprietor had said the treasure of Germany 's most honored son should be bartered away in no meaner place .
Hildegarde and her father sat close to the books , silent and sorrowful , and holding each other 's hands .
There was a great crowd of people present .
A heavy drag -- the auctioneer persuaded , pleaded , implored -- it was useless , everybody remained silent --
`` Five hundred and sixty ! ''
Going , going -- one -- ''
`` Going -- going -- going -- third and last call -- one -- two -- ''
-- well done , Crutches ! ''
The crowd took it up , and shouted altogether , `` Well done , Crutches ! ''
The ANZEIGER is an eight-page paper ; its page is one inch wider and one inch longer than a foolscap page ; that is to say , the dimensions of its page are somewhere between those of a schoolboy 's slate and a lady's pocket handkerchief .
One-fourth of the first page is taken up with the heading of the journal ; this gives it a rather top-heavy appearance ; the rest of the first page is reading-matter ; all of the second page is reading-matter ; the other six pages are devoted to advertisements .
DRUMMER ( after a pause , pleadingly ) .
-- But do you you mind letting ME look at them !
I have n't seen them for three weeks !
I very soon had an opportunity .
I knocked at a miner 's lonely log cabin in the foot-hills of the Sierras just at nightfall .
It was snowing at the time .
A jaded , melancholy man of fifty , barefooted , opened the door to me .
When he heard my 'nom de guerre ' he looked more dejected than before .
He let me in -- pretty reluctantly , I thought -- and after the customary bacon and beans , black coffee and hot whiskey , I took a pipe .
This sorrowful man had not said three words up to this time .
Now he spoke up and said , in the voice of one who is secretly suffering , `` You 're the fourth -- I 'm going to move . ''
`` The fourth what ? ''
`` The fourth littery man that has been here in twenty-four hours -- I 'm going to move . ''
`` You do n't tell me ! ''
said I ; `` who were the others ? ''
`` Mr. Longfellow , Mr. Emerson , and Mr. Oliver Wendell Holmes -- consound the lot ! ''
`` 'I am the doubter and the doubt -- '
`` As I said , Mr .
Twain , you are the fourth in twenty-four hours -- and I'm going to move ; I ai n't suited to a littery atmosphere . ''
The miner investigated me with a calm eye for a while ; then said he , `` Ah !
impostors , were they ?
One other feature is clear -- Willie Winter ( for these past thousand years dramatic editor of the New York Tribune , and still occupying that high post in his old age ) was there .
He was much younger then than he is now , and he showed 'it .
It was always a pleasure to me to see Willie Winter at a banquet .
During a matter of twenty years I was seldom at a banquet where Willie Winter was not also present , and where he did not read a charming poem written for the occasion .
He did it this time , and it was up to standard : dainty , happy , choicely phrased , and as good to listen to as music , and sounding exactly as if it was pouring unprepared out of heart and brain .
I just suppose that he does not know me , but says he knows me .
What a talent for compression !
It takes a genius in compression to compact as many facts as that .
I suppose she meant the halo .
Now here is a gold-miner 's compliment .
It is forty-two years old .
It was my introduction to an audience to which I lectured in a log school-house .
There were no ladies there .
I wasn't famous then .
They did n't know me .
Only the miners were there , with their breeches tucked into their boottops and with clay all over them .
They wanted some one to introduce me , and they selected a miner , who protested , saying :
Mr. Norton was very gentle in what he had to say , and almost delicate , and he said : `` Mr. Clemens , I have been spending some time with Mr. Darwin in England , and I should like to tell you something connected with that visit .
You were the object of it , and I myself would have been very proud of it , but you may not be proud of it .
At any rate , I am going to tell you what it was , and to leave to you to regard it as you please .
Mr. Darwin took me up to his bedroom and pointed out certain things there-pitcher-plants , and so on , that he was measuring and watching from day to day -- and he said : 'The chambermaid is permitted to do what she pleases in this room , but she must never touch those plants and never touch those books on that table by that candle .
With those books I read myself to sleep every night . '
Those were your own books . ''
I said : `` There is no question to my mind as to whether I should regard that as a compliment or not .
I do regard it as a very great compliment and a very high honor that that great mind , laboring for the whole human race , should rest itself on my books .
I am proud that he should read himself to sleep with them . ''
Mr. Birrell has touched lightly -- very lightly , but in not an uncomplimentary way -- on my position in this world as a moralist .
I am glad to have that recognition , too , because I have suffered since I have been in this town ; in the first place , right away , when I came here , from a newsman going around with a great red , highly displayed placard in the place of an apron .
No doubt many a person was misled by those sentences joined together in that unkind way .
I have no doubt my character has suffered from it .
I suppose I ought to defend my character , but how can I defend it ?
I can say here and now -- and anybody can see by my face that I am sincere , that I speak the truth -- that I have never seen that Cup .
I have not got the Cup -- I did not have a chance to get it .
I have always had a good character in that way .
I have hardly ever stolen anything , and if I did steal anything I had discretion enough to know about the value of it first .
I do not steal things that are likely to get myself into trouble .
I do not think any of us do that .
I know we all take things -- that is to be expected -- but really , I have never taken anything , certainly in England , that amounts to any great thing .
I do confess that when I was here seven years ago I stole a hat , but that did not amount to anything .
It was not a good hat , and was only a clergyman 's hat , anyway .
But now I am chaffing and chaffing and chaffing here , and I hope you will forgive me for that ; but when a man stands on the verge of seventy-two you know perfectly well that he never reached that place without knowing what this life is heart-breaking bereavement .
And so our reverence is for our dead .
We do not forget them ; but our duty is toward the living ; and if we can be cheerful , cheerful in spirit , cheerful in speech and in hope , that is a benefit to those who are around us .
And then look at Ambassador Bryce , who referred to his alma mater , Oxford .
He might just as well have included me .
Well , I am a later production .
ADDRESS TO THE VIENNA PRESS CLUB , NOVEMBER 21 , 1897 , DELIVERED IN GERMAN [ Here in literal translation ]
The German language speak I not good , but have numerous connoisseurs me assured that I her write like an angel .
Maybe -- maybe -- I know not .
Have till now no acquaintance with the angels had .
That comes later -- when it the dear God please -- it has no hurry .
ADDRESS AT THE JUBILEE CELEBRATION OF THE EMANCIPATION OF THE HUNGARIAN PRESS , MARCH 26 , 1899
The Ministry and members of Parliament were present .
The subject was the `` Ausgleich '' -- i. e. , the arrangement for the apportionment of the taxes between Hungary and Austria .
Paragraph 14 of the ausgleich fixes the proportion each country must pay to the support of the army .
It is the paragraph which caused the trouble and prevented its renewal .
Let us not waste this golden , this beneficent , this providential opportunity .
I am willing to make any concession you want , just so we get it settled .
I am not only willing to let grain come in free , I am willing to pay the freight on it , and you may send delegates to the Reichsrath if you like .
All I require is that they shall be quiet , peaceable people like your own deputies , and not disturb our proceedings .
Well , I am unspeakably glad to have that ausgleich off my hands .
It has kept me awake nights for anderthalbjahr .
My late wife was the dramatist and stage-manager .
Our coachman was the stage-manager , second in command .
We used to play it in this simple way , and the one who used to bring in the crown on a cushion -- he was a little fellow then -- is now a clergyman way up high -- six or seven feet high -- and growing higher all the time .
We played it well , but not as well as you see it here , for you see it done by practically trained professionals .
Just a word or two to let you know how deeply I appreciate the honor which the children who are the actors and frequenters of this cozy playhouse have conferred upon me .
They have asked me to be their ambassador to invite the hearts and brains of New York to come down here and see the work they are doing .
I consider it a grand distinction to be chosen as their intermediary .
Between the children and myself there is an indissoluble bond of friendship .
I wish we could reach more children at one time .
I am glad to see that the children of the East Side have turned their backs on the Bowery theatres to come to see the pure entertainments presented here .
I would start in at once to elevate , purify , and depopulate the red-light district .
I would assign the most soulful poets to that district , all heavily armed with their poems .
Take Chauncey Depew as a sample .
I would station them on the corners after they had rounded up all the depraved people of the district so they could not escape , and then have them read from their poems to the poor unfortunates .
The plan would be very effective in causing an emigration of the depraved element .
I have been hemmed in all day by William Dean Howells and other frivolous persons , and I have been talking about everything in the world except that of which speeches are constructed .
Then , too , seven days on the water is not conducive to speech-making .
I will only say that I congratulate Mr. Mayhew ; he has certainly made a delightful play out of my rubbish .
His is a charming gift .
Confidentially I have always had an idea that I was well equipped to write plays , but I have never encountered a manager who has agreed with me .
Of course , before a man reaches my years the fear of criticism might prevent him from indulging his fancy .
I am not afraid of that .
I am decidedly for pleasing color combinations in dress .
I like to see the women 's clothes , say , at the opera .
What can be more depressing than the sombre black which custom requires men to wear upon state occasions ?
A group of men in evening clothes looks like a flock of crows , and is just about as inspiring .
It is true that I dressed the Connecticut Yankee at King Arthur 's Court in a plug-hat , but , let 's see , that was twenty-five years ago .
Then no man was considered fully dressed until he donned a plug-hat .
Nowadays I think that no man is dressed until he leaves it home .
Why , when I left home yesterday they trotted out a plug-hat for me to wear .
`` Can you tell us the names of some of the notables that are here to see you off ? ''
Five hundred undergraduates , under the auspices of the Woman's University Club , New York , welcomed Mr. Clemens as their guest , April 3 , 1906 , and gave him the freedom of the club , which the chairman explained was freedom to talk individually to any girl present .
DELIVERED AT THE ANNIVERSARY FESTIVAL , 1872 , OF THE SCOTTISH CORPORATION OF LONDON
MR. PRESIDENT , -- I do not know why I should be singled out to receive the greatest distinction of the evening -- for so the office of replying to the toast of woman has been regarded in every age .
I do not know why I have received his distinction , unless it be that I am a trifle less homely than the other members of the club .
But be this as it may , Mr. President , I am proud of the position , and you could not have chosen any one who would have accepted it more gladly , or labored with a heartier good-will to do the subject justice than I -- because , sir , I love the sex .
I love all the women , irrespective of age or color .
At the twenty-fifth anniversary of the founding of Tuskeegee Institute by Booker Washington , Mr. Choate presided , and in introducing Mr. Clemens made fun of him because he made play his work , and that when he worked hardest he did so lying in bed .
At his mercy was the daily bread of every official , every trader , every clerk , every civil servant , big and little , in the whole huge India Company 's machine , and the man who hazarded his bread by any failure of subserviency to the boss lost it .
At a later meeting of the Acorn Club , Mr. Clemens said :
The Bishop has just spoken of a condition of things which none of us can deny , and which ought not to exist ; that is , the lust of gain -- a lust which does not stop short of the penitentiary or the jail to accomplish its ends .
But we may be sure of one thing , and that is that this sort of thing is not universal .
If it were , this country would not be .
You may put this down as a fact : that out of every fifty men , forty-nine are clean .
Then why is it , you may ask , that the forty-nine do n't have things the way they want them ?
I 'll tell you why it is .
A good deal has been said here to-night about what is to be accomplished by organization .
That 's just the thing .
It 's because the fiftieth fellow and his pals are organized and the other forty-nine are not that the dirty one rubs it into the clean fellows every time .
I do n't know anything about finance , and I never did , but I know some pretty shrewd financiers , and they told me that Mr. Bryan was n't safe on any financial question .
I said to myself , then , that it would n't do for me to vote for Bryan , and I rather thought -- I know now -- that McKinley was n't just right on this Philippine question , and so I just did n't vote for anybody .
I 've got that vote yet , and I 've kept it clean , ready to deposit at some other election .
It was n't cast for any wildcat financial theories , and it was n't cast to support the man who sends our boys as volunteers out into the Philippines to get shot down under a polluted flag .
ADDRESS AT THE ANNUAL DINNER OF THE ST. NICHOLAS SOCIETY , NEW YORK , DECEMBER 6 , 1900 .
What has made these sky-scrapers possible is the elevator .
The cigar-box which the European calls a `` lift '' needs but to be compared with our elevators to be appreciated .
The lift stops to reflect between floors .
That is all right in a hearse , but not in elevators .
The American elevator acts like the man 's patent purge -- it worked .
As the inventor said , `` This purge does n't waste any time fooling around ; it attends strictly to business . ''
But it is by the laws of the city , it is by the manners of the city , it is by the ideals of the city , it is by the customs of the city and by the municipal government which all these elements correct , support , and foster , by which the foreigner judges the city .
It is by these that he realizes that New York may , indeed , hold her head high among the cities of the world .
It is by these standards that he knows whether to class the city higher or lower than the other municipalities of the world .
`` Here they come !
Show them to the archangel 's box , and turn the lime-light on them ! ''
The New Vagabonds Club of London , made up of the leading younger literary men of the day , gave a dinner in honor of Mr. and Mrs. Clemens , July 8 , 1899 .
When you start with a blaze of sunshine and upburst of humor , when you begin with that , the proper office of humor is to reflect , to put you into that pensive mood of deep thought , to make you think of your sins , if you wish half an hour to fly .
Humor makes me reflect now to-night , it sets the thinking machinery in motion .
Always , when I am thinking , there come suggestions of what I am , and what we all are , and what we are coming to .
A sermon comes from my lips always when I listen to a humorous speech .
I seize the opportunity to throw away frivolities , to say something to plant the seed , and make all better than when I came .
In Mr. Grossmith's remarks there was a subtle something suggesting my favorite theory of the difference between theoretical morals and practical morals .
I try to instil practical morals in the place of theatrical -- I mean theoretical ; but as an addendum -- an annex -- something added to theoretical morals .
It was in my boyhood just a statement of fact , reading is only more formal , merely facts , merely pathetic facts , which I can state so as to be understood .
It relates to the first time I ever stole a watermelon ; that is , I think it was the first time ; anyway , it was right along there somewhere .
The New Vagabonds are old vagabonds ( undergoing the old sort of reform ) .
You drank my health ; I hope I have not been unuseful .
Take this system of morality to your hearts .
Take it home to your neighbors and your graves , and I hope that it will be a long time before you arrive there .
I have been listening to what was said here , and there is in it a lesson of citizenship .
You created the police , and you are responsible for them .
One must pause , therefore , before criticising them too harshly .
They are citizens , just as we are .
A little of citizenship ought to be taught at the mother 's knee and in the nursery .
Citizenship is what makes a republic ; monarchies can get along without it .
What keeps a republic on its legs is good citizenship .
The poet could be spared , and so , largely for his own good and partly for mine , I kept the thing in his mind , which was necessary , as would-be suicides are very changeable aid hard to hold to their purpose .
He had a preference for a pistol , which was an extravagance , for we had n't enough between us to hire a pistol .
A fork would have been easier .
China never wanted foreigners any more than foreigners wanted Chinamen , and on this question I am with the Boxers every time .
The Boxer is a patriot .
He loves his country better than he does the countries of other people .
I wish him success .
The Boxer believes in driving us out of his country .
I am a Boxer too , for I believe in driving him out of our country .
Yet , instead of putting their trust in God , they harried that poor creature , shelterless and friendless , from place to place , exactly as they did in the Middle Ages , when they made lepers wear bells , so that people could be warned of their approach and avoid them .
Perhaps those people in the Middle Ages thought they were putting their trust in God .
We see the result when American railroad iron is sold so cheap in England that the poorest family can have it .
He has so beguiled that Cabinet of England .
But I said to him : `` It is all right ; I have discovered you , and Stanley will be here by the four-o'clock train and will discover you officially , and then we will turn to and have a reg'lar good time . ''
I said : `` Cheer up , for Stanley has got corn , ammunition , glass beads , hymn-books , whiskey , and everything which the human heart can desire ; he has got all kinds of valuables , including telegraph-poles and a few cart-loads of money .
By this time communication has been made with the land of Bibles and civilization , and property will advance . ''
And then we surveyed all that country , from Ujiji , through Unanogo and other places , to Unyanyembe .
I mention these names simply for your edification , nothing more -- do not expect it -- particularly as intelligence to the Royal Geographical Society .
And then , having filled up the old man , we were all too full for utterance and departed .
We have since then feasted on honors .
ADDRESS DELIVERED IN BOSTON , NOVEMBER , 1886
Mr. Clemens introduced Mr. Stanley .
A dinner to express their confidence in the integrity and good judgment of District-Attorney Jerome was given at Delmonico's by over three hundred of his admirers on the evening of May 7 , 1909 .
In writing plays the chief thing is novelty .
The world grows tired of solid forms in all the arts .
I struck a new idea myself years ago .
I was not surprised at it .
I was always expecting it would happen .
A person who has suffered disappointment for many years loses confidence , and I thought I had better make inquiries before I exploited my new idea of doing a drama in the form of a dream , so I wrote to a great authority on knowledge of all kinds , and asked him whether it was new .
In introducing Mr. Clemens , Doctor Van Dyke said :
In this very room , a month or two ago , some people admired that portrait ; some admired this , but the great majority fastened on that , and said , `` There is a portrait that is a beautiful piece of art . ''
When that portrait is a hundred years old it will suggest what were the manners and customs in our time .
Just as they talk about Mr. Mabie to-night , in that enthusiastic way , pointing out the various virtues of the man and the grace of his spirit , and all that , so was that portrait talked about .
They were enthusiastic , just as we men have been over the character and the work of Mr. Mabie .
And when they were through they said that portrait , fine as it is , that work , beautiful as it is , that piece of humanity on that canvas , gracious and fine as it is , does not rise to those perfections that exist in the man himself .
Come up , Mr. Alexander .
[ The reference was to James W. Alexander , who happened to be sitting -- beneath the portrait of himself on the wall . ]
Now , I should come up and show myself .
But he can not do it , he can not do it .
He was born that way , he was reared in that way .
Let his modesty be an example , and I wish some of you had it , too .
But that is just what I have been saying -- that portrait , fine as it is , is not as fine as the man it represents , and all the things that have been said about Mr. Mabie , and certainly they have been very nobly worded and beautiful , still fall short of the real Mabie .
Thus , working together , they made a strong team ; laboring together , they could do miracles ; but break the circuit , and both were impotent .
It has remained so to this day : they must travel together , hoe , and plant , and plough , and reap , and sell their public together , or there 's no result .
He began with that word `` H. '' That 's a long word and a profane word .
I do n't remember what the word was now , but I recognized the power of it .
I had never used that language myself , but at that moment I was converted .
It has been a great refuge for me in time of trouble .
If a man does n't know that language he ca n't express himself on strenuous occasions .
When you have that word at your command let trouble come .
Choate here -- he has n't got anything to say , but he says it just the same , and he can do it so felicitously , too .
I said long ago he was the handsomest man America ever produced .
May the progress of civilization always rest on such distinguished men as it has in the past !
I thank you , Mr. Toastmaster , for the compliment which you have paid me , and I am sure I would rather have made people laugh than cry , yet in my time I have made some of them cry ; and before I stop entirely I hope to make some more of them cry .
I deal in them myself .
I have listened with the greatest pleasure to the compliments which the chairman has paid to Mr. Rogers and that road of his to-night , and I hope some of them are deserved .
That is not all Mr. Rogers has done ; but you never see that side of his character , because it is never protruding ; but he lends a helping hand daily out of that generous heart of his .
You never hear of it .
He is supposed to be a moon which has one side dark and the other bright .
But the other side , though you do n't see it , is not dark ; it is bright , and its rays penetrate , and others do see it who are not God .
When that fearless and forgetful chairman is found there will be another story told .
At the Press Club recently I thought that I had found him .
He started in in the way that I knew I should be painted with all sincerity , and was leading to things that would not be to my credit ; but when he said that he never read a book of mine I knew at once that he was a liar , because he never could have had all the wit and intelligence with which he was blessed unless he had read my works as a basis .
I like to go home and tell them all over again to the members of my family .
They do n't believe them , but I like to tell them in the home circle , all the same .
I like to dream of them if I can .
If the community is anxious to have a reading-room it would put its hand in its pocket and bring out the penny tax .
I think it a proof of the healthy , moral , financial , and mental condition of the community if it taxes itself for its mental food .
I propose to go there to purify the political atmosphere .
I am in favor of everything everybody is in favor of .
What you should do is to satisfy the whole nation , not half of it , for then you would only be half a President .
I went out to Cambridge one day a few years ago and called on President Eliot .
In the course of the conversation he said that he had just returned from England , and that he was very much touched by what he considered the high compliment Darwin was paying to my books , and he went on to tell me something like this :
THE NEW YORK PRESS CLUB DINNER
AT THE ANNUAL DINNER , NOVEMBER 13 , 1900
Col. William L. Brown , the former editor of the Daily News , as president of the club , introduced Mr. Clemens as the principal ornament of American literature .
ADDRESS AT THE DINNER GIVEN TO MR. CARNEGIE AT THE DEDICATION OF THE NEW YORK ENGINEERS ' CLUB , DECEMBER 9 , 1907
Simplified spelling brought about sun-spots , the San Francisco earthquake , and the recent business depression , which we would never have had if spelling had been left all alone .
ADDRESS AT THE ANNUAL DINNER OF THE ASSOCIATED PRESS , AT THE WALDORF-ASTORIA , SEPTEMBER 18 , 1906
Every day of the three hundred and sixty-five the only pages of the world 's countless newspapers that are read by all the human beings and angels and devils that can read , are these pages that are built out of Associated Press despatches .
And so I beg you , I beseech you -- oh , I implore you to spell them in our simplified forms .
Do this daily , constantly , persistently , for three months -- only three months -- it is all I ask .
-- victory , victory all down the line .
For by that time all eyes here and above and below will have become adjusted to the change and in love with it , and the present clumsy and ragged forms will be grotesque to the eye and revolting to the soul .
And we shall be rid of phthisis and phthisic and pneumonia and pneumatics , and diphtheria and pterodactyl , and all those other insane words which no man addicted to the simple Christian life can try to spell and not lose some of the bloom of his piety in the demoralizing attempt .
Do not doubt it .
We are chameleons , and our partialities and prejudices change places with an easy and blessed facility , and we are soon wonted to the change and happy in it .
We do not regret our old , yellow fangs and snags and tushes after we have worn nice , fresh , uniform store teeth a while .
Ten pages of that .
Each and every word a seventeen-jointed vestibuled railroad train .
Seven cents a word .
I saw starvation staring the family in the face .
I went to the editor , and I took a stenographer along so as to have the interview down in black and white , for no magazine editor can ever remember any part of a business talk except the part that 's got graft in it for him and the magazine .
I said , `` Read that text , Jackson , and let it go on the record ; read it out loud . ''
He read it : `` Considerations concerning the alleged subterranean holophotal extemporaneousness of the conchyliaceous superimbrication of the Ornithorhyncus , as foreshadowed by the unintelligibility of its plesiosaurian anisodactylous aspects . ''
I said , `` You want ten pages of those rumbling , great , long , summer thunderpeals , and you expect to get them at seven cents a peal ? ''
I said , `` Jackson , this is cold-blooded oppression .
What 's an average English word ? ''
`` Then for the sake of the family , if you have no feeling for me , you ought at least to allow me overtime on that word extemporaneousness . ''
Again he coldly refused .
I seldom say a harsh word to any one , but I was not master of myself then , and I spoke right out and called him an anisodactylous plesiosaurian conchyliaceous Ornithorhyncus , and rotten to the heart with holoaophotal subterranean extemporaneousness .
God forgive me for that wanton crime ; he lived only two hours .
Now I wish to say just one entirely serious word :
And , speaking of burglars , let us not speak of them too harshly .
Now , I have known so many burglars -- not exactly known , but so many of them have come near me in my various dwelling-places , that I am disposed to allow them credit for whatever good qualities they possess .
Chief among these , and , indeed , the only one I just now think of , is their great care while doing business to avoid disturbing people's sleep .
Last February , when Rudyard Kipling was ill in America , the sympathy which was poured out to him was genuine and sincere , and I believe that which cost Kipling so much will bring England and America closer together .
I have been proud and pleased to see this growing affection and respect between the two countries .
I hope it will continue to grow , and , please God , it will continue to grow .
I trust we authors will leave to posterity , if we have nothing else to leave , a friendship between England and America that will count for much .
I will now confess that I have been engaged for the past eight days in compiling a publication .
I have brought it here to lay at your feet .
I do not ask your indulgence in presenting it , but for your applause .
I had got a number of friends of mine , stalwart men , to sprinkle themselves through the audience armed with big clubs .
Every time I said anything they could possibly guess I intended to be funny they were to pound those clubs on the floor .
Then there was a kind lady in a box up there , also a good friend of mine , the wife of the Governor .
She was to watch me intently , and whenever I glanced toward her she was going to deliver a gubernatorial laugh that would lead the whole audience into applause .
If any one here loves me , she has my sincere thanks .
Nay , if any one here is so good as to love me -- why , I 'll be a brother to her .
She shall have my sincere , warm , unsullied affection .
When I was coming up in the car with the very kind young lady who was delegated to show me the way , she asked me what I was going to talk about .
And I said I was n't sure .
I said I had some illustrations , and I was going to bring them in .
I said I was certain to give those illustrations , but that I had n't the faintest notion what they were going to illustrate .
But I do n't know why I never heard any one say that but myself .
I always recognized it .
But even those nearest and dearest to me could n't seem to see it .
My mother , especially , seemed to think there was something wrong with that estimate .
And she never got over that prejudice .
`` No , '' said I , `` I 'm living in Rochester . ''
Well , do you know when I saw that I began to feel sorry -- sorry -- sorry .
It seemed to me that I had done wrong .
I reflected that I was young -- I think I was just eleven .
But I knew that though immature I did not lack moral advancement .
I knew what a boy ought to do who had extracted a watermelon -- like that .
I considered George Washington , and what action he would have taken under similar circumstances .
Then I knew there was just one thing to make me feel right inside , and that was -- Restitution .
I turned over and tried to count , but I could n't keep my mind on it .
I kept thinking of that grewsome mass .
I was losing count all the time , and going back and beginning over again .
Oh no ; I wasn't frightened -- just annoyed .
But by the time I 'd gotten to the century mark I turned cautiously over and opened my eyes with great fortitude .
When I was seventeen I was very bashful , and a sixteen-year-old girl came to stay a week with us .
She was a peach , and I was seized with a happiness not of this world .
At one time in our domestic history we had a colored butler who had a failing .
He could never remember to ask people who came to the door to state their business .
So I used to suffer a good many calls unnecessarily .
And if you 'd believe me , that man was sitting with a whole gallery of etchings spread out before him .
But I did n't happen to notice that they were our etchings , spread out by some member of my family for some unguessed purpose .
Very curtly I asked the gentleman his business .
With a surprised , timid manner he faltered that he had met my wife and daughter at Onteora , and they had asked him to call .
Fine lie , I thought , and I froze him .
ADDRESS AT THE DINNER OF THE SOCIETY OF ILLUSTRATORS , GIVEN AT THE ALDINE ASSOCIATION CLUB , DECEMBER 22 , 1905
Now put that heart into such a breast -- eighteen years old -- and give it that masterly intellect which showed in the face , and furnish it with that almost god-like spirit , and what are you going to have ?
The conventional Joan of Arc ?
Not by any means .
I can not comprehend any such thing as that .
Halliday -- ah , that 's the name -- Ben Halliday , your uncle [ turning to Mr. Carnegie ] .
That was the fellow -- Ben Halliday -- and Jack was full of admiration at the prodigious speed that that line of stages made -- and it was good speed -- one hundred and twenty-five miles a day , going day and night , and it was the event of Jack 's life , and there at the Fords of the Jordan the colonel was inspired to a speech ( he was always making a speech ) , so he called us up to him .
He called up five sinners and three saints .
It has been only lately that Mr. Carnegie beatified me .
And he said : `` Here are the Fords of the Jordan -- a monumental place .
At this very point , when Moses brought the children of Israel through -- he brought the children of Israel from Egypt through the desert you see them -- he guarded them through that desert patiently , patiently during forty years , and brought them to this spot safe and sound .
There you see -- there is the scene of what Moses did . ''
He wrote this letter , not to me , but to a friend of mine ; and he said : `` I have ridden horseback '' -- this was three years after -- '' I hate ridden horseback four hundred miles through a desert country where you never see anything but cattle now and then , and now and then a cattle station -- ten miles apart , twenty miles apart .
Now you tell Clemens that in all that stretch of four hundred miles I have seen only two books -- the Bible and 'Innocents Abroad ' .
Tell Clemens the Bible was in a very good condition . ''
MR. CHAIRMAN AND GENTLEMEN , -- Dr. Van Fleet is the gentleman who gave me the character .
I have heard my character discussed a thousand times before you were born , sir , and shown the iniquities in it , and you did not get more than half of them .
But this had nothing but a spiritual effect on me , and I did n't care for that .
When they took off the sheet it was yellow from the output of my conscience , the exudation of sin .
It purified me spiritually , and it remains until this day .
Mr. Clemens visited Albany on February 21 and 28 , 1901 .
The privileges of the floor were granted and he was asked to make a short address to the Senate .
But I will not venture to advise this body , as I only venture to advise bodies who are , not present .
`` Can I be of any service to you ? ''
`` Will you have a place in the sleeper ? ''
`` Yes , '' I said , `` and much oblige me , too .
Give me anything -- anything will answer . ''
`` Yes , sah , dat you kin ; you kin pen on it ; I 'll get it myself . ''
Let me tell you briefly the history of my personal relation to tobacco .
It began , I think , when I was a lad , and took the form of a quid , which I became expert in tucking under my tongue .
Afterward I learned the delights of the pipe , and I suppose there was no other youngster of my age who could more deftly cut plug tobacco so as to make it available for pipe-smoking .
I discovered that the `` worst cigars , '' so called , are the best for me , after all .
`` No , Sir .
I 'll excuse you . ''
A saloon-keeper 's boy passed by with a steaming pitcher of hot punch , and Boggs snuffed the fragrance gratefully .
We found him standing on a table in a saloon , with an old tin lantern in one hand and the school report in the other , haranguing a gang of `` corned '' miners on , the iniquity of squandering the public money on education `` when hundreds and hundreds of honest , hard-working men were literally starving for whiskey . ''
He had been assisting in a regal spree with those parties for hours .
We dragged him away , and put him into bed .
I reached the bottom muddy and bruised about the elbows , but safe .
`` All set-hoist away ! ''
`` Are you comfortable ? ''
`` Why , where are you going ? ''
`` After the school report ! ''
Perhaps I am not a humorist , but I am a first-class fool -- a simpleton ; for up to this moment I have believed Chairman MacAlister to be a decent person whom I could allow to mix up with my friends and relatives .
The exhibition he has just made of himself reveals him to be a scoundrel and a knave of the deepest dye .
I have been cruelly deceived , and it serves me right for trusting a Scotchman .
Yes , I do understand figures , and I can count .
I have counted the words in MacAlister 's drivel ( I certainly can not call it a speech ) , and there were exactly three thousand four hundred and thirty-nine .
I also carefully counted the lies -- there were exactly three thousand four hundred and thirty-nine .
Therefore , I leave MacAlister to his fate .
I remember one day I was walking down Third Street in San Francisco .
It was a sleepy , dull Sunday afternoon , and no one was stirring .
Suddenly as I looked up the street about three hundred yards the whole side of a house fell out .
The street was full of bricks and mortar .
At the same time I was knocked against the side of a house , and stood there stunned for a moment .
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN , -- It seems a sort of cruelty to inflict upon an audience like this our rude English tongue , after we have heard that divine speech flowing in that lucid Gallic tongue .
I have a pleasant recollection of an incident so many years ago -- when Madame Bernhardt came to Hartford , where I lived , and she was going to play and the tickets were three dollars , and there were two lovely women -- a widow and her daughter -- neighbors of ours , highly cultivated ladies they were ; their tastes were fine and elevated , but they were very poor , and they said `` Well , we must not spend six dollars on a pleasure of the mind , a pleasure of the intellect ; we must spend it , if it must go at all , to furnish to somebody bread to eat . ''
And so they sorrowed over the fact that they had to give up that great pleasure of seeing Madame Bernhardt , but there were two neighbors equally highly cultivated and who could not afford bread , and those good-hearted Joneses sent that six dollars -- deprived themselves of it -- and sent it to those poor Smiths to buy bread with .
And those Smiths took it and bought tickets with it to see Madame Bernhardt .
Now , I will tell you a story whose moral is that , whose lesson is that , whose lament is that .
He went on down there and accosted this antiquity , and made a remark or two .
I could not catch up .
They were so casual I could not recognize which one it was that touched that bottom , for in an instant that old man was literally in eruption and was filling the whole place with profanity of the most exquisite kind .
You never heard such accomplished profanity .
I never heard it also delivered with such eloquence .
`` And then he went away crying , and at earliest dawn the next morning they came for him and routed him out , and they said that new ship of his was ready to sail on a three years ' voyage .
In a minute he was on board that ship and gone .
`` He felt it all through ; he had constant reminders of it , because the crew would pass him with their grog , come out on the deck and take it , and there was the torturous Smell of it .
The Colonel commanded a regiment , and did his part , I suppose , to destroy the Union .
He did not succeed , yet if he had obeyed me he would have done so .
I had a plan , and I fully intended to drive General Grant into the Pacific Ocean -- if I could get transportation .
I told Colonel Watterson about it .
I told him what he had to do .
What I wanted him to do was to surround the Eastern army and wait until I came up .
But he was insubordinate ; he stuck on some quibble of military etiquette about a second lieutenant giving orders to a colonel or something like that .
And what was the consequence ?
The Union was preserved .
This is the first time I believe that that secret has ever been revealed .
`` Well-er-a , '' I began , `` I was born in Alabama , or Alaska , or the Sandwich Islands ; I do n't know where , but right around there somewhere .
And you had better put it down before you forget it . ''
`` But you were n't born in all those places , '' he said .
`` I shall be nineteen in June , '' I said .
`` Did you bury him without knowing whether he was dead or not ? ''
`` Where 's the mystery ? ''
It is n't objectionable to me that all the trades and professions in the United States are protected by the bill .
They are all important and worthy , and if we can take care of them under the Copyright law I should like to see it done .
I should like to see oyster culture added , and anything else .
The laws of England and America do take it away , do select but one class , the people who create the literature of the land .
They always talk handsomely about the literature of the land , always what a fine , great , monumental thing a great literature is , and in the midst of their enthusiasm they turn around and do what they can to discourage it .
I said I wished he could mention any kind of property on this planet that had a pecuniary value which was not derived from an idea or ideas .
I hope the bill will pass without any deleterious amendments .
I do seem to be extraordinarily interested in a whole lot of arts and things that I have got nothing to do with .
It is a part of my generous , liberal nature ; I ca n't help it .
I feel the same sort of charity to everybody that was manifested by a gentleman who arrived at home at two o'clock in the morning from the club and was feeling so perfectly satisfied with life , so happy , and so comfortable , and there was his house weaving , weaving , weaving around .
He watched his chance , and by and by when the steps got in his neighborhood he made a jump and climbed up and got on the portico .
ADDRESS AT A PUBLIC MEETING OF THE NEW YORK ASSOCIATION FOR PROMOTING THE INTERESTS OF THE BLIND AT THE WALDORF ASTORIA , MARCH 29 , 1906
[ Mr. Clemens was in another dilemma .
Again he was obliged to turn to Mr .
What this association needs and wants is $ 15,000 .
The figures are set down , and what the money is for , and there is no graft in it or I would not be here .
And they hope to beguile that out of your pockets , and you will find affixed to the programme an opportunity , that little blank which you will fill out and promise so much money now or to-morrow or some time .
Then , there is another opportunity which is still better , and that is that you shall subscribe an annual sum .
I did n't take much notice of the place .
I did n't really get my bearings .
I noticed Twichell got a German bed about two feet wide , the kind in which you 've got to lie on your edge , because there is n't room to lie on your back , and he was way down south in that big room , and I was way up north at the other end of it , with a regular Sahara in between .
This is always indispensable : Bleed your patient .
[ Then came a laugh and loud cries for a speech .
As the great humorist spoke of his recent visit to Hannibal , his old home , his voice trembled . ]
I told him that I would still be a customer of his , and that I cherished no ill-feeling because of the incident -- that would remain green in my memory .
He says that the primary rule of business success is loyalty to your employer .
That 's all right -- as a theory .
What is the matter with loyalty to yourself ?
As nearly as I can understand Mr. Cannon 's methods , there is one great drawback to them .
He wants you to work a great deal .
Diligence is a good thing , but taking things easy is much more-restful .
My idea is that the employer should be the busy man , and the employee the idle one .
The employer should be the worried man , and the employee the happy one .
He gets the salary .
My plan is to get another man to do the work for me .
In that there 's more repose .
What I want is repose first , last , and all the time .
He put the revolver to his forehead and blew a tunnel straight through his head .
The tunnel was about the size of your finger .
You could look right through it .
The job was complete ; there was nothing in it .
Well , after that that man never could write prose , but he could write poetry .
He could write it after he had blown his brains out .
There is lots of that talent all over the country , but the trouble is they don't develop it .
`` This is an error .
I intend the lectures , as well as the property , for the creditors .
The law recognizes no mortgage on a man 's brains , and a merchant who has given up all he has may take advantage of the laws of insolvency and may start free again for himself .
But I am not a business man , and honor is a harder master than the law .
It can not compromise for less than one hundred cents on a dollar , and its debts are never outlawed .
Earlier in life this would have pained me and made me ashamed , but I am older now , and when I am behaving myself , and doing right , I do not care for a whale 's opinion about me .
When we are young we generally estimate an opinion by the size of the person that holds it , but later we find that that is an uncertain rule , for we realize that there are times when a hornet 's opinion disturbs us more than an emperor 's .
I am glad , with you and the nation , to welcome the new ship .
She is another pride , another consolation , for a great country whose mighty fleets have all vanished , and which has almost forgotten , what it is to fly its flag to sea .
I am not sure as to which St. Paul she is named for .
Some think it is the one that is on the upper Mississippi , but the head quartermaster told me it was the one that killed Goliath .
But it is not important .
No matter which it is , let us give her hearty welcome and godspeed .
Address at a dinner given in honor of Mr. Clemens by Colonel Harvey , President of Harper & Brothers .
Look at John Hay and me .
There we were in obscurity , and look where we are now .
Consider the ladder which he has climbed , the illustrious vocations he has served -- and vocations is the right word ; he has in all those vocations acquitted himself with high credit and honor to his country and to the mother that bore him .
Scholar , soldier , diplomat , poet , historian -- now , see where we are .
He is Secretary of State and I am a gentleman .
It could not happen in any other country .
Our institutions give men the positions that of right belong to them through merit ; all you men have won your places , not by heredities , and not by family influence or extraneous help , but only by the natural gifts God gave you at your birth , made effective by your own energies ; this is the country to live in .
Well , I like the poetry .
I like all the speeches and the poetry , too .
I liked Doctor Van Dyke 's poem .
I wish I could return thanks in proper measure to you , gentlemen , who have spoken and violated your feelings to pay me compliments ; some were merited and some you overlooked , it is true ; and Colonel Harvey did slander every one of you , and put things into my mouth that I never said , never thought of at all .
And at the dinner , Chairman ( I do not know who he was ) -- failed to come to time .
The gentleman who had been appointed to pay me the customary compliments and to introduce me forgot the compliments , and did not know what they were .
My other master the Ambassador-is not here yet .
Under those two gentlemen I learned to make after-dinner speeches , and it was charming .
Here a man came across the platform and touched him on the shoulder , and said : `` One minute . ''
And then to the audience :
And this is just a little maxim which has saved me from many a difficulty and many a disaster , and in times of tribulation and uncertainty has come to my rescue , as it shall to yours if you observe it as I do day and night .
Well , now , another speaker got up , and in fifteen minutes damped my spirit ; and during the speech of the third speaker all my enthusiasm went away .
When at last the hat came round I dropped in ten cents -- and took out twenty-five .
Here or anywhere you must scour your head every two or three days or it is full of grit .
Your clothes must collect just as much dirt as your hair .
If you wear white clothes you are clean , and your cleaning bill gets so heavy that you have to take care .
I am proud to say that I can wear a white suit of clothes without a blemish for three days .
If you need any further instruction in the matter of clothes I shall be glad to give it to you .
I hope I have convinced some of you that it is just as well to wear white clothes as any other kind .
I do not want to boast .
I only want to make you understand that you are not clean .
I remember out in Sydney once having to respond to some complimentary toast , and my one desire was to turn in my tracks like any other worm -- and run , for it .
I was remembering that occasion at a later date when I had to introduce a speaker .
Hoping , then , to spur his speech by putting him , in joke , on the defensive , I accused him in my introduction of everything I thought it impossible for him to have committed .
When I finished there was an awful calm .
I had been telling his life history by mistake .
I had given up trying to find the money lying about , and was in a hotel lobby in despair , when I saw a beautiful unfriended dog .
The dog saw me , too , and at once we became acquainted .
Then General Miles came in , admired the dog , and asked me to price it .
I priced it at $ 3 .
He offered me an opportunity to reconsider the value of the beautiful animal , but I refused to take more than Providence knew I needed .
The General carried the dog to his room .
`` 'How much ? '
And I told him $ 3 .
I was working off these humorous brilliancies on him and getting no return -- not a scintillation in his eye , not a spark of recognition of what I was doing there .
I was almost in despair .
I noticed in Ambassador Choate 's speech that he said : `` You may be Americans or Englishmen , but you can not be both at the same time . ''
You responded by applause .
Consider the effect of a short residence here .
I find the Ambassador rises first to speak to a toast , followed by a Senator , and I come third .
What a subtle tribute that to monarchial influence of the country when you place rank above respectability !
I am pleased to see that we have a cessation of war for the time .
This coming from me , a soldier , you will appreciate .
I was a soldier in the Southern war for two weeks , and when gentlemen get up to speak of the great deeds our army and navy have recently done , why , it goes all through me and fires up the old war spirit .
I had in my first engagement three horses shot under me .
The next ones went over my head , the next hit me in the back .
Then I retired to meet an engagement .
I had to go five miles up-river , and had to catch a particular train or not get there .
But see the magnanimity which is born in me , which I have cultivated all my life .
A very famous and very great British clergyman came to me presently , and he said : `` I am away down in the list ; I have got to catch a certain train this Saturday night ; if I do n't catch that train I shall be carried beyond midnight and break the Sabbath .
Won't you change places with me ? ''
I said : `` Certainly I will . ''
I did it at once .
Now , see what happened .
I am learning much here to-night .
I find I did n't know anything about the American Society -- that is , I did n't know its chief virtue .
I did n't know its chief virtue until his Excellency our Ambassador revealed it -- I may say , exposed it .
I was intending to go home on the 13th of this month , but I look upon that in a different light now .
I am going to stay here until the American Society pays my passage .
I have suffered in that way myself .
I have had relatives killed in that way .
One was in Chicago years ago -- an uncle of mine , just as good an uncle as I have ever had , and I had lots of them -- yes , uncles to burn , uncles to spare .
This poor uncle , full of patriotism , opened his mouth to hurrah , and a rocket went down his throat .
Before that man could ask for a drink of water to quench that thing , it blew up and scattered him all , over the forty-five States , and -- really , now , this is true -- I know about it myself -- twenty-four hours after that it was raining buttons , recognizable as his , on the Atlantic seaboard .
A person can not have a disaster like that and be entirely cheerful the rest of his life .
I had another uncle , on an entirely different Fourth of July , who was blown up that way , and really it trimmed him as it would a tree .
He had hardly a limb left on him anywhere .
All we have left now is an expurgated edition of that uncle .
But never mind about these things ; they are merely passing matters .
Do n't let me make you sad .
And I have been to the Zoological Gardens .
What a wonderful place that is !
I never have seen such a curious and interesting variety of wild animals in any garden before -- except `` Mabilie . ''
I never believed before there were so many different kinds of animals in the world as you can find there -- and I do n't believe it yet .
I have been to the British Museum .
I would advise you to drop in there some time when you have nothing to do for -- five minutes -- if you have never been there : It seems to me the noblest monument that this nation has yet erected to her greatness .
I say to her , our greatness -- as a nation .
True , she has built other monuments , and stately ones , as well ; but these she has uplifted in honor of two or three colossal demigods who have stalked across the world 's stage , destroying tyrants and delivering nations , and whose prodigies will still live in the memories of men ages after their monuments shall have crumbled to dust -- I refer to the Wellington and Nelson monuments , and -- the Albert memorial .
The Albert memorial is the finest monument in the world , and celebrates the existence of as commonplace a person as good luck ever lifted out of obscurity . ]
Just before the luncheon he acted as pilot .
I have had a great many birthdays in my time .
I remember the first one very well , and I always think of it with indignation ; everything was so crude , unaesthetic , primeval .
Nothing like this at all .
No proper appreciative preparation made ; nothing really ready .
Now , for a person born with high and delicate instincts -- why , even the cradle wasn't whitewashed -- nothing ready at all .
I had n't any hair , I had n't any teeth , I had n't any clothes , I had to go to my first banquet just like that .
Well , everybody came swarming in .
It was the merest little bit of a village -- hardly that , just a little hamlet , in the backwoods of Missouri , where nothing ever happened , and the people were all interested , and they all came ; they looked me over to see if there was anything fresh in my line .
Why , nothing ever happened in that village -- I -- why , I was the only thing that had really happened there for months and months and months ; and although I say it myself that should n't , I came the nearest to being a real event that had happened in that village in more than , two years .
Well , those people came , they came with that curiosity which is so provincial , with that frankness which also is so provincial , and they examined me all around and gave their opinion .
Nobody asked them , and I should n't have minded if anybody had paid me a compliment , but nobody did .
Their opinions were all just green with prejudice , and I feel those opinions to this day .
Well , I stood that as long as -- well , you know I was born courteous , and I stood it to the limit .
I stood it an hour , and then the worm turned .
I was the warm ; it was my turn to turn , and I turned .
I knew very well the strength of my position ; I knew that I was the only spotlessly pure and innocent person in that whole town , and I came out and said so : And they could not say a word .
It was so true : They blushed ; they were embarrassed .
Well , that was the first after-dinner speech I ever made : I think it was after dinner .
In the matter of diet -- which is another main thing -- I have been persistently strict in sticking to the things which did n't agree with me until one or the other of us got the best of it .
Until lately I got the best of it myself .
But last spring I stopped frolicking with mince-pie after midnight ; up to then I had always believed it was n't loaded .
For thirty years I have taken coffee and bread at eight in the morning , and no bite nor sup until seven-thirty in the evening .
That is all right for me , and is wholesome , because I have never had a headache in my life , but headachy people would not reach seventy comfortably by that road , and they would be foolish to try it .
And I wish to urge upon you this -- which I think is wisdom -- that if you find you ca n't make seventy by any but an uncomfortable road , do n't you go .
When they take off the Pullman and retire you to the rancid smoker , put on your things , count your checks , and get out at the first way station where there 's a cemetery .
Since I was seven years old I have seldom take , a dose of medicine , and have still seldomer needed one .
But up to seven I lived exclusively on allopathic medicines .
Not that I needed them , for I do n't think I did ; it was for economy ; my father took a drug-store for a debt , and it made cod-liver oil cheaper than the other breakfast foods .
We had nine barrels of it , and it lasted me seven years .
Then I was weaned .
The rest of the family had to get along with rhubarb and ipecac and such things , because I was the pet .
I was the first Standard Oil Trust .
I had it all .
By the time the drugstore was exhausted my health was established , and there has never been much the matter with me since .
But you know very well it would be foolish for the average child to start for seventy on that basis .
It happened to be just the thing for me , but that was merely an accident ; it could n't happen again in a century .
I sprang forward with a warning hand up .
That is why Catherine did not scream .
She was going to do that -- I saw it plainly .
Then I whispered her to slip out of the place , and say nothing of what had happened .
I said Joan was asleep -- asleep and dreaming .
Catherine whispered back , and said :
And when , in exile wand'ring , we Shall fainting yearn for glimpse of thee , Oh , rise upon our sight !
`` Name of God , Bastard , Bastard !
you can not tell me this small thing , yet are bold to name a large one -- telling us what is in the stomach of the unborn morrow : that we shall not have those men .
Now it is my thought that they will be with us . ''
`` There were other reasons for declining battle , according to the saying of your Excellency ? ''
Before dawn we were with our army again , and with us the Constable and nearly all his men , for we left only a small garrison in Beaugency castle .
We heard the dull booming of cannon to the front , and knew that Talbot was beginning his attack on the bridge .
But some time before it was yet light the sound ceased and we heard it no more .
What a harvest of English strongholds we had reaped in those three days !
-- strongholds which had defied France with quite cool confidence and plenty of it until we came .
`` Name of God , what would you ?
We must smite these English , and we will .
They shall not escape us .
Though they were hung to the clouds we would get them ! ''
The duke and the Bastard wanted to follow , but Joan said :
`` Oh , Satan and his Hellions , see them go ! ''
Somebody muttered it in deep admiration .
`` Wait -- not yet . ''
( 1 ) Lord Ronald Gower ( Joan of Arc , p. 82 ) says : `` Michelet discovered this story in the deposition of Joan of Arc 's page , Louis de Conte , who was probably an eye-witness of the scene . ''
It was a part of the testimony of the author of these `` Personal Recollections of Joan of Arc , '' given by him in the Rehabilitation proceedings of 1456 .
31 France Begins to Live Again
Yes , one can do that ; but understand it ?
Ah , that is another matter ; none will ever be able to comprehend that stupefying marvel .
The news beat the flying enemy to Yeuville , and the town rose against its English masters and shut the gates against their brethren .
It flew to Mont Pipeau , to Saint Simon , and to this , that , and the other English fortress ; and straightway the garrison applied the torch and took to the fields and the woods .
A detachment of our army occupied Meung and pillaged it .
The great deeds of Joan of Arc are five :
The Coronation of the King .
Then moves the Reconciliation -- but does not proclaim check , it being a move for position , and to take effect later .
The King was afraid to start to Rheims , because the road was mile-posted with English fortresses , so to speak .
Joan held them in light esteem and not things to be afraid of in the existing modified condition of English confidence .
`` In three days ' time the place is ours . ''
That poor starved fellow begged us with his piteous eyes to save him ; then spoke , and said he had a wife and little children at home .
Think how it wrung our heartstrings .
But what could we do ?
The Burgundian was within his right .
We could only beg and plead for the prisoner .
And the Burgundian enjoyed it .
He stayed his hand to hear more of it , and laugh at it .
Then the Dwarf said :
We struck the bonds from the prisoner and told him he was free .
His crawling humbleness changed to frantic joy in a moment , and his ghastly fear to a childish rage .
He flew at that dead corpse and kicked it , spat in its face , danced upon it , crammed mud into its mouth , laughing , jeering , cursing , and volleying forth indecencies and bestialities like a drunken fiend .
It was a thing to be expected ; soldiering makes few saints .
Many of the onlookers laughed , others were indifferent , none was surprised .
But presently in his mad caperings the freed man capered within reach of the waiting file , and another Burgundian promptly slipped a knife through his neck , and down he went with a death-shriek , his brilliant artery blood spurting ten feet as straight and bright as a ray of light .
There was a great burst of jolly laughter all around from friend and foe alike ; and thus closed one of the pleasantest incidents of my checkered military life .
Now in order to get the flask , a most ancient ceremonial had to be gone through with ; otherwise the Abby of St. Remi hereditary guardian in perpetuity of the oil , would not deliver it .
So , in accordance with custom , the King deputed five great nobles to ride in solemn state and richly armed and accoutered , they and their steeds , to the Abbey Church as a guard of honor to the Archbishop of Rheims and his canons , who were to bear the King 's demand for the oil .
When the five great lords were ready to start , they knelt in a row and put up their mailed hands before their faces , palm joined to palm , and swore upon their lives to conduct the sacred vessel safely , and safely restore it again to the Church of St. Remi after the anointing of the King .
The Archbishop and his subordinates , thus nobly escorted , took their way to St. Remi .
The Archbishop was in grand costume , with his miter on his head and his cross in his hand .
At the door of St. Remi they halted and formed , to receive the holy vial .
Soon one heard the deep tones of the organ and of chanting men ; then one saw a long file of lights approaching through the dim church .
And so came the Abbot , in his sacerdotal panoply , bearing the vial , with his people following after .
He delivered it , with solemn ceremonies , to the Archbishop ; then the march back began , and it was most impressive ; for it moved , the whole way , between two multitudes of men and women who lay flat upon their faces and prayed in dumb silence and in dread while that awful thing went by that had been in heaven .
She was like one transfigured , so divine was the joy that shone in her face as she sank to her knees at the King 's feet and looked up at him through her tears .
Her lips were quivering , and her words came soft and low and broken :
`` It is so commanded .
`` Indeed , I can not , gentle King .
Do not press me .
I will not have aught else , but only this alone . ''
How brief it is ; yet how much it says !
It is the nation speaking .
You have the spectacle of that unsentimental thing , a Government , making reverence to that name and saying to its agent , `` Uncover , and pass on ; it is France that commands . ''
Yes , the promise has been kept ; it will be kept always ; `` forever '' was the King 's word .
( 1 ) At two o'clock in the afternoon the ceremonies of the Coronation came at last to an end ; then the procession formed once more , with Joan and the King at its head , and took up its solemn march through the midst of the church , all instruments and all people making such clamor of rejoicing noises as was , indeed , a marvel to hear .
An so ended the third of the great days of Joan 's life .
And how close together they stand -- May 8th , June 18th , July 17th !
( 1 ) IT was faithfully kept during three hundred and sixty years and more ; then the over-confident octogenarian 's prophecy failed .
During the tumult of the French Revolution the promise was forgotten and the grace withdrawn .
It has remained in disuse ever since .
Joan never asked to be remembered , but France has remembered her with an inextinguishable love and reverence ; Joan never asked for a statue , but France has lavished them upon her ; Joan never asked for a church for Domremy , but France is building one ; Joan never asked for saintship , but even that is impending .
Everything which Joan of Arc did not ask for has been given her , and with a noble profusion ; but the one humble little thing which she did ask for and get has been taken away from her .
There is something infinitely pathetic about this .
France owes Domremy a hundred years of taxes , and could hardly find a citizen within her borders who would vote against the payment of the debt .
-- NOTE BY THE TRANSLATOR .
The city gave a grand banquet to the King and Joan in mid-afternoon , and to the Court and the Grand Staff ; and about the middle of it Pere D'Arc and Laxart were sent for , but would not venture until it was promised that they might sit in a gallery and be all by themselves and see all that was to be seen and yet be unmolested .
And so they sat there and looked down upon the splendid spectacle , and were moved till the tears ran down their cheeks to see the unbelievable honors that were paid to their small darling , and how naively serene and unafraid she sat there with those consuming glories beating upon her .
At the fall of night we the Domremy contingent of the personal staff were with the father and uncle at the inn , in their private parlor , brewing generous drinks and breaking ground for a homely talk about Domremy and the neighbors , when a large parcel arrived from Joan to be kept till she came ; and soon she came herself and sent her guard away , saying she would take one of her father 's rooms and sleep under his roof , and so be at home again .
We of the staff rose and stood , as was meet , until she made us sit .
Then she turned and saw that the two old men had gotten up too , and were standing in an embarrassed and unmilitary way ; which made her want to laugh , but she kept it in , as not wishing to hurt them ; and got them to their seats and snuggled down between them , and took a hand of each of them upon her knees and nestled her own hands in them , and said :
`` Yes , your mother -- that is true .
I never saw such a woman .
She worries , and worries , and worries ; and wakes nights , and lies so , thinking -- that is , worrying ; worrying about you .
And when the night storms go raging along , she moans and says , 'Ah , God pity her , she is out in this with her poor wet soldiers . '
And when the lightning glares and the thunder crashes she wrings her hands and trembles , saying , 'It is like the awful cannon and the flash , and yonder somewhere she is riding down upon the spouting guns and I not there to protect her . ''
There was some more talk of this sort , then Uncle Laxart said :
`` This is not a confessional , my lord .
You were not obliged to expose that shame here . ''
`` Out of charity I will consider that you did not know who devised this measure which you condemn in so candid language . ''
Joan 's prediction was verified .
It was not a campaign , it was only another holiday excursion .
English strongholds lined our route ; they surrendered without a blow ; we garrisoned them with Frenchmen and passed on .
Bedford was on the march against us with his new army by this time , and on the 25th of July the hostile forces faced each other and made preparation for battle ; but Bedford 's good judgment prevailed , and he turned and retreated toward Paris .
Now was our chance .
Our men were in great spirits .
She dragged herself out of bed a day later with a new hope .
D'Alencon had thrown a bridge across the Seine near St. Denis .
Might she not cross by that and assault Paris at another point ?
But the King got wind of it and broke the bridge down !
And more -- he declared the campaign ended !
And more still -- he had made a new truce and a long one , in which he had agreed to leave Paris unthreatened and unmolested , and go back to the Loire whence he had come !
Now came her Voices again .
They said , `` Remain at St .
There was no explanation .
They did not say why .
That was the voice of God ; it took precedence of the command of the King ; Joan resolved to stay .
But that filled La Tremouille with dread .
She was too tremendous a force to be left to herself ; she would surely defeat all his plans .
He beguiled the King to use compulsion .
Joan had to submit -- because she was wounded and helpless .
In the Great Trial she said she was carried away against her will ; and that if she had not been wounded it could not have been accomplished .
Ah , she had a spirit , that slender girl !
a spirit to brave all earthly powers and defy them .
We shall never know why the Voices ordered her to stay .
We only know this ; that if she could have obeyed , the history of France would not be as it now stands written in the books .
Yes , well we know that .
YES , IT was as I have said : Joan had Paris and France in her grip , and the Hundred Years ' War under her heel , and the King made her open her fist and take away her foot .
She never complained , of course .
It was not her way .
She was the sort that endure in silence .
France was full of rovers -- disbanded soldiers ready for anything that might turn up .
Several times , at intervals , when Joan 's dull captivity grew too heavy to bear , she was allowed to gather a troop of cavalry and make a health-restoring dash against the enemy .
These things were a bath to her spirits .
Then there was the affair near Lagny , where we charged the intrenched Burgundians through the open field four times , the last time victoriously ; the best prize of it Franquet d'Arras , the free-booter and pitiless scourge of the region roundabout .
Joan crashed into the Burgundians at Marguy and was repulsed .
Then she saw the other Burgundians moving down from Clairoix .
Joan rallied her men and charged again , and was again rolled back .
Two assaults occupy a good deal of time -- and time was precious here .
The English were approaching the road now from Venette , but the boulevard opened fire on them and they were checked .
Joan heartened her men with inspiring words and led them to the charge again in great style .
This time she carried Marguy with a hurrah .
Then she turned at once to the right and plunged into the plan and struck the Clairoix force , which was just arriving ; then there was heavy work , and plenty of it , the two armies hurling each other backward turn about and about , and victory inclining first to the one , then to the other .
Now all of a sudden there was a panic on our side .
Some say one thing caused it , some another .
Some say the cannonade made our front ranks think retreat was being cut off by the English , some say the rear ranks got the idea that Joan was killed .
Anyway our men broke , and went flying in a wild rout for the causeway .
Joan tried to rally them and face them around , crying to them that victory was sure , but it did no good , they divided and swept by her like a wave .
Old D'Aulon begged her to retreat while there was yet a chance for safety , but she refused ; so he seized her horse 's bridle and bore her along with the wreck and ruin in spite of herself .
And so along the causeway they came swarming , that wild confusion of frenzied men and horses -- and the artillery had to stop firing , of course ; consequently the English and Burgundians closed in in safety , the former in front , the latter behind their prey .
Clear to the boulevard the French were washed in this enveloping inundation ; and there , cornered in an angle formed by the flank of the boulevard and the slope of the causeway , they bravely fought a hopeless fight , and sank down one by one .
The 24th of May .
We will draw down the curtain now upon the most strange , and pathetic , and wonderful military drama that has been played upon the stage of the world .
Joan of Arc will march no more .
The English had seen their opportunity , and it was the English power that was really acting , not the Church .
The Church was being used as a blind , a disguise ; and for a forcible reason : the Church was not only able to take the life of Joan of Arc , but to blight her influence and the valor-breeding inspiration of her name , whereas the English power could but kill her body ; that would not diminish or destroy the influence of her name ; it would magnify it and make it permanent .
Joan of Arc was the only power in France that the English did not despise , the only power in France that they considered formidable .
If the Church could be brought to take her life , or to proclaim her an idolater , a heretic , a witch , sent from Satan , not from heaven , it was believed that the English supremacy could be at once reinstated .
And yet when she heard at last that Compiegne was being closely besieged and likely to be captured , and that the enemy had declared that no inhabitant of it should escape massacre , not even children of seven years of age , she was in a fever at once to fly to our rescue .
So she tore her bedclothes to strips and tied them together and descended this frail rope in the night , and it broke , and she fell and was badly bruised , and remained three days insensible , meantime neither eating nor drinking .
Still France made no move .
How do I account for this ?
I think there is only one way .
You will remember that whenever Joan was not at the front , the French held back and ventured nothing ; that whenever she led , they swept everything before them , so long as they could see her white armor or her banner ; that every time she fell wounded or was reported killed -- as at Compiegne -- they broke in panic and fled like sheep .
I argue from this that they had undergone no real transformation as yet ; that at bottom they were still under the spell of a timorousness born of generations of unsuccess , and a lack of confidence in each other and in their leaders born of old and bitter experience in the way of treacheries of all sorts -- for their kings had been treacherous to their great vassals and to their generals , and these in turn were treacherous to the head of the state and to each other .
The soldiery found that they could depend utterly on Joan , and upon her alone .
With her gone , everything was gone .
She was the sun that melted the frozen torrents and set them boiling ; with that sun removed , they froze again , and the army and all France became what they had been before , mere dead corpses -- that and nothing more ; incapable of thought , hope , ambition , or motion .
2 Joan Sold to the English
MY WOUND gave me a great deal of trouble clear into the first part of October ; then the fresher weather renewed my life and strength .
All this time there were reports drifting about that the King was going to ransom Joan .
I believed these , for I was young and had not yet found out the littleness and meanness of our poor human race , which brags about itself so much , and thinks it is better and higher than the other animals .
`` He drained the cup of glory to the last drop , and went jubilant to his peace , blessedly spared all part in the disaster which was to follow .
What luck , what luck !
What was our sin that we are still here , we who have also earned our place with the happy dead ? ''
`` They tore the sacred Standard from his dead hand and carried it away , their most precious prize after its captured owner .
But they have n't it now .
A month ago we put our lives upon the risk -- our two good knights , my fellow-prisoners , and I -- and stole it , and got it smuggled by trusty hands to Orleans , and there it is now , safe for all time in the Treasury . ''
I attended Manchon constantly straight along , out of January and into February , and was often in the citadel with him -- in the very fortress where Joan was imprisoned , though not in the dungeon where she was confined , and so did not see her , of course .
Well , the time was approaching for the Great Trial .
For more than two months Cauchon had been raking and scraping everywhere for any odds and ends of evidence or suspicion or conjecture that might be usable against Joan , and carefully suppressing all evidence that came to hand in her favor .
He had limitless ways and means and powers at his disposal for preparing and strengthening the case for the prosecution , and he used them all .
When she learned that the court was made up of ecclesiastics in the interest of the English , she begged that in fairness an equal number of priests of the French party should be added to these .
Cauchon scoffed at her message , and would not even deign to answer it .
In the morning Manchon and I went early , yet as we approached the vast fortress we found crowds of men already there and still others gathering .
The chapel was already full and the way barred against further admissions of unofficial persons .
We took our appointed places .
Throned on high sat the president , Cauchon , Bishop of Beauvais , in his grand robes , and before him in rows sat his robed court -- fifty distinguished ecclesiastics , men of high degree in the Church , of clear-cut intellectual faces , men of deep learning , veteran adepts in strategy and casuistry , practised setters of traps for ignorant minds and unwary feet .
When I looked around upon this army of masters of legal fence , gathered here to find just one verdict and no other , and remembered that Joan must fight for her good name and her life single-handed against them , I asked myself what chance an ignorant poor country-girl of nineteen could have in such an unequal conflict ; and my heart sank down low , very low .
When I looked again at that obese president , puffing and wheezing there , his great belly distending and receding with each breath , and noted his three chins , fold above fold , and his knobby and knotty face , and his purple and splotchy complexion , and his repulsive cauliflower nose , and his cold and malignant eyes -- a brute , every detail of him -- my heart sank lower still .
And when I noted that all were afraid of this man , and shrank and fidgeted in their seats when his eye smote theirs , my last poor ray of hope dissolved away and wholly disappeared .
It made me catch my breath .
My heart began to thump like a hammer .
But there was silence now -- silence absolute .
All those noises ceased , and it was as if they had never been .
Not a sound ; the stillness grew oppressive ; it was like a weight upon one .
All faces were turned toward the door ; and one could properly expect that , for most of the people there suddenly realized , no doubt , that they were about to see , in actual flesh and blood , what had been to them before only an embodied prodigy , a word , a phrase , a world-girdling Name .
And so she went from the place in the midst of an impressive stillness , which made the sharper and more distressful to me the clank of those pathetic chains .
What presence of mind she had !
One could never surprise her out of it .
She saw Noel and me there when she first took her seat on the bench , and we flushed to the forehead with excitement and emotion , but her face showed nothing , betrayed nothing .
Her eyes sought us fifty times that day , but they passed on and there was never any ray of recognition in them .
Another would have started upon seeing us , and then -- why , then there could have been trouble for us , of course .
( 1 ) He kept his word .
His account of the Great Trial will be found to be in strict and detailed accordance with the sworn facts of history .
`` You are required now , to take the oath pure and simple , to answer truly all questions asked you . ''
The Bishop insisted and insisted , with rising temper ; Joan but shook her head and remained silent .
At last she said :
`` Now , Joan , the matter is very simple ; just speak up and frankly and truly answer the questions which I am going to ask you , as you have sworn to do . ''
Beaupere asked other questions .
I helped my mother in the household work and went to the pastures with the sheep and the cattle . ''
`` From what direction did it come ? ''
`` It was a noble Voice , and I thought it was sent to me from God .
The third time I heard it I recognized it as being an angel 's . ''
`` As to that , I will not tell you . ''
Then she told how she was balked and interrupted at Vaucouleurs , but finally got her soldiers , and began her march .
Joan was suspicious again .
She would not answer .
`` Passez outre , '' was all she said .
So Beaupere gave up the matter for the present .
Joan was troubled a moment , then she answered yes , it was a feast-day .
This was a shot which might make the first breach in a wall which had suffered no damage thus far .
There was immediate silence in the court and intense expectancy noticeable all about .
But Joan disappointed the house .
She merely made a slight little motion with her hand , as when one brushes away a fly , and said with reposeful indifference :
`` Take care what you do , my lord , you who are my judge , for you take a terrible responsibility on yourself and you presume too far . ''
It made a great stir , and Cauchon burst out upon her with an awful threat -- the threat of instant condemnation unless she obeyed .
That made the very bones of my body turn cold , and I saw cheeks about me blanch -- for it meant fire and the stake !
But Joan , still standing , answered him back , proud and undismayed :
The Bishop stormed out again :
Joan cut in with a nonchalant `` Passez outre , '' and Cauchon retired from the struggle ; but he retired with some credit this time , for he offered a compromise , and Joan , always clear-headed , saw protection for herself in it and promptly and willingly accepted it .
She was to swear to tell the truth `` as touching the matters et down in the proces verbal . ''
They could not sail her outside of definite limits , now ; her course was over a charted sea , henceforth .
The Bishop had granted more than he had intended , and more than he would honestly try to abide by .
By command , Beaupere resumed his examination of the accused .
It being Lent , there might be a chance to catch her neglecting some detail of her religious duties .
I could have told him he would fail there .
Why , religion was her life !
`` No , without touching me . ''
`` The Voice has commanded me to tell the King certain things , and not you -- and some very lately -- even last night ; things which I would he knew .
He would be more easy at his dinner . ''
`` Are you in a state of Grace ? ''
`` It was beyond the wisdom of man to devise that answer .
Whence comes this child 's amazing inspirations ? ''
`` Indeed yes , if I may go out from this prison -- but here , no . ''
Meaning , I think , that she would have to get permission of her Voices first .
Beaupere shifted once more to the matter of the male attire , now , and proceeded to make a solemn talk about it .
That tried Joan 's patience ; and presently she interrupted and said :
`` What revelations were made to the King ? ''
The subject was dropped now for a while , and Beaupere took up the matter of the miraculous sword of Fierbois to see if he could not find a chance there to fix the crime of sorcery upon Joan .
Joan had no concealments to make as to this :
`` Were you wearing it when you were taken in battle at Compiegne ? ''
`` The sword of the Burgundian Franquet d'Arras , whom I took prisoner in the engagement at Lagny .
I kept it because it was a good war-sword -- good to lay on stout thumps and blows with . ''
It made a great many smile ; and no wonder , when you consider what a gentle and innocent little thing she looked .
One could hardly believe she had ever even seen men slaughtered , she look so little fitted for such things .
THE NEXT sitting opened on Thursday the first of March .
Fifty-eight judges present -- the others resting .
As soon as the judge was better of his embarrassment he came back to the charge , but was prudent and passed by Joan 's question :
`` Is it true that you received a letter from the Count of Armagnac asking you which of the three Popes he ought to obey ? ''
`` Do you acknowledge as your own the document which has just been read ? ''
`` Yes , except that there are errors in it -- words which make me give myself too much importance . ''
I saw what was coming ; I was troubled and ashamed .
`` For instance , I did not say 'Deliver up to the Maid ' ( rendez au la Pucelle ) ; I said 'Deliver up to the King ' ( rendez au Roi ) ; and I did not call myself 'Commander-in-Chief ' ( chef de guerre ) .
All those are words which my secretary substituted ; or mayhap he misheard me or forgot what I said . ''
Now consider these things .
The French armies no longer existed .
The French cause was standing still , our King was standing still , there was no hint that by and by the Constable Richemont would come forward and take up the great work of Joan of Arc and finish it .
In face of all this , Joan made that prophecy -- made it with perfect confidence -- and it came true .
For within five years Paris fell -- 1436 -- and our King marched into it flying the victor 's flag .
So the first part of the prophecy was then fulfilled -- in fact , almost the entire prophecy ; for , with Paris in our hands , the fulfilment of the rest of it was assured .
They would have given their right hands to know the source of it .
`` I know it by revelation .
And I know it as surely as I know that you sit here before me . ''
To Joan , questions like these were profane frivolities and not worthy of serious notice ; she answered indifferently .
But the question brought to her mind another matter , and she turned upon Cauchon and said :
Perhaps they could be made to do Joan a damage .
`` Is that in your proces ? ''
`` That is not in your proces ; yet I will say this much : they told me that the King would become master of his kingdom in spite of his enemies . ''
If faces do really betray what is passing in men 's minds , a fear came upon many in that house , at this time , that maybe , after all , a chosen servant and herald of God was here being hunted to her death .
Movements and whisperings ceased : the stillness became almost painful .
Now you understand how the inquisitors were able to devise that long array of minutely prying questions ; questions whose subtlety and ingenuity and penetration are astonishing until we come to remember Loyseleur 's performance and recognize their source .
Ah , Bishop of Beauvais , you are now lamenting this cruel iniquity these many years in hell !
Yes verily , unless one has come to your help .
There is but one among the redeemed that would do it ; and it is futile to hope that that one has not already done it -- Joan of Arc .
We will return to the questionings .
That day was our understanding of it -- Noel 's and mine ; that was our dream ; and now we would count the days , the hours , the minutes .
They would fly lightly along ; they would soon be over .
In the present and also in later sittings Joan was urged to name the exact day of her deliverance ; but she could not do that .
She had not the permission of her Voices .
Moreover , the Voices themselves did not name the precise day .
Ever since the fulfilment of the prophecy , I have believed that Joan had the idea that her deliverance was going to come in the form of death .
But not that death !
Divine as she was , dauntless as she was in battle , she was human also .
She was not solely a saint , an angel , she was a clay-made girl also -- as human a girl as any in the world , and full of a human girl 's sensitiveness and tenderness and delicacies .
And so , that death !
No , she could not have lived the three months with that one before her , I think .
You remember that the first time she was wounded she was frightened , and cried , just as any other girl of seventeen would have done , although she had known for eighteen days that she was going to be wounded on that very day .
No , she was not afraid of any ordinary death , and an ordinary death was what she believed the prophecy of deliverance meant , I think , for her face showed happiness , not horror , when she uttered it .
10 The Inquisitors at Their Wits ' End
And so , as I have said , the session was stormy .
It was easy to see that these men had made up their minds to force words from Joan to-day which should shorten up her case and bring it to a prompt conclusion .
It shows that after all their experience with her they did not know her yet .
`` You are once more required to take the oath pure and simple . ''
`` I will answer to what is in the proces verbal .
When I do more , I will choose the occasion for myself . ''
`` That is not in your proces . ''
`` I have done best to serve and obey my sovereign Lord and Master . ''
`` The lancers of my guard did it .
It was to distinguish them from the rest of the forces .
It was their own idea . ''
When the lances were broken they were renewed . ''
`` Did the French people believe you were sent of God ? ''
`` As to that , I know not ; but whether they believed it or not , I was not the less sent of God . ''
Why they were transported with joy to see her .
When they could not kiss her hands or her feet , they knelt in the mire and kissed the hoof-prints of her horse .
They worshiped her ; and that is what these priests were trying to prove .
It was nothing to them that she was not to blame for what other people did .
No , if she was worshiped , it was enough ; she was guilty of mortal sin .
`` Did you not say that you would rather die than be delivered into the power of the English ? ''
There were signs that here and there in the court a judge was being softened toward Joan by her courage , her presence of mind , her fortitude , her constancy , her piety , her simplicity and candor , her manifest purity , the nobility of her character , her fine intelligence , and the good brave fight she was making , all friendless and alone , against unfair odds , and there was grave room for fear that this softening process would spread further and presently bring Cauchon's plans in danger .
`` They love whom Our Lord loves , and hate whom He hates . ''
`` Ah , you asked their pardon ?
So you knew you were guilty of sin in going without their leave ! ''
Her eyes flashed , and she exclaimed :
`` I was commanded of God , and it was right to go !
If I had had a hundred fathers and mothers and been a king 's daughter to boot I would have gone . ''
`` For myself I had horses and arms , and money to pay the service in my household . ''
`` Had you not a treasury ? ''
`` Whether it was the Standard or whether it was I , is nothing -- the victories came from God . ''
In God , and not otherwise . ''
It was not . ''
`` Why was it that your Standard had place at the crowning of the King in the Cathedral of Rheims , rather than those of the other captains ? ''
( 1 ) What she said has been many times translated , but never with success .
There is a haunting pathos about the original which eludes all efforts to convey it into our tongue .
It is as subtle as an odor , and escapes in the transmission .
Her words were these :
Monseigneur Ricard , Honorary Vicar-General to the Archbishop of Aix , finely speaks of it ( Jeanne d'Arc la Venerable , page 197 ) as `` that sublime reply , enduring in the history of celebrated sayings like the cry of a French and Christian soul wounded unto death in its patriotism and its faith . ''
Certainly there was no baseness that those people were ashamed to stoop to in their hunt for that friendless girl 's life .
What they wanted to show was this -- that she had committed the sin of relapsing from her vow and trying to violate it .
The rest of this day and part of the next the court labored upon the old theme -- the male attire .
It was shabby work for those grave men to be engaged in ; for they well knew one of Joan 's reasons for clinging to the male dress was , that soldiers of the guard were always present in her room whether she was asleep or awake , and that the male dress was a better protection for her modesty than the other .
That was just her way .
If a thing was to be done , it was love first , and hammer and tongs to follow ; but no shilly-shallying between .
She added with a little sigh :
`` I have asked their leave several times , but they have not given it . ''
Now , then , at this point , something occurred which convinces me , every time I think of it -- and it struck me so at the time -- that for a moment , at least , her hopes wandered to the King , and put into her mind the same notion about her deliverance which Noel and I had settled upon -- a rescue by her old soldiers .
I think the idea of the rescue did occur to her , but only as a passing thought , and that it quickly passed away .
`` It is a weighty answer . ''
`` As to that , I do not know .
My hope for salvation is in holding fast to my oath to keep by body and my soul pure . ''
The snare was ingeniously devised , but Joan 's simple and humble answer left it empty :
Then Jean de la Fontaine corrected her notion that there was but one Church .
There were two -- the Church Triumphant , which is God , the saints , the angels , and the redeemed , and has its seat in heaven ; and the Church Militant , which is our Holy Father the Pope , Vicar of God , the prelates , the clergy and all good Christians and Catholics , the which Church has its seat in the earth , is governed by the Holy Spirit , and can not err .
`` Will you not submit those matters to the Church Militant ? ''
`` I am come to the King of France from the Church Triumphant on high by its commandant , and to that Church I will submit all those things which I have done .
For the Church Militant I have no other answer now . ''
It made the Bishop 's purple face fairly blanch with consternation .
If Joan had only known , if she had only know !
She had lodged a mine under this black conspiracy able to blow the Bishop 's schemes to the four winds of heaven , and she did n't know it .
She had made that speech by mere instinct , not suspecting what tremendous forces were hidden in it , and there was none to tell her what she had done .
I knew , and Manchon knew ; and if she had known how to read writing we could have hoped to get the knowledge to her somehow ; but speech was the only way , and none was allowed to approach her near enough for that .
So there she sat , once more Joan of Arc the Victorious , but all unconscious of it .
She was miserably worn and tired , by the long day 's struggle and by illness , or she must have noticed the effect of that speech and divined the reason of it .
Rome would have given her a fair trial , and that was all that her cause needed .
From that trial she would have gone forth free , and honored , and blessed .
Maybe that was on account of Lohier 's remark upon that head ; or maybe it was hoped that the reading would kill the prisoner with fatigue -- for , as it turned out , this reading occupied several days .
It was also decided that Joan should be required to answer squarely to every article , and that if she refused she should be considered convicted .
You see , Cauchon was managing to narrow her chances more and more all the time ; he was drawing the toils closer and closer .
The Bishop was not expecting any other reply .
He had made a show of fairness and could have it entered on the minutes , therefore he was satisfied .
There it is -- every fact of her life distorted , perverted , reversed .
As a child she had loved the fairies , she had spoken a pitying word for them when they were banished from their home , she had played under their tree and around their fountain -- hence she was a comrade of evil spirits .
She denied the accusation of idolatry and that she had sought men's homage .
She had the pluck to say to that deadly tribunal that she did not know the fairies to be evil beings .
She knew it was a perilous thing to say , but it was not in her nature to speak anything but the truth when she spoke at all .
Danger had no weight with her in such things .
Note was taken of her remark .
She was reproached with doing man 's work in the wars and thus deserting the industries proper to her sex .
She answered , with some little touch of soldierly disdain :
The judge mixed the Burgundians and English together in speaking of the enemy which Joan had come to make war upon .
But she showed that she made a distinction between them by act and word , the Burgundians being Frenchmen and therefore entitled to less brusque treatment than the English .
`` If they had listened to me , '' said she , `` they would have done wisely . ''
At this point she uttered her prophecy again , saying with emphasis , `` Before seven years they will see it themselves . ''
At one point she corrected the proces verbal , saying :
This third trial was ended at last .
And once again there was no definite result .
Joan cried out that she would gladly go before so fairly constructed a tribunal as that ; but before Isambard could say another word Cauchon turned savagely upon him and exclaimed :
`` Shut up , in the devil 's name ! ''
It is not necessary . ''
Part of the first one says Joan asserts that she has found her salvation .
She never said anything of the kind .
It also says she refuses to submit herself to the Church .
She was willing to submit all her acts to this Rouen tribunal except those done by the command of God in fulfilment of her mission .
Those she reserved for the judgment of God .
She refused to recognize Cauchon and his serfs as the Church , but was willing to go before the Pope or the Council of Basel .
He meant that to escape the stake she might undo the bandage and let herself bleed to death .
But Cauchon was not touched .
He made another of those conscienceless speeches of his , all dripping with hypocrisy and guile .
He told Joan that among her answers had been some which had seemed to endanger religion ; and as she was ignorant and without knowledge of the Scriptures , he had brought some good and wise men to instruct her , if she desired it .
Said he , `` We are churchmen , and disposed by our good will as well as by our vocation to procure for you the salvation of your soul and your body , in every way in our power , just as we would do the like for our nearest kin or for ourselves .
In this we but follow the example of Holy Church , who never closes the refuge of her bosom against any that are willing to return . ''
`` Then if you want the Sacraments , you must do as all good Catholics do , and submit to the Church . ''
There was some more conversation of the like sort , then Cauchon demanded again , and imperiously , that she submit herself and all her deeds to the Church .
His threatening and storming went for nothing .
That body was weak , but the spirit in it was the spirit of Joan of Arc ; and out of that came the steadfast answer which these people were already so familiar with and detested so sincerely :
`` Let come what may .
I will neither do nor say any otherwise than I have said already in your tribunals . ''
`` The Church calls upon you to submit ; disobey , and she will abandon you as if you were a pagan ! ''
My heart was like lead in my body when I went out from that dungeon ; but she -- she was serene , she was not troubled .
She had done what she believed to be her duty , and that was sufficient ; the consequences were not her affair .
The last thing she said that time was full of this serenity , full of contented repose :
15 Undaunted by Threat of Burning
Why , it was almost cruel the way those moldy veterans laughed ; and as for the orator , he looked so flustered and helpless that almost anybody would have pitied him , and I had difficulty to keep from doing it myself .
Yes , Joan was feeling very well after her rest , and the native mischief that was in her lay near the surface .
It did not show when she made the remark , but I knew it was close in there back of the words .
Ah , that would have smitten you or me dead with fright , but it only roused the lion heart of Joan of Arc , and in her answer rang that martial note which had used to stir her soldiers like a bugle-call :
`` Would you be willing to do so and so if we should give you leave ? ''
Cauchon lived in the great palace of the Archbishop , and it was guarded by English soldiery ; but no matter , there was never a dark night but the walls showed next morning that the rude joker had been there with his paint and brush .
Yes , he had been there , and had smeared the sacred walls with pictures of hogs in all attitudes except flattering ones ; hogs clothed in a Bishop 's vestments and wearing a Bishop 's miter irreverently cocked on the side of their heads .
So all Rouen laughed again , and kept it up for three days , saying :
And the palace walls got a new decoration -- a mitered hog carrying a discarded rack home on its shoulder , and Loyseleur weeping in its wake .
Many rewards were offered for the capture of these painters , but nobody applied .
Even the English guard feigned blindness and would not see the artists at work .
The doctors of the University had to see those creatures in order to know ; and if Joan was deceived , it is argument that they in their turn could also be deceived , for their insight and judgment were surely not clearer than hers .
To-morrow -- twenty-fourth of May !
Exactly a year since I saw her go speeding across the plain at the head of her troops , her silver helmet shining , her silvery cape fluttering in the wind , her white plumes flowing , her sword held aloft ; saw her charge the Burgundian camp three times , and carry it ; saw her wheel to the right and spur for the duke's reserves ; saw her fling herself against it in the last assault she was ever to make .
And now that fatal day was come again -- and see what it was bringing !
Now that was a shrewd thought .
She was but a girl after all , and , under illness and exhaustion , subject to a girl 's weaknesses .
Yes , it was shrewdly thought .
She had tacitly said herself that under the bitter pains of the rack they would be able to extort a false confession from her .
It was a hint worth remembering , and it was remembered .
She had furnished another hint at the same time : that as soon as the pains were gone , she would retract the confession .
That hint was also remembered .
That would not answer ; for only her death would content the English .
Alive she was a terror , in a prison or out of it .
She had escaped from two prisons already .
The world knows now that Cauchon 's plan was as I have sketched it to you , but the world did not know it at that time .
There are sufficient indications that Warwick and all the other English chiefs except the highest one -- the Cardinal of Winchester -- were not let into the secret , also , that only Loyseleur and Beaupere , on the French side , knew the scheme .
Sometimes I have doubted if even Loyseleur and Beaupere knew the whole of it at first .
However , if any did , it was these two .
The streets were surging tides of excited men .
It was difficult to make one 's way .
Toward midnight our aimless tramp brought us to the neighborhood of the beautiful church of St. Ouen , and there all was bustle and work .
The square was a wilderness of torches and people ; and through a guarded passage dividing the pack , laborers were carrying planks and timbers and disappearing with them through the gate of the churchyard .
We asked what was going forward ; the answer was :
`` Scaffolds and the stake .
Do n't you know that the French witch is to be burned in the morning ? ''
Then we went away .
We had no heart for that place .
At last the stillness was broken .
From beyond the square rose an indistinct sound , but familiar -- court , crisp phrases of command ; next I saw the plain of heads dividing , and the steady swing of a marching host was glimpsed between .
My heart leaped for a moment .
Was it La Hire and his hellions ?
No -- that was not their gait .
No , it was the prisoner and her escort ; it was Joan of Arc , under guard , that was coming ; my spirits sank as low as they had been before .
Weak as she was they made her walk ; they would increase her weakness all they could .
The distance was not great -- it was but a few hundred yards -- but short as it was it was a heavy tax upon one who had been lying chained in one spot for months , and whose feet had lost their powers from inaction .
Yes , and for a year Joan had known only the cool damps of a dungeon , and now she was dragging herself through this sultry summer heat , this airless and suffocating void .
As she entered the gate , drooping with exhaustion , there was that creature Loyseleur at her side with his head bent to her ear .
We knew afterward that he had been with her again this morning in the prison wearying her with his persuasions and enticing her with false promises , and that he was now still at the same work at the gate , imploring her to yield everything that would be required of her , and assuring her that if she would do this all would be well with her : she would be rid of the dreaded English and find safety in the powerful shelter and protection of the Church .
A miserable man , a stony-hearted man !
`` By my faith , sir !
I make bold to say and swear , on pain of death , that he is the most noble Christian of all Christians , and the best lover of the faith and the Church ! ''
The Pope once more !
It was very embarrassing .
Here was a person who was asked to submit her case to the Church , and who frankly consents -- offers to submit it to the very head of it .
What more could any one require ?
How was one to answer such a formidably unanswerable answer as that ?
from the priests ; `` sign -- sign and be saved ! ''
And Loyseleur was urging at her ear , `` Do as I told you -- do not destroy yourself ! ''
The great crime was accomplished .
She had signed -- what ?
She did not know -- but the others knew .
She had signed a paper confessing herself a sorceress , a dealer with devils , a liar , a blasphemer of God and His angels , a lover of blood , a promoter of sedition , cruel , wicked , commissioned of Satan ; and this signature of hers bound her to resume the dress of a woman .
Loyseleur pressed forward and praised her for having done `` such a good day 's work . ''
But she was still dreamy , she hardly heard .
The rumbling of a drum broke upon the stillness , and for just one moment she thought of the glorious deliverance promised by her Voices -- I read it in the rapture that lit her face ; then she saw what it was -- her prison escort -- and that light faded , never to revive again .
And now her head began a piteous rocking motion , swaying slowly , this way and that , as is the way when one is suffering unwordable pain , or when one 's heart is broken ; then drearily she went from us , with her face in her hands , and sobbing bitterly .
`` Give yourself no uneasiness , my lord ; we shall soon have her again . ''
For we were young then , yes , we were very young .
No , there was no rest for her , with those sleuth-hounds on her track .
Cauchon and some of his people followed her to her lair straightway ; they found her dazed and dull , her mental and physical forces in a state of prostration .
They told her she had abjured ; that she had made certain promises -- among them , to resume the apparel of her sex ; and that if she relapsed , the Church would cast her out for good and all .
She heard the words , but they had no meaning to her .
She was like a person who has taken a narcotic and is dying for sleep , dying for rest from nagging , dying to be let alone , and who mechanically does everything the persecutor asks , taking but dull note of the things done , and but dully recording them in the memory .
And so Joan put on the gown which Cauchon and his people had brought ; and would come to herself by and by , and have at first but a dim idea as to when and how the change had come about .
Why , then she must be forced to do it .
Did Cauchon hint to the English guards that thenceforth if they chose to make their prisoner 's captivity crueler and bitterer than ever , no official notice would be taken of it ?
Perhaps so ; since the guards did begin that policy at once , and no official notice was taken of it .
Yes , from that moment Joan 's life in that dungeon was made almost unendurable .
Do not ask me to enlarge upon it .
I will not do it .
22 Joan Gives the Fatal Answer
Soon other voices took up that cry -- tens , scores , hundreds of voices ; all the world seemed filled with the brutal joy of it .
And there were other clamors -- the clatter of rushing feet , merry congratulations , bursts of coarse laughter , the rolling of drums , the boom and crash of distant bands profaning the sacred day with the music of victory and thanksgiving .
About the middle of the afternoon came a summons for Manchon and me to go to Joan 's dungeon -- a summons from Cauchon .
But by that time distrust had already taken possession of the English and their soldiery again , and all Rouen was in an angry and threatening mood .
We could see plenty of evidences of this from our own windows -- fist-shaking , black looks , tumultuous tides of furious men billowing by along the street .
That was her way .
It was not in her character to hold a servant to account for what his master had made him do , and her mind had cleared now , and she knew that the advantage which had been taken of her the previous morning had its origin , not in the subordinate but in the master -- Cauchon .
`` There is something suspicious about this .
How could it have come about without connivance on the part of others ?
Perhaps even something worse ? ''
There -- I had been sure , all along , that she did not know what she was doing and saying on the platform Thursday , and this answer of hers was proof that I had not been mistaken .
Then she went on to add this :
Then Joan held out her fettered hands sorrowfully toward these unfeeling men and said :
That is , fear of the fire had made her sign a paper whose contents she had not understood then , but understood now by revelation of her Voices and by testimony of her persecutors .
And now she closed this most painful scene with these words ; and there was a weary note in them that was pathetic :
`` I would rather do my penance all at once ; let me die .
I can not endure captivity any longer . ''
It is something she wishes done .
She said she had noticed the young man who helps me , and that he had a good face ; and did I think he would do a kindness for her ?
I said I knew you would , and asked her what it was , and she said a letter -- would you write a letter to her mother ?
Then he sent orders that Joan of Arc be conveyed the next morning to the place known as the Old Market ; and that she be then delivered to the civil judge , and by the civil judge to the executioner .
That meant she would be burnt .
Or was it of the kind of death she must suffer ?
I hoped not ; for she feared only one kind , and that one had for her unspeakable terrors .
I believed she so feared that one that with her strong will she would shut the thought of it wholly out of her mind , and hope and believe that God would take pity on her and grant her an easier one ; and so it might chance that the awful news which we were bringing might come as a surprise to her at last .
`` Ah , be patient , Joan .
You die because you have not kept your promise , but have returned to your sins . ''
Then Cauchon winced , and looked less placidly content than before , and he turned him about and went away .
All these things I saw , albeit dimly and blurred with tears ; but I could bear no more .
I continued in my place , but what I shall deliver to you now I got by others ' eyes and others ' mouths .
Tragic sounds there were that pierced my ears and wounded my heart as I sat there , but it is as I tell you : the latest image recorded by my eyes in that desolating hour was Joan of Arc with the grace of her comely youth still unmarred ; and that image , untouched by time or decay , has remained with me all my days .
Now I will go on .
She heard the flames crackling below her , and immediately distress for a fellow-creature who was in danger took possession of her .
It was the friar Isambard .
She had given him her cross and begged him to raise it toward her face and let her eyes rest in hope and consolation upon it till she was entered into the peace of God .
She made him go out from the danger of the fire .
Then she was satisfied , and said :
`` I am come , Joan , to exhort you for the last time to repent and seek the pardon of God . ''
Yes , she was gone from us : JOAN OF ARC !
What little words they are , to tell of a rich world made empty and poor !
She said I would live until those wars were forgotten -- a prophecy which failed .
If I should live a thousand years it would still fail .
For whatsoever had touch with Joan of Arc , that thing is immortal .
Now as to the Rehabilitation .
Joan crowned the King at Rheims .
For reward he allowed her to be hunted to her death without making one effort to save her .
During the next twenty-three years he remained indifferent to her memory ; indifferent to the fact that her good name was under a damning blot put there by the priest because of the deeds which she had done in saving him and his scepter ; indifferent to the fact that France was ashamed , and longed to have the Deliverer 's fair fame restored .
Indifferent all that time .
Then he suddenly changed and was anxious to have justice for poor Joan himself .
Had he become grateful at last ?
Had remorse attacked his hard heart ?
No , he had a better reason -- a better one for his sort of man .
This better reason was that , now that the English had been finally expelled from the country , they were beginning to call attention to the fact that this King had gotten his crown by the hands of a person proven by the priests to have been in league with Satan and burned for it by them as a sorceress -- therefore , of what value or authority was such a Kingship as that ?
Of no value at all ; no nation could afford to allow such a king to remain on the throne .
It was high time to stir now , and the King did it .
That is how Charles VII .
came to be smitten with anxiety to have justice done the memory of his benefactress .
I studied over it , but could n't seem to git at the right of it , no way .
`` Better slip back there and tie him , and land the ship , '' he says .
`` Well , then , it 's just as I reckoned .
The professor lied . ''
`` Tom Sawyer , what 's a map for ?
Ai n't it to learn you facts ? ''
He see I had him , and Jim see it too ; and I tell you , I felt pretty good , for Tom Sawyer was always a hard person to git ahead of .
Jim slapped his leg and says :
But I could n't see no argument about that , and neither could Jim .
Jim shook his head , and says :
Then he took the glass and hunted up another clock , and sure enough it was an hour fast too .
Then his eyes began to spread and his breath to come out kinder gaspy like , and he says :
`` Well , what 's been and gone and happened now ? ''
`` Yes , they 're right . ''
`` Mars Tom , is you tryin ' to let on dat de time ai n't de SAME everywheres ? ''
I never heard such ignorance .
There ai n't no discriminating about it .
When he makes you and some more of his children black , and makes the rest of us white , what do you call that ? ''
He never asked . ''
`` Mars Tom talkin ' sich talk as dat !
Choosday in one place en Monday in t'other , bofe in the same day !
Huck , dis ai n't no place to joke -- up here whah we is .
Two days in one day !
How you gwine to get two days inter one day ?
Ca n't git two hours inter one hour , kin you ?
Ca n't git two niggers inter one nigger skin , kin you ?
Ca n't git two gallons of whisky inter a one-gallon jug , kin you ?
No , sir , 'twould strain de jug .
Yes , en even den you could n't , I do n't believe .
Why , looky here , Huck , s'posen de Choosday was New Year 's -- now den !
is you gwine to tell me it 's dis year in one place en las ' year in t'other , bofe in de identical same minute ?
It 's de beatenest rubbage !
I ca n't stan ' it -- I ca n't stan ' to hear tell 'bout it . ''
Then he begun to shiver and turn gray , and Tom says :
Jim shivered again , and says :
AND it got lonesomer and lonesomer .
There was the big sky up there , empty and awful deep ; and the ocean down there without a thing on it but just the waves .
All around us was a ring , where the sky and the water come together ; yes , a monstrous big ring it was , and we right in the dead center of it -- plumb in the center .
We was racing along like a prairie fire , but it never made any difference , we could n't seem to git past that center no way .
I could n't see that we ever gained an inch on that ring .
It made a body feel creepy , it was so curious and unaccountable .
He was turning away , but he whirled around when we said that , and give us a long look of his blackest kind -- one of the maliciousest and suspiciousest looks I ever see .
`` You want to leave me .
Do n't try to deny it . ''
We set there huddled up in the bow , and talked low about the poor professor ; and everybody was sorry for him , and sorry the world had made fun of him and treated him so harsh , when he was doing the best he could , and had n't a friend nor nobody to encourage him and keep him from brooding his mind away and going deranged .
There was plenty of clothes and blankets and everything at the other end , but we thought we 'd ruther take the rain than go meddling back there .
WE tried to make some plans , but we could n't come to no agreement .
Me and Jim was for turning around and going back home , but Tom allowed that by the time daylight come , so we could see our way , we would be so far toward England that we might as well go there , and come back in a ship , and have the glory of saying we done it .
So then he p'inted her east , and said he would hold her there till we rousted out the breakfast .
The professor had laid in everything a body could want ; he could n't 'a ' been better fixed .
There was n't no milk for the coffee , but there was water , and everything else you could want , and a charcoal stove and the fixings for it , and pipes and cigars and matches ; and wine and liquor , which war n't in our line ; and books , and maps , and charts , and an accordion ; and furs , and blankets , and no end of rubbish , like brass beads and brass jewelry , which Tom said was a sure sign that he had an idea of visiting among savages .
There was money , too .
Yes , the professor was well enough fixed .
`` Tom Sawyer , this ai n't no welkin , it 's a balloon . ''
`` Well , now , who SAID it was a welkin , smarty ? ''
`` Oh , I thought it did .
Well , then , what is a welkin ? ''
Jim was satisfied to stop .
He was dreadful pleased with himself for catching Tom out .
The minute Tom begun to talk about birds I judged he was a goner , because Jim knowed more about birds than both of us put together .
You see , he had killed hundreds and hundreds of them , and that 's the way to find out about birds .
That 's the way people does that writes books about birds , and loves them so that they 'll go hungry and tired and take any amount of trouble to find a new bird and kill it .
Their name is ornithologers , and I could have been an ornithologer myself , because I always loved birds and creatures ; and I started out to learn how to be one , and I see a bird setting on a limb of a high tree , singing with its head tilted back and its mouth open , and before I thought I fired , and his song stopped and he fell straight down from the limb , all limp like a rag , and I run and picked him up and he was dead , and his body was warm in my hand , and his head rolled about this way and that , like his neck was broke , and there was a little white skin over his eyes , and one little drop of blood on the side of his head ; and , laws !
I could n't see nothing more for the tears ; and I hai n't never murdered no creature since that war n't doing me no harm , and I ain't going to .
It was my watch till midnight , and then it was Jim 's ; but Tom stayed up , because he said ship captains done that when they was making the land , and did n't stand no regular watch .
It made Tom fly , but it took the stiffening all out of my legs .
I could only just gasp along the way you do in a dream when there 's a ghost gaining on you .
But Tom was aboard by this time , and he started the balloon up a little , and stopped it again as soon as the end of the ladder was ten or twelve feet above ground .
And there was the lion , a-ripping around under me , and roaring and springing up in the air at the ladder , and only missing it about a quarter of an inch , it seemed to me .
It was delicious to be out of his reach , perfectly delicious , and made me feel good and thankful all up one side ; but I was hanging there helpless and couldn't climb , and that made me feel perfectly wretched and miserable all down the other .
It is most seldom that a person feels so mixed like that ; and it is not to be recommended , either .
`` Do n't go so fast , '' I shouted .
`` It makes my head swim . ''
He had started like a lightning express .
He slowed down , and we glided over the sand slower , but still in a kind of sickening way ; for it IS uncomfortable to see things sliding and gliding under you like that , and not a sound .
`` I bet you a thousand to one I know where we are .
We 're in the Great Sahara , as sure as guns ! ''
`` 'Tai n't in either ; it 's in Africa . ''
Jim was gazing down with the glass .
He shook his head and says :
`` Spiders in a desert , you shad ?
Spiders walking in a procession ?
You do n't ever reflect , Huck Finn , and I reckon you really have n't got anything to reflect WITH .
Do n't you know we 're as much as a mile up in the air , and that that string of crawlers is two or three miles away ?
Spiders , good land !
Spiders as big as a cow ?
Perhaps you 'd like to go down and milk one of 'em .
But they 're camels , just the same .
It 's a caravan , that 's what it is , and it 's a mile long . ''
`` All right , '' he says , and give the command :
`` Ca n't a man walk miles ? ''
`` Ca n't a flea ? ''
`` Well , hit do look sorter so , but I would n't 'a ' b'lieved it , Mars Tom . ''
`` Is dem figgers jist edjackly true , en no jokin ' en no lies , Mars Tom ? ''
`` Well , I bet they do .
They 've got ever so much more sense , and brains , and brightness , in proportion to their size , than any other cretur in the world .
A person can learn them 'most anything ; and they learn it quicker than any other cretur , too .
They 've been learnt to haul little carriages in harness , and go this way and that way and t'other way according to their orders ; yes , and to march and drill like soldiers , doing it as exact , according to orders , as soldiers does it .
They've been learnt to do all sorts of hard and troublesome things .
S'pose you could cultivate a flea up to the size of a man , and keep his natural smartness a-growing and a-growing right along up , bigger and bigger , and keener and keener , in the same proportion -- where 'd the human race be , do you reckon ?
That flea would be President of the United States , and you could n't any more prevent it than you can prevent lightning . ''
`` There 's more to him , by a long sight , than there is to any other cretur , man or beast , in proportion to size .
He 's the interestingest of them all .
People have so much to say about an ant 's strength , and an elephant 's , and a locomotive 's .
Shucks , they do n't begin with a flea .
He can lift two or three hundred times his own weight .
And none of them can come anywhere near it .
And , moreover , he has got notions of his own , and is very particular , and you ca n't fool him ; his instinct , or his judgment , or whatever it is , is perfectly sound and clear , and don't ever make a mistake .
People think all humans are alike to a flea .
It ai n't so .
There 's folks that he wo n't go near , hungry or not hungry , and I 'm one of them .
I 've never had one of them on me in my life . ''
We went up to the cold weather to freeze 'em out , and stayed a little spell , and then come back to the comfortable weather and went lazying along twenty or twenty-five miles an hour , the way we 'd been doing for the last few hours .
The reason was , that the longer we was in that solemn , peaceful desert , the more the hurry and fuss got kind of soothed down in us , and the more happier and contented and satisfied we got to feeling , and the more we got to liking the desert , and then loving it .
So we had cramped the speed down , as I was saying , and was having a most noble good lazy time , sometimes watching through the glasses , sometimes stretched out on the lockers reading , sometimes taking a nap .
`` Had he lost an upper front tooth ? ''
`` Was his off hind leg lame ? ''
`` Was he loaded with millet-seed on one side and honey on the other ? ''
Tom 's chin dropped on his breast , and 'stead of being mad , as I reckoned he 'd be , to hear me scoff at his tale that way , he seemed to be only sad ; and he says :
We had had two hours of that blazing weather down there , and was dreadful thirsty when we got aboard again .
We went straight for the water , but it was spoiled and bitter , besides being pretty near hot enough to scald your mouth .
We could n't drink it .
It was Mississippi river water , the best in the world , and we stirred up the mud in it to see if that would help , but no , the mud was n't any better than the water .
Well , we had n't been so very , very thirsty before , while we was interested in the lost people , but we was now , and as soon as we found we could n't have a drink , we was more than thirty-five times as thirsty as we was a quarter of a minute before .
Why , in a little while we wanted to hold our mouths open and pant like a dog .
`` Boys , it was a MYridge ! ''
Said it like he was glad .
I did n't see nothing to be glad about .
Jim was trembling all over , and so scared he could n't speak , but he wanted to ask that question himself if he could 'a ' done it .
`` What 's BECOME of it ?
Why , you see yourself it 's gone . ''
It astonished Jim to hear him talk so , and he broke in and says , kind of pleading and distressed :
`` What do YOU say -- is the sun standing still ? ''
`` Tom Sawyer , what 's the use to ask such a jackass question ?
Anybody that ai n't blind can see it do n't stand still . ''
We shut down some of the power , so as not to outspeed them , and took out after them .
We went skimming along a quarter of a mile behind them , and when we had followed them an hour and a half and was getting pretty discouraged , and was thirsty clean to unendurableness , Tom says :
`` Take the glass , one of you , and see what that is , away ahead of the birds . ''
Then we went down and had a swim , and then Tom came up and spelled me , and me and Jim had a swim , and then Jim spelled Tom , and me and Tom had a foot-race and a boxing-mill , and I do n't reckon I ever had such a good time in my life .
It war n't so very hot , because it was close on to evening , and we had n't any clothes on , anyway .
Clothes is well enough in school , and in towns , and at balls , too , but there ai n't no sense in them when there ai n't no civilization nor other kinds of bothers and fussiness around .
`` Leggo , and drop ! ''
As for the clothes , they war n't any , any more .
Every last rag of them was inside of the animals ; and not agreeing with them very well , I don't reckon , for there was considerable many brass buttons on them , and there was knives in the pockets , too , and smoking tobacco , and nails and chalk and marbles and fishhooks and things .
But I was n't caring .
All that was bothering me was , that all we had now was the professor 's clothes , a big enough assortment , but not suitable to go into company with , if we came across any , because the britches was as long as tunnels , and the coats and things according .
Still , there was everything a tailor needed , and Jim was a kind of jack legged tailor , and he allowed he could soon trim a suit or two down for us that would answer .
STILL , we thought we would drop down there a minute , but on another errand .
Most of the professor 's cargo of food was put up in cans , in the new way that somebody had just invented ; the rest was fresh .
When you fetch Missouri beefsteak to the Great Sahara , you want to be particular and stay up in the coolish weather .
So we reckoned we would drop down into the lion market and see how we could make out there .
It was strange and unnatural to see lion eat lion , and we thought maybe they war n't kin .
But Jim said that did n't make no difference .
He said a hog was fond of her own children , and so was a spider , and he reckoned maybe a lion was pretty near as unprincipled though maybe not quite .
He thought likely a lion would n't eat his own father , if he knowed which was him , but reckoned he would eat his brother-in-law if he was uncommon hungry , and eat his mother-in-law any time .
But RECKONING do n't settle nothing .
You can reckon till the cows come home , but that do n't fetch you to no decision .
So we give it up and let it drop .
`` Shucks , there 's plenty sand , you need n't worry . ''
`` Well , '' he says , `` this Desert is about the shape of the United States , and if you was to lay it down on top of the United States , it would cover the land of the free out of sight like a blanket .
There 'd be a little corner sticking out , up at Maine and away up northwest , and Florida sticking out like a turtle 's tail , and that 's all .
We 've took California away from the Mexicans two or three years ago , so that part of the Pacific coast is ours now , and if you laid the Great Sahara down with her edge on the Pacific , she would cover the United States and stick out past New York six hundred miles into the Atlantic ocean . ''
`` Ef a thing ai n't no good , it 's made in vain , ai n't it ? ''
`` Mars Tom , I b'lieve it uz jes like when you 's buildin ' a house ; dey's allays a lot o ' truck en rubbish lef ' over .
What does you do wid it ?
Doan ' you take en k'yart it off en dump it into a ole vacant back lot ?
Now , den , it 's my opinion hit was jes like dat -- dat de Great Sahara war n't made at all , she jes HAPPEN ' . ''
`` That 's it -- it 's the one I 've been looking for , sure .
If I 'm right , it's the one the dervish took the man into and showed him all the treasures . ''
The driver was so glad he could n't hardly hold in , and says :
`` All de same , Mars Tom , dey IS sich a thing as learnin ' by expe'ence .
De Good Book say de burnt chile shun de fire . ''
`` Well , I ai n't denying that a thing 's a lesson if it 's a thing that can happen twice just the same way .
There 's lots of such things , and THEY educate a person , that 's what Uncle Abner always said ; but there 's forty MILLION lots of the other kind -- the kind that do n't happen the same way twice -- and they ai n't no real use , they ai n't no more instructive than the small-pox .
When you 've got it , it ai n't no good to find out you ought to been vaccinated , and it ai n't no good to git vaccinated afterward , because the small-pox do n't come but once .
But , on the other hand , Uncle Abner said that the person that had took a bull by the tail once had learnt sixty or seventy times as much as a person that had n't , and said a person that started in to carry a cat home by the tail was gitting knowledge that was always going to be useful to him , and warn't ever going to grow dim or doubtful .
But I can tell you , Jim , Uncle Abner was down on them people that 's all the time trying to dig a lesson out of everything that happens , no matter whether -- ''
Tom said nobody war n't accusing him .
That made him look like he wished he had n't said anything .
And he wanted to git away from the subject , I reckon , because he begun to abuse the camel-driver , just the way a person does when he has got catched in something and wants to take it out of somebody else .
He let into the camel-driver the hardest he knowed how , and I had to agree with him ; and he praised up the dervish the highest he could , and I had to agree with him there , too .
`` Because he knowed how he was going to get all of them by and by . ''
And to me and Jim , as wonderful a thing as any was the way Tom could come into a strange big country like this and go straight and find a little hump like that and tell it in a minute from a million other humps that was almost just like it , and nothing to help him but only his own learning and his own natural smartness .
We talked and talked it over together , but could n't make out how he done it .
He had the best head on him I ever see ; and all he lacked was age , to make a name for himself equal to Captain Kidd or George Washington .
I bet you it would 'a' crowded either of THEM to find that hill , with all their gifts , but it war n't nothing to Tom Sawyer ; he went across Sahara and put his finger on it as easy as you could pick a nigger out of a bunch of angels .
And you know the more you join in with people in their joys and their sorrows , the more nearer and dearer they come to be to you .
Now we war n't cold and indifferent , the way most travelers is , we was right down friendly and sociable , and took a chance in everything that was going , and the caravan could depend on us to be on hand every time , it did n't make no difference what it was .
`` Well , sah , she 's wuth a quarter of a dollar a load at home , en I reckon we 's got as much as twenty loads , hai n't we ?
How much would dat be ? ''
`` Well , the minute people knows it 's genuwyne sand from the genuwyne Desert of Sahara , they 'll just be in a perfect state of mind to git hold of some of it to keep on the what-not in a vial with a label on it for a curiosity .
All we got to do is to put it up in vials and float around all over the United States and peddle them out at ten cents apiece .
We 've got all of ten thousand dollars ' worth of sand in this boat . ''
`` What IS our duty , Tom ?
Because if we ca n't git around it , why ca n't we just DO it ?
People often has to . ''
`` All right , consider me crying about it , and sorry .
And then he just broke down and cried , he was so thankful .
So between him and Tom there was talk enough , Jim being excited because the land was so full of history -- Joseph and his brethren , Moses in the bulrushers , Jacob coming down into Egypt to buy corn , the silver cup in the sack , and all them interesting things ; and Tom just as excited too , because the land was so full of history that was in HIS line , about Noureddin , and Bedreddin , and such like monstrous giants , that made Jim 's wool rise , and a raft of other Arabian Nights folks , which the half of them never done the things they let on they done , I don't believe .
Tom slammed on the back-action , and as we slowed to a standstill a man's face as big as our house at home looked in over the gunnel , same as a house looks out of its windows , and I laid down and died .
I must 'a' been clear dead and gone for as much as a minute or more ; then I come to , and Tom had hitched a boat-hook on to the lower lip of the giant and was holding the balloon steady with it whilst he canted his head back and got a good long look up at that awful face .
I never see Tom look so little and like a fly ; but that was because the giant 's head was so big and awful .
Awful , yes , so it was , but not dreadful any more , because you could see it was a noble face , and kind of sad , and not thinking about you , but about other things and larger .
It was stone , reddish stone , and its nose and ears battered , and that give it an abused look , and you felt sorrier for it for that .
At last I took up the glass and see some little black things a-capering around on that velvet carpet , and some more a-climbing up the cretur's back , and then I see two or three wee puffs of white smoke , and told Tom to look .
He done it , and says :
`` What 's an indemnity , Mars Tom ? ''
`` The United States .
Or , we can take whichever we please .
We can take the apology , if we want to , and let the gov'ment take the money . ''
We was sailing around examining the pyramids , you know , and now we soared up and roosted on the flat top of the biggest one , and found it was just like what the man said in the Sunday-school .
It was like four pairs of stairs that starts broad at the bottom and slants up and comes together in a point at the top , only these stair-steps could n't be clumb the way you climb other stairs ; no , for each step was as high as your chin , and you have to be boosted up from behind .
The two other pyramids war n't far away , and the people moving about on the sand between looked like bugs crawling , we was so high above them .
`` This balloon is a good enough reason it could happen , I should reckon . ''
I turned it over in my mind , and says :
`` By touching the buttons . ''
`` Yes , just the same in both . ''
`` My lan ' , ef Huck ai n't got him ag'in !
Huck 's landed him high en dry dis time , I tell you !
Hit 's de smartes ' trap I ever see a body walk inter -- en ef I -- ''
But Jim was so full of laugh he got to strangling and could n't go on , and Tom was that mad to see how neat I had floored him , and turned his own argument ag'in him and knocked him all to rags and flinders with it , that all he could manage to say was that whenever he heard me and Jim try to argue it made him ashamed of the human race .
I never said nothing ; I was feeling pretty well satisfied .
When I have got the best of a person that way , it ai n't my way to go around crowing about it the way some people does , for I consider that if I was in his place I would n't wish him to crow over me .
It 's better to be generous , that's what I think .
So then we come out and got some little donkeys and rode a piece , and then went in a boat another piece , and then more donkeys , and got to Cairo ; and all the way the road was as smooth and beautiful a road as ever I see , and had tall date-pa'ms on both sides , and naked children everywhere , and the men was as red as copper , and fine and strong and handsome .
And the city was a curiosity .
Such narrow streets -- why , they were just lanes , and crowded with people with turbans , and women with veils , and everybody rigged out in blazing bright clothes and all sorts of colors , and you wondered how the camels and the people got by each other in such narrow little cracks , but they done it -- a perfect jam , you see , and everybody noisy .
The stores war n't big enough to turn around in , but you did n't have to go in ; the storekeeper sat tailor fashion on his counter , smoking his snaky long pipe , and had his things where he could reach them to sell , and he was just as good as in the street , for the camel-loads brushed him as they went by .
There was churches , but they do n't know enough to keep Sunday ; they keep Friday and break the Sabbath .
You have to take off your shoes when you go in .
There was crowds of men and boys in the church , setting in groups on the stone floor and making no end of noise -- getting their lessons by heart , Tom said , out of the Koran , which they think is a Bible , and people that knows better knows enough to not let on .
I never see such a big church in my life before , and most awful high , it was ; it made you dizzy to look up ; our village church at home ai n't a circumstance to it ; if you was to put it in there , people would think it was a drygoods box .
We did n't see half there was to see in Cairo , because Tom was in such a sweat to hunt out places that was celebrated in history .
We had a most tiresome time to find the granary where Joseph stored up the grain before the famine , and when we found it it war n't worth much to look at , being such an old tumble-down wreck ; but Tom was satisfied , and made more fuss over it than I would make if I stuck a nail in my foot .
How he ever found that place was too many for me .
We passed as much as forty just like it before we come to it , and any of them would 'a ' done for me , but none but just the right one would suit him ; I never see anybody so particular as Tom Sawyer .
The minute he struck the right one he reconnized it as easy as I would reconnize my other shirt if I had one , but how he done it he could n't any more tell than he could fly ; he said so himself .
Then we hunted a long time for the house where the boy lived that learned the cadi how to try the case of the old olives and the new ones , and said it was out of the Arabian Nights , and he would tell me and Jim about it when he got time .
Well , we hunted and hunted till I was ready to drop , and I wanted Tom to give it up and come next day and git somebody that knowed the town and could talk Missourian and could go straight to the place ; but no , he wanted to find it himself , and nothing else would answer .
So on we went .
Then at last the remarkablest thing happened I ever see .
The house was gone -- gone hundreds of years ago -- every last rag of it gone but just one mud brick .
Now a person would n't ever believe that a backwoods Missouri boy that had n't ever been in that town before could go and hunt that place over and find that brick , but Tom Sawyer done it .
I know he done it , because I see him do it .
I was right by his very side at the time , and see him see the brick and see him reconnize it .
Well , I says to myself , how DOES he do it ?
Is it knowledge , or is it instink ?
When we got back Jim dropped down and took us in , and there was a young man there with a red skullcap and tassel on and a beautiful silk jacket and baggy trousers with a shawl around his waist and pistols in it that could talk English and wanted to hire to us as guide and take us to Mecca and Medina and Central Africa and everywheres for a half a dollar a day and his keep , and we hired him and left , and piled on the power , and by the time we was through dinner we was over the place where the Israelites crossed the Red Sea when Pharaoh tried to overtake them and was caught by the waters .
We stopped , then , and had a good look at the place , and it done Jim good to see it .
He said he could see it all , now , just the way it happened ; he could see the Israelites walking along between the walls of water , and the Egyptians coming , from away off yonder , hurrying all they could , and see them start in as the Israelites went out , and then when they was all in , see the walls tumble together and drown the last man of them .
Then we piled on the power again and rushed away and huvvered over Mount Sinai , and saw the place where Moses broke the tables of stone , and where the children of Israel camped in the plain and worshiped the golden calf , and it was all just as interesting as could be , and the guide knowed every place as well as I knowed the village at home .
He thought it over , and said we must scour around and see if we could roust out one in Egypt or Arabia or around in some of these countries , but the guide said no , it war n't no use , they did n't have them .
So Tom was pretty glum for a little while , then he chirked up and said he 'd got the idea and knowed what to do .
Tom he read the piece of paper to us .
He had wrote on it :
[ * This misplacing of the Ark is probably Huck 's error , not Tom's.
One -- two -- three -- away you go ! ''
The balloon come hack all right , and brung the pipe ; but Aunt Polly had catched Jim when he was getting it , and anybody can guess what happened : she sent for Tom .
So Jim he says :
So then we shoved for home , and not feeling very gay , neither .
`` Oh , a number ; I do n't know how many . ''
`` Do -- please ! ''
`` You wo n't run away again ? ''
`` They are in your pockets , '' he said , and it was true .
And they were of the best , too , and we ate them and wished we had more , though none of us said so .
`` It would n't be a rudeness , and I should forgive it if it was .
Have I seen him ?
From the time that I was a little child a thousand years old I was his second favorite among the nursery angels of our blood and lineage -- to use a human phrase -- yes , from that time until the Fall , eight thousand years , measured as you count time . ''
He turned to Seppi , and went on as if answering something that was in Seppi 's mind : `` Why , naturally I look like a boy , for that is what I am .
With us what you call time is a spacious thing ; it takes a long stretch of it to grow an angel to full age . ''
There was a question in my mind , and he turned to me and answered it , `` I am sixteen thousand years old -- counting as you count . ''
Then he turned to Nikolaus and said : `` No , the Fall did not affect me nor the rest of the relationship .
It was only he that I was named for who ate of the fruit of the tree and then beguiled the man and the woman with it .
We others are still ignorant of sin ; we are not able to commit it ; we are without blemish , and shall abide in that estate always .
We -- '' Two of the little workmen were quarreling , and in buzzing little bumblebee voices they were cursing and swearing at each other ; now came blows and blood ; then they locked themselves together in a life-and-death struggle .
Satan reached out his hand and crushed the life out of them with his fingers , threw them away , wiped the red from his fingers on his handkerchief , and went on talking where he had left off : `` We can not do wrong ; neither have we any disposition to do it , for we do not know what it is . ''
`` Oh , it is no matter ; we can make plenty more . ''
Presently he said he must go away on an errand .
But we could not bear the thought of it , and clung to him , and pleaded with him to stay ; and that pleased him , and he said so , and said he would not go yet , but would wait a little while and we would sit down and talk a few minutes longer ; and he told us Satan was only his real name , and he was to be known by it to us alone , but he had chosen another one to be called by in the presence of others ; just a common one , such as people have -- Philip Traum .
Once when he was bunching the most illustrious kings and conquerors and poets and prophets and pirates and beggars together -- just a brick-pile -- I was shamed into putting in a word for man , and asked him why he made so much difference between men and himself .
He had to struggle with that a moment ; he did n't seem to understand how I could ask such a strange question .
`` Do n't ! ''
`` Do n't go ; stay with us .
You wo n't come back . ''
Nikolaus sighed and said about the same .
`` A little while , Father . ''
Our mouths came open to answer , but stood so for a moment , because we could n't say `` Nobody , '' for it would n't be true , and the right word did n't seem to come ; then I thought of the right one , and said it :
He could n't get around that argument , and it cheered him up .
`` But it is n't mine , you see -- it is n't mine , in any case . ''
He looked down , surprised , over his great spectacles , and said , `` Why , it is the faculty which enables us to distinguish good from evil . ''
lad , it is the one thing that lifts man above the beasts that perish and makes him heir to immortality ! ''
It would not have been safe for us to say he was mistaken , but we knew he was .
Nikolaus said , `` We ask pardon for the mistake , but we meant to say seven . ''
`` What was it , my son ? ''
asked the astrologer , indifferently .
Old Ursula 's jaws worked , but she could not get any word out for the moment , she was so horrified .
When she got her tongue , she stormed out , `` Go about your business , you puppy , or I will take a stick to you ! ''
`` Call it Agnes .
The creature answered to the name and came .
Ursula examined its tongue .
`` Upon my word , it 's true ! ''
`` I have not seen this kind of a cat before .
Is it yours ? ''
And so they went on chatting , and poor Marget forgot her sorrow for one little while , anyway .
It was probably the only really bright and cheery hour she had known lately .
I saw she liked Philip , and I knew she would .
And when he told her he was studying for the ministry I could see that she liked him better than ever .
And then , when he promised to get her admitted to the jail so that she could see her uncle , that was the capstone .
He said he would give the guards a little present , and she must always go in the evening after dark , and say nothing , `` but just show this paper and pass in , and show it again when you come out '' -- and he scribbled some queer marks on the paper and gave it to her , and she was ever so thankful , and right away was in a fever for the sun to go down ; for in that old , cruel time prisoners were not allowed to see their friends , and sometimes they spent years in the jails without ever seeing a friendly face .
I judged that the marks on the paper were an enchantment , and that the guards would not know what they were doing , nor have any memory of it afterward ; and that was indeed the way of it .
Ursula put her head in at the door now and said :
Before Marget could speak , Satan had the word , and was talking back to Ursula in her own language -- which was a surprise to her , and for her mistress , too .
He said , `` Did n't I see you down the road awhile ago ? ''
`` Yes , sir . ''
That sponged the slate of Ursula 's feelings clean of its anxieties , and a deep , financial joy shone in her eyes .
The cat 's value was augmenting .
It was getting full time for Marget to take some sort of notice of Satan 's invitation , and she did it in the best way , the honest way that was natural to her .
She said she had little to offer , but that we were welcome if we would share it with her .
`` He 's come again ! ''
`` There is that misused word again -- that shabby slander .
Brutes do not act like that , but only men . ''
`` I am old and very poor , '' she said , `` and I work for my living .
There was no way but to confess .
If I had n't they might have set me free .
That would ruin me , for no one would forget that I had been suspected of being a witch , and so I would get no more work , and wherever I went they would set the dogs on me .
In a little while I would starve .
The fire is best ; it is soon over .
You have been good to me , you two , and I thank you . ''
He said there must be witchcraft at the bottom of it , and told the villagers to resume relations with Marget and Ursula in a private and unostentatious way , and keep both eyes open .
They were told to keep their own counsel , and not rouse the suspicions of the household .
The villagers were at first a bit reluctant to enter such a dreadful place , but the priest said they would be under his protection while there , and no harm could come to them , particularly if they carried a trifle of holy water along and kept their beads and crosses handy .
This satisfied them and made them willing to go ; envy and malice made the baser sort even eager to go .
Marget was troubled at times , and pursued Ursula with questions to an uncomfortable degree ; but Ursula stood her ground and stuck to it that it was Providence , and said no word about the cat .
Marget knew that nothing was impossible to Providence , but she could not help having doubts that this effort was from there , though she was afraid to say so , lest disaster come of it .
Witchcraft occurred to her , but she put the thought aside , for this was before Gottfried joined the household , and she knew Ursula was pious and a bitter hater of witches .
By the time Gottfried arrived Providence was established , unshakably intrenched , and getting all the gratitude .
The cat made no murmur , but went on composedly improving in style and prodigality by experience .
His words were cut off short .
His face became red , then purple , but he could not utter another sound .
Then I saw Satan , a transparent film , melt into the astrologer 's body ; then the astrologer put up his hand , and apparently in his own voice said , `` Wait -- remain where you are . ''
All stopped where they stood .
`` Bring a funnel ! ''
Ursula brought it , trembling and scared , and he stuck it in the bottle and took up the great bowl and began to pour the wine back , the people gazing and dazed with astonishment , for they knew the bottle was already full before he began .
He emptied the whole of the bowl into the bottle , then smiled out over the room , chuckled , and said , indifferently : `` It is nothing -- anybody can do it !
With my powers I can even do much more . ''
Marget was pale , and crying ; Meidling looked kind of petrified ; Ursula the same ; but Gottfried was the worst -- he could n't stand , he was so weak and scared .
For he was of a witch family , you know , and it would be bad for him to be suspected .
Agnes came loafing in , looking pious and unaware , and wanted to rub up against Ursula and be petted , but Ursula was afraid of her and shrank away from her , but pretending she was not meaning any incivility , for she knew very well it would n't answer to have strained relations with that kind of a cat .
But we boys took Agnes and petted her , for Satan would not have befriended her if he had not had a good opinion of her , and that was indorsement enough for us .
He seemed to trust anything that had n't the Moral Sense .
`` They have not ventured to lay their hands upon an anointed servant of God before , '' he said ; `` and how they could have dared it this time I can not make out , for he wore his crucifix .
Is n't it so ? ''
That was a grand surprise , and made me sort of drunk with vanity and gladness to think I had come so far -- so much , much farther than anybody else in our village , including Bartel Sperling , who had such a great opinion of his travels .
We buzzed around over that empire for more than half an hour , and saw the whole of it .
It was wonderful , the spectacles we saw ; and some were beautiful , others too horrible to think .
For instance -- However , I may go into that by and by , and also why Satan chose China for this excursion instead of another place ; it would interrupt my tale to do it now .
Finally we stopped flitting and lit .
`` Oh , Satan , then how could you do these things ? ''
`` Well , it is true that they are nothing to me .
It is not possible that they should be .
The difference between them and me is abysmal , immeasurable .
They have no intellect . ''
`` It is my intention . ''
Straight off I was building that great future of Nicky 's in my imagination , and had already made a renowned general of him and hofmeister at the court , when I noticed that Satan was waiting for me to get ready to listen again .
I was ashamed of having exposed my cheap imaginings to him , and was expecting some sarcasms , but it did not happen .
He proceeded with his subject :
`` That 's grand ! ''
`` But for this change certain things would happen twelve days from now .
For instance , Nikolaus would save Lisa from drowning .
He would arrive on the scene at exactly the right moment -- four minutes past ten , the long-ago appointed instant of time -- and the water would be shoal , the achievement easy and certain .
But he will arrive some seconds too late , now ; Lisa will have struggled into deeper water .
He will do his best , but both will drown . ''
`` From ten years of pain and slow recovery from an accident , and then from nineteen years ' pollution , shame , depravity , crime , ending with death at the hands of the executioner .
Twelve days hence she will die ; her mother would save her life if she could .
Am I not kinder than her mother ? ''
`` Yes -- oh , indeed yes ; and wiser . ''
`` Why , Satan , how can that be ?
Do you really think it ? ''
-- less than twelve days . ''
We wandered many a mile , always following paths which had been our favorites from the days when we were little , and always we talked about the old times .
All the blitheness was with Nikolaus ; we others could not shake off our depression .
Our tone toward Nikolaus was so strangely gentle and tender and yearning that he noticed it , and was pleased ; and we were constantly doing him deferential little offices of courtesy , and saying , `` Wait , let me do that for you , '' and that pleased him , too .
I gave him seven fish-hooks -- all I had -- and made him take them ; and Seppi gave him his new knife and a humming-top painted red and yellow -- atonements for swindles practised upon him formerly , as I learned later , and probably no longer remembered by Nikolaus now .
These things touched him , and he could not have believed that we loved him so ; and his pride in it and gratefulness for it cut us to the heart , we were so undeserving of them .
When we parted at last , he was radiant , and said he had never had such a happy day .
When the evening of the last day came we stayed out too long ; Seppi and I were in fault for that ; we could not bear to part with Nikolaus ; so it was very late when we left him at his door .
We lingered near awhile , listening ; and that happened which we were fearing .
His father gave him the promised punishment , and we heard his shrieks .
But we listened only a moment , then hurried away , remorseful for this thing which we had caused .
And sorry for the father , too ; our thought being , `` If he only knew -- if he only knew ! ''
`` I am sorry , '' she answered , `` but he ca n't .
To punish him further , his father does n't allow him to go out of the house to-day . ''
`` Sit down , '' he said , `` and look at what I 've been doing .
And I've finished a kite that you will say is a beauty .
It 's drying , in the kitchen ; I 'll fetch it . ''
`` Examine them at your leisure while I get mother to touch up the kite with her iron if it is n't dry enough yet . ''
`` Two minutes to ten .
Seven minutes more and he will pass the death-point .
Theodor , he is going to be saved !
He 's going to -- ''
`` But where is he ? ''
`` Oh , my God ! ''
that poor mother cried out , and fell on her knees , and put her arms about her dead boy and began to cover the wet face with kisses .
`` Oh , it was I that sent him , and I have been his death .
If I had obeyed , and kept him in the house , this would not have happened .
And I am rightly punished ; I was cruel to him last night , and him begging me , his own mother , to be his friend . ''
And so she went on and on , and all the women cried , and pitied her , and tried to comfort her , but she could not forgive herself and could not be comforted , and kept on saying if she had not sent him out he would be alive and well now , and she was the cause of his death .
`` For nearly two weeks I have had dreams and presentiments and warnings that death was going to strike what was most precious to me , and day and night and night and day I have groveled in the dirt before Him praying Him to have pity on my innocent child and save it from harm -- and here is His answer ! ''
Both funerals took place at the same time in our little church next day .
Everybody was there , including the party guests .
Satan was there , too ; which was proper , for it was on account of his efforts that the funerals had happened .
Nikolaus had departed this life without absolution , and a collection was taken up for masses , to get him out of purgatory .
Only two-thirds of the required money was gathered , and the parents were going to try to borrow the rest , but Satan furnished it .
He told us privately that there was no purgatory , but he had contributed in order that Nikolaus 's parents and their friends might be saved from worry and distress .
We thought it very good of him , but he said money did not cost him anything .
`` He is doing it now -- betraying her .
In three days she will go to the stake . ''
If he had not met Frau Brandt awhile ago he would die next year , thirty-four years of age .
Now he will live to be ninety , and have a pretty prosperous and comfortable life of it , as human lives go . ''
But it made no impression on him .
He had never felt a pain or a sorrow , and did not know what they were , in any really informing way .
He had no knowledge of them except theoretically -- that is to say , intellectually .
And of course that is no good .
One can never get any but a loose and ignorant notion of such things except by experience .
We tried our best to make him comprehend the awful thing that had been done and how we were compromised by it , but he could n't seem to get hold of it .
He said he did not think it important where Fischer went to ; in heaven he would not be missed , there were `` plenty there . ''
We tried to make him see that he was missing the point entirely ; that Fischer , and not other people , was the proper one to decide about the importance of it ; but it all went for nothing ; he said he did not care for Fischer -- there were plenty more Fischers .
`` Yes , entirely .
Some have gained years , some have lost them .
Some few will profit in various ways by the change , but only that few . ''
Next , we had Sodom and Gomorrah , and `` the attempt to discover two or three respectable persons there , '' as Satan described it .
Next , Lot and his daughters in the cave .
Next we had Jael ; and saw her slip into the tent and drive the nail into the temple of her sleeping guest ; and we were so close that when the blood gushed out it trickled in a little , red stream to our feet , and we could have stained our hands in it if we had wanted to .
`` Now , '' said Satan , `` you have seen your progress down to the present , and you must confess that it is wonderful -- in its way .
We must now exhibit the future . ''
We obeyed , and reached up and received the new cups as they descended .
They were shapely and beautiful goblets , but they were not made of any material that we were acquainted with .
They seemed to be in motion , they seemed to be alive ; and certainly the colors in them were in motion .
They were very brilliant and sparkling , and of every tint , and they were never still , but flowed to and fro in rich tides which met and broke and flashed out dainty explosions of enchanting color .
I think it was most like opals washing about in waves and flashing out their splendid fires .
But there is nothing to compare the wine with .
We drank it , and felt a strange and witching ecstasy as of heaven go stealing through us , and Seppi 's eyes filled and he said worshipingly :
They hanged the lady , and I threw a stone at her , although in my heart I was sorry for her ; but all were throwing stones and each was watching his neighbor , and if I had not done as the others did it would have been noticed and spoken of .
Satan burst out laughing .
`` What are you laughing at ?
Moreover , please explain to the company why you threw no stone . ''
`` There has never been a just one , never an honorable one -- on the part of the instigator of the war .
I can see a million years ahead , and this rule will never change in so many as half a dozen instances .
The loud little handful -- as usual -- will shout for the war .
The pulpit will -- warily and cautiously -- object -- at first ; the great , big , dull bulk of the nation will rub its sleepy eyes and try to make out why there should be a war , and will say , earnestly and indignantly , `` It is unjust and dishonorable , and there is no necessity for it . ''
Then the handful will shout louder .
A few fair men on the other side will argue and reason against the war with speech and pen , and at first will have a hearing and be applauded ; but it will not last long ; those others will outshout them , and presently the anti-war audiences will thin out and lose popularity .
Before long you will see this curious thing : the speakers stoned from the platform , and free speech strangled by hordes of furious men who in their secret hearts are still at one with those stoned speakers -- as earlier -- but do not dare to say so .
And now the whole nation -- pulpit and all -- will take up the war-cry , and shout itself hoarse , and mob any honest man who ventures to open his mouth ; and presently such mouths will cease to open .
Next the statesmen will invent cheap lies , putting the blame upon the nation that is attacked , and every man will be glad of those conscience-soothing falsities , and will diligently study them , and refuse to examine any refutations of them ; and thus he will by and by convince himself that the war is just , and will thank God for the better sleep he enjoys after this process of grotesque self-deception . ''
Why do you stop ?
The astrologer said his understanding of it was correct .
`` It can say it is not the coin that the astrologer once possessed .
It can say it was not in existence last December .
By its date it can say this . ''
Well , what Satan had done was this : he had appeared before that poor prisoner , exclaiming , `` The trial is over , and you stand forever disgraced as a thief -- by verdict of the court ! ''
`` Do n't do it , dear ; remember , there are witnesses , and it is not becoming in the Crown Princess .
Tell me your trouble -- it shall be mended ; there is nothing the Emperor can not do . ''
Then he looked around and saw old Ursula with her apron to her eyes .
He was puzzled at that , and said , `` And what is the matter with you ? ''
Through her sobs she got out words explaining that she was distressed to see him -- '' so . ''
He reflected over that a moment , then muttered , as if to himself : `` A singular old thing , the Dowager Duchess -- means well , but is always snuffling and never able to tell what it is about .
It is because she does n't know . ''
His eyes fell on Wilhelm .
`` Prince of India , '' he said , `` I divine that it is you that the Crown Princess is concerned about .
Her tears shall be dried ; I will no longer stand between you ; she shall share your throne ; and between you you shall inherit mine .
There , little lady , have I done well ?
You can smile now -- is n't it so ? ''
`` There spoke the race ! ''
he said ; `` always ready to claim what it hasn't got , and mistake its ounce of brass filings for a ton of gold-dust .
You have a mongrel perception of humor , nothing more ; a multitude of you possess that .
This multitude see the comic side of a thousand low-grade and trivial things -- broad incongruities , mainly ; grotesqueries , absurdities , evokers of the horse-laugh .
The ten thousand high-grade comicalities which exist in the world are sealed from their dull vision .
Will a day come when the race will detect the funniness of these juvenilities and laugh at them -- and by laughing at them destroy them ?
For your race , in its poverty , has unquestionably one really effective weapon -- laughter .
Power , money , persuasion , supplication , persecution -- these can lift at a colossal humbug -- push it a little -- weaken it a little , century by century ; but only laughter can blow it to rags and atoms at a blast .
Against the assault of laughter nothing can stand .
You are always fussing and fighting with your other weapons .
Do you ever use that one ?
No ; you leave it lying rusting .
As a race , do you ever use it at all ?
No ; you lack sense and the courage . ''
We were traveling at the time and stopped at a little city in India and looked on while a juggler did his tricks before a group of natives .
They were wonderful , but I knew Satan could beat that game , and I begged him to show off a little , and he said he would .
He changed himself into a native in turban and breech-cloth , and very considerately conferred on me a temporary knowledge of the language .
`` You are only an apprentice ; you do n't know your trade .
Give me the seed .
I will show you . ''
He took the seed and said , `` What shall I raise from it ? ''
The fruits rotted on the branches , and the leaves withered and fell .
The foreigner gazed at the bare limbs with the look of one who is surprised , and not gratified .
`` None of them understood , but he will always be afraid that some of them did .
That fear will be torture to him , for he has been a harsh master to them .
In his dreams he will imagine them chopping his tree down .
That will make his days uncomfortable -- I have already arranged for his nights . ''
`` But the priest will burn the tree .
I know it ; he will not allow it to remain . ''
`` I am perishing already -- I am failing -- I am passing away .
In a little while you will be alone in shoreless space , to wander its limitless solitudes without friend or comrade forever -- for you will remain a thought , the only existent thought , and by your nature inextinguishable , indestructible .
But I , your poor servant , have revealed you to yourself and set you free .
Dream other dreams , and better !
`` It is the looks of it , '' said the cat .
This filled them with admiration and uncertainty , and they were more excited than ever .
Then the cow asked :
It was easy to see that these doubts were having an effect upon the animals , so the cat went off offended .
The subject was dropped for a couple of days , but in the meantime curiosity was taking a fresh start , aid there was a revival of interest perceptible .
Then the animals assailed the ass for spoiling what could possibly have been a pleasure to them , on a mere suspicion that the picture was not beautiful , without any evidence that such was the case .
The ass was not , troubled ; he was calm , and said there was one way to find out who was in the right , himself or the cat : he would go and look in that hole , and come back and tell what he found there .
The animals felt relieved and grateful , and asked him to go at once -- which he did .
But he did not know where he ought to stand ; and so , through error , he stood between the picture and the mirror .
The result was that the picture had no chance , and did n't show up .
He returned home and said :
The camel found a camel , and nothing more .
`` We had a time of it to get her back ; but we accomplished it finally , for money .
The alarm firm said that what we needed now was to have her put in right -- with their new patent springs in the windows to make false alarms impossible , and their new patent clock attached to take off and put on the alarm morning and night without human assistance .
That seemed a good scheme .
They promised to have the whole thing finished in ten days .
They began work , and we left for the summer .
They worked a couple of days ; then they left for the summer .
After which the burglars moved in , and began their summer vacation .
When we returned in the fall , the house was as empty as a beer closet in premises where painters have been at work .
We refurnished , and then sent down to hurry up the expert .
He came up and finished the job , and said : 'Now this clock is set to put on the alarm every night at 10 , and take it off every morning at 5:45 .
All you 've got to do is to wind her up every week , and then leave her alone -- she will take care of the alarm herself . '
`` After that we had a most tranquil season during three months .
The bill was prodigious , of course , and I had said I would not pay it until the new machinery had proved itself to be flawless .
The time stipulated was three months .
So I paid the bill , and the very next day the alarm went to buzzing like ten thousand bee swarms at ten o'clock in the morning .
I turned the hands around twelve hours , according to instructions , and this took off the alarm ; but there was another hitch at night , and I had to set her ahead twelve hours once more to get her to put the alarm on again .
That sort of nonsense went on a week or two , then the expert came up and put in a new clock .
He came up every three months during the next three years , and put in a new clock .
But it was always a failure .
His clocks all had the same perverse defect : they would put the alarm on in the daytime , and they would not put it on at night ; and if you forced it on yourself , they would take it off again the minute your back was turned .
