Where are those others who fought and fell , Outmanned , outgunned and scant of shell , On the deadly curve of the Ypres hell , Barring the coast to the last ?
Where are our laddies who died out there , From Poelcapelle to Festubert , When the days grew short and the poplars bare In the cold November blast ?
Where are those others in this glad time , When the standards wave and the joy-bells chime , And London stands with outstretched hands Waving her children in ?
Athwart our joy still comes the thought Of the dear dead boys , whose lives have bought All that sweet victory has brought To us who lived to win .
We can turn from German scheming , From humanitarian dreaming , From assertions , contradictions , Twisted facts and solemn fictions -- Haig is moving !
`` The froward peoples have deserved Thy wrath , And on them is the Judgment as of old , But if they wandered from the hallowed path Yet is their retribution manifold .
Behold all Europe writhing on the rack , The sins of fathers grinding down the sons !
How long , O Lord ? ''
He sends no answer back , But still I hear the mutter of the guns .
`` And the British , '' cried another , `` they are mercenary cattle , Without one noble impulse of the soul , Degenerate and drunken ; if the dollars chink and rattle , 'T is the only sort of music that will call them to the battle . ''
And all the bristle-headed cried , `` _Ja wohl !
_ '' And so next day your battle rolled across the Menin Plain , Where Capper 's men stood lonely to your wrath .
You broke him , and you broke him , but you broke him all in vain , For he and his contemptibles kept closing up again , And the khaki bar was still across your path .
`` The army swore terribly in Flanders . ''
That and the toot of the corporal 's flute , Until he could blow no more , And the lilt of `` Sussex by the Sea , '' The marching song of the corps .
We ca n't show much in the way of fun For four and a half years gone ; If we 'd had our chance -- just one !
-- Carry on , old Sport , carry on !
Behind me on the darkened pier They crowd and chatter , man and maid , A coon-song gently strikes the ear , A flapper giggles in the shade .
There where the in-turned lantern gleams It shines on khaki and on brass ; Across its yellow slanting beams The arm-locked lovers slowly pass .
The coon-song whimpers to a wail , The treble laughter sinks and dies , The lovers cluster on the rail , With whispered words and straining eyes .
One hush of awe , and then once more The vision fades for them and me , And there is laughter on the shore , And silent duty on the sea .
If you should search all Scotland round , The mainland , skerries , and the islands , A grimmer spot could not be found Than Loch McGarry in the Highlands .
Such were the four who sailed that day , To the Highlands each a stranger ; Sunlit and calm the wide loch lay , With not a hint of coming danger .
With two small oars they work and strain , A long mile from the nearer shore They cease -- their efforts are in vain ; She 's sinking fast , and all is o'er .
Ah , it 's coming !
See the crazy wherry reel !
Downward to the rocks she flounders -- Just one foot beneath her keel !
Late that day four sopping tourists To their quarters made their way , And the brushes of Futurists Scarce could paint their disarray .
Waters , who had never thought In his life of others ' needs , Has most generously bought A nursing-home for invalids .
The Roman mother understood That , if the babe upon her breast Untimely died , the gods were good , And the child 's welfare manifest .
With tender guides the soul would go And there , in some Elysian bower , The tiny bud plucked here below Would ripen to the perfect flower .
Had they begun To weigh the myths that they professed , One hour of reason and each one Would surely stand a fraud confessed .
Pretending to believe each deed Of Theseus or of Hercules , With fairy tales of Ganymede , And gods of rocks and gods of trees !
[ `` During the catastrophe the band of the _Titanic_ played negro melodies and ragtime until the last moment , when they broke into a hymn . ''
-- DAILY PAPER . ]
Horses go down the dingy lane , But never a horse comes up again .
The greasy yard where the red hides lie Marks the place where the horses die .
He tried to nuzzle against my cheek , He looked the grief he could not speak ; But no caress came back again , For harder times make harder men .
My thoughts were set on stable rent , On money saved and money spent , On weekly bills for forage lost , And all the old bay hunter cost .
I saw the old groom wince away , He looked the thoughts he dared not say ; Then from his fob he slowly drew A leather pouch of faded hue .
High-brow House was furnished well With many a goblet fair ; So when they brought the Holy Grail , There was never a space to spare .
Simple Cottage was clear and clean , With room to store at will ; So there they laid the Holy Grail , And there you 'll find it still .
Great Guide , I ask you still , `` Wherefore I ? ''
But if it be thy will That I try , Trace my pathway among men , Show me how to strike , and when , Take me to the fight -- and then , Oh , be nigh !
Printed by Hazell , Watson & Viney , Ld.
, London and Aylesbury , England .
_The Daily Telegraph._ -- '' There is spirit and animation , the rush and glow of young blood about his poems -- always a pulsating sense of life . ''
_The Morning Post._ -- '' A troop of rollicking tales , of fervid exhortations and straightforward arguments ... sound sentiments , hearty humour ... .
The creator of Sherlock Holmes is able to construct vivid and pungent verse . ''
THE MAN WHO SAW , and other Poems By Sir William Watson .
POEMS NEW AND OLD By Sir Henry Newbolt .
By J. Griffyth Fairfax MESOPOTAMIA 3_s._ 6_d._ net THE HORNS OF TAURUS 3_s._ 6_d._ net THE TEMPLE OF JANUS 5_s._ net
By Ronald Campbell Macfie , LL.D .
ODES AND OTHER POEMS 5_s._ net WAR 3_s._ 6_d._ net
So much for your great-grandfather , Ironside Joe .
I have preferred to put these passages before you , for on the principle that actions speak louder than words , I find that in describing a man 's character it is better to give examples of his ways than to speak in broad and general terms .
Had I said that he was fierce in ins religion and subject to strange fits of piety , the words might have made little impression upon you ; but when I tell you of his attack upon the officers in the tanning-yard , and his summoning us down in the dead of the night to await the second coming , you can judge for yourselves the lengths to which his belief would carry him .
For the rest , he was an excellent man of business , fair and even generous in his dealings , respected by all and loved by few , for his nature was too self-contained to admit of much affection .
To us he was a stern and rigid father , punishing us heavily for whatever he regarded as amiss in our conduct .
He bad a store of such proverbs as 'Give a child its will and a whelp its fill , and neither will strive , ' or 'Children are certain cares and uncertain comforts , ' wherewith he would temper my mother 's more kindly impulses .
He could not bear that we should play trick-track upon the green , or dance with the other children upon the Saturday night .
My mother , on the other hand , held that the very essence of a church was that it should have a hierarchy and a graduated government within itself , with the king at the apex , the archbishops beneath him , the bishops under their control , and so down through the ministry to the common folk .
Such was , in her opinion , the Church as established in the beginning , and no religion without these characteristics could lay any claim to being the true one .
Ritual was to her of as great importance as morality , and if every tradesman and farmer were allowed to invent prayers , and change the service as the fancy seized him , it would be impossible to preserve the purity of the Christian creed .
She agreed that religion was based upon the Bible , but the Bible was a book which contained much that was obscure , and unless that obscurity were cleared away by a duly elected and consecrated servant of God , a lineal descendant of the Disciples , all human wisdom might not serve to interpret it aright .
That was my mother 's position , and neither argument nor entreaty could move her from it .
The only question of belief on which my two parents were equally ardent was their mutual dislike and distrust of the Roman Catholic forms of worship , and in this the Churchwoman was every whit as decided as the fanatical Independent .
My purpose was to weaken it in such a way that , though it would bear the weight of one , it would collapse when the main body of our foemen were upon it , and so precipitate them into the ice-cold stream .
The water was but a couple of feet deep at the place , so that there was nothing for them but a fright and a ducking .
So cool a reception ought to deter them from ever invading us again , and confirm my reputation as a daring leader .
Reuben Lockarby , my lieutenant , son of old John Lockarby of the Wheatsheaf , marshalled our forces behind the hedgerow , whilst I sawed vigorously at the plank until I had nearly severed it across .
I had no compunction about the destruction of the bridge , for I knew enough of carpentry to see that a skilful joiner could in an hour 's work make it stronger than ever by putting a prop beneath the point where I had divided it .
When at last I felt by the yielding of the plank that I had done enough , and that the least strain would snap it , I crawled quietly off , and taking up my position with my schoolfellows , awaited the coming of the enemy .
I had scarce concealed myself when we heard the steps of some one approaching down the footpath which led to the bridge .
We crouched behind the cover , convinced that the sound must come from some scout whom our foemen had sent on in front -- a big boy evidently , for his step was heavy and slow , with a clinking noise mingling with it , of which we could make nothing .
Nearer came the sound and nearer , until a shadowy figure loomed out of the darkness upon the other side , and after pausing and peering for a moment , came straight for the bridge .
It was only as he was setting foot upon the plank and beginning gingerly to pick his way across it , that we discerned the outlines of the familiar form , and realised the dreadful truth that the stranger whom we had taken for the advance guard of our enemy was in truth none other than Vicar Pinfold , and that it was the rhythmic pat of his stick which we heard mingling with his footfalls .
Fascinated by the sight , we lay bereft of all power to warn him -- a line of staring eyeballs .
One step , two steps , three steps did the haughty Churchman take , when there was a rending crack , and he vanished with a mighty splash into the swift-flowing stream .
He must have fallen upon his back , for we could see the curved outline of his portly figure standing out above the surface as he struggled desperately to regain his feet .
At last he managed to get erect , and came spluttering for the bank with such a mixture of godly ejaculations and of profane oaths that , even in our terror , we could not keep from laughter .
Rising from under his feet like a covey of wild-fowl , we scurried off across the fields and so back to the school , where , as you may imagine , we said nothing to our good master of what had occurred .
'Pull at the anchor , man , pull at the anchor ! '
my companion shouted , springing up from the seat .
Pull at the anchor ! '
he cried in a peevish voice ; 'to think of my brother Nonus serving me such a trick !
What would our blessed mother have said could she have seen it ?
My whole kit gone , to say nothing of my venture in the voyage !
And now I have kicked off a pair of new jack boots that cost sixteen rix-dollars at Vanseddar 's at Amsterdam .
I ca n't swim in jack-boots , nor can I walk without them . '
As he spoke he drew a flat box from his pocket , and several wooden tubes , which he screwed together to form a long pipe .
This he stuffed with tobacco , and having lit it by means of a flint and steel with a piece of touch-paper from the inside of his box , he curled his legs under him in Eastern fashion , and settled down to enjoy a smoke .
There was something so peculiar about the whole incident , and so preposterous about the man 's appearance and actions , that we both broke into a roar of laughter , which lasted until for very exhaustion we were compelled to stop .
He neither joined in our merriment nor expressed offence at it , but continued to suck away at his long wooden tube with a perfectly stolid and impassive face , save that the half-covered eyes glinted rapidly backwards and forwards from one to the other of us .
'But a flesh wound , at the most , ' he answered .
'I thought it best to come away , however , lest the affair grow into a quarrel .
I am sure that it was he who trained the nine-pounder on me when I was in the water .
It came near enough to part my hair .
He was always a good shot with a falconet or a mortar-piece .
He could not have been hurt , however , to get down from the poop to the main-deck in the time . '
'The question now is , ' said the stranger , 'where we are to go to ? '
'Certainly , ' he replied , handing it over to me with a polite bow .
'Is there any other reasonable matter in which I can oblige ye ?
I will give up anything to do ye pleasure-save only my good name and soldierly repute , or this same copy of `` Hudibras , '' which , together with a Latin treatise upon the usages of war , written by a Fleming and printed in Liege in the Lowlands , I do ever bear in my bosom . '
I thought that our passenger 's coolness deserted him for a moment , and that a look of annoyance passed over his face .
'If all this be true , ' said I , 'and if your mission is indeed as you have said , why did you even now propose to make for France ? '
'Aptly asked , and yet the answer is clear enough , ' he replied ; 'sweet and ingenuous as are your faces , I could not read upon them that ye would prove to be Whigs and friends of the good old cause .
Ye might have taken me to where excisemen or others would have wanted to pry and peep , and so endangered my commission .
Better a voyage to France in an open boat than that . '
he speaks like the Lord High Chancellor of England !
What is it the old man says ?
How 's that , eh ?
Waller himself could not have capped the couplet neater . '
'Where man is nought and the Lord is all , ' rejoined Saxon .
'I am an old fighting man , ' our visitor answered , screwing his pipe together , 'a lean old dog of the hold-fast breed .
This body of mine bears the mark of many a cut and slash received for the most part in the service of the Protestant faith , though some few were caught for the sake of Christendom in general when warring against the Turk .
There is blood of mine , sir , Spotted all over the map of Europe .
Some of it , I confess , was spilled in no public cause , but for the protection of mine own honour in the private duello or holmgang , as it was called among the nations of the north .
It is necessary that a cavaliero of fortune , being for the greater part a stranger in a strange land , should be somewhat nice in matters of the sort , since he stands , as it were , as the representative of his country , whose good name should be more dear to him than his own . '
'What think you of my find , Dad ? '
It was evident to me that my father 's suit was infinitely better , both in texture and material , than that which our visitor had brought with him .
As he had withdrawn his head , however , entirely beneath the bedclothes , there was nothing more to be said , so I descended to the lower room , where I found toy father busily engaged fastening a new buckle to his sword-belt while my mother and the maid were preparing the morning meal .
He paused , and led me away to the farther end of the yard , for the workmen had begun to arrive and to cluster round the dipping trough .
'There are many good men among the exiles , are there not ? '
'But I am not concerned , ' said I .
'Why , to make signals with , ' said he .
'Odds me that I should have forgot it !
How is one 's consort to know what is going forward when the flagship carries no artillery ?
Had the lass been kind I should have fired one gun , that you might know it . '
Here , then , was one good friend settled down finally for life .
Another warned me that I was wasting my best years in the hamlet .
A third , the most respected of all , advised me openly to throw in my lot with the insurgents , should the occasion arise .
If I refused , I should have the shame of seeing my aged father setting off for the wars , whilst I lingered at home .
And why should I refuse ?
Had it not long been the secret wish of my heart to see something of the great world , and what fairer chance could present itself ?
My wishes , my friend 's advice , and my father 's hopes all pointed in the one direction .
'Father , ' said I , when I returned home , 'I am ready to go where you will . '
This important point having been settled , there was the further question of arms to be discussed , which gave rise to much weighty controversy between Decimus Saxon and my father , each citing many instances from their own experiences where the presence or absence of some taslet or arm-guard had been of the deepest import to the wearer .
Your great-grandfather had set his heart upon my wearing the breastplate which still bore the dints of the Scottish spears at Dunbar , but on trying it on we found it was too small for me .
I confess that this was a surprise , for when I looked back at the awe with which I had regarded my father 's huge proportions , it was marvellous to me to have this convincing proof that I had outgrown him .
By ripping down the side-leather and piercing holes through which a lace could be passed , my mother managed to arrange it so that I could wear it without discomfort .
A pair of taslets or thigh-pieces , with guards for the upper arm and gauntlets , were all borrowed from the old Parliamentary equipment , together with the heavy straight sword and pair of horse pistols which formed the usual weapons of a cavalier .
My father had chosen me a head-piece in Portsmouth , fluted , with good barrets , padded inside with soft leather , very light and yet very strong .
When fully equipped , both Saxon and my father agreed that I had all that was requisite for a well-appointed soldier .
Saxon had purchased a buff-coat , a steel cap , and a pair of jack-boots , so that with the rapier and pistols which my father had presented him with , he was ready to take the field at any time .
There would , we hoped , be no great difficulty in our reaching Monmouth's forces when the hour came .
In those troublous times the main roads were so infested by highwaymen and footpads , that it was usual for travellers to carry weapons and even armour for their protection .
There was no reason therefore why our appearance should excite suspicion .
Should questions be asked , Saxon had a long story prepared , to the effect that we were travelling to join Henry Somerset , Duke of Beaufort , to whose household we belonged .
This invention he explained to me , with many points of corroboration which I was to furnish , but when I said positively that I should rather be hanged as a rebel than speak a falsehood , he looked at me open-eyed , and shook his head as one much shocked .
A few weeks of campaigning , he said , would soon cure me of my squeamishness .
For himself , no more truthful child had ever carried a horn-book , but he had learned to lie upon the Danube , and looked upon it as a necessary part of the soldier 's upbringing .
'For what are all stratagems , ambuscades , and outfalls but lying upon a large scale ? '
'What is an adroit commander but one who hath a facility for disguising the truth ?
When , at the battle of Senlac , William the Norman ordered his men to feign flight in order that they might break his enemy 's array , a wile much practised both by the Scythians of old and by the Croats of our own day , pray what is it but the acting of a lie ?
Or when Hannibal , having tied torches to the horns of great droves of oxen , caused the Roman Consuls to imagine that his army was in retreat , was it not a deception or infraction of the truth ?
-- a point well brought out by a soldier of repute in the treatise `` An in bello dolo uti liceat ; an apud hostes falsiloquio uti liceat . ''
And so if , after these great models , I in order to gain mine ends do announce that we are bound to Beaufort when we are in truth making for Monmouth , is it not in accord with the usages of war and the customs of great commanders ? '
All which specious argument I made no attempt to answer , beyond repeating that he might avail himself of the usage , but that he must not look to me for corroboration .
On the other hand , I promised to hold my speech and to say nothing which might hamper him , with which pledge he was forced to be contented .
'I am he , ' said my father .
'What force hath he ? '
my father asked anxiously .
'I have learned little of the sort , ' said I .
My father did but teach me to strike an honest downright blow .
This sword can shear through a square inch of iron bar . '
'The village of Swathling , ' I replied .
'The lights of Bishopstoke lie to the right , in the hollow . '
'We must press on , for I would fain be in Salisbury before it is broad day .
There we shall put our horses up until evening and have some rest , for there is nothing gained by man or beast coming jaded to the wars .
All this day the western roads will be crowded with couriers , and mayhap patrolled by cavalry as well , so that we can not show our faces upon it without a risk of being stopped and examined .
Now if we lie by all day , and push on at dusk , keeping off the main road and making our way across Salisbury Plain and the Somersetshire downs , we shall be less likely to come to harm . '
'What ho , friend ! '
cried Saxon , reining his mare across the road so as to bar the man 's passage .
'What news from the West ? '
'He is a hot-headed youngster , ' the older officer replied , 'and a little solitary reflection added to the lesson which you have taught him may bring him profit .
As for the muscadine , that loss will soon be repaired , the more gladly as your friend here will help us to drink it . '
My companion looked ill at ease , as one who feels that he has been taken off his ground .
'There was indeed one such at Nurnberg , ' he answered , 'one Gervinus or Gervanus , who , the folk said , could turn an ingot of iron into an ingot of gold as easily as I turn this tobacco into ashes .
Old Pappenheimer shut him up with a ton of metal , and threatened to put the thumbikins upon him unless he changed it into gold pieces .
I can vouch for it that there was not a yellow boy there , for I was captain of the guard and searched the whole dungeon through .
To my sorrow I say it , for I had myself added a small iron brazier to the heap , thinking that if there should be any such change it would be as well that I should have some small share in the experiment . '
'We may meet on the field of battle , if not before , ' said I , and we bade our friendly enemies a very cordial adieu .
A hare 's foot suspended round the neck driveth away colic .
Press not into the heart of the fray , and yet flinch not from the standard of the Protestant faith .
'And oh , Micah , my own bright boy , come back safe to your mother , or my very heart will break !
Of our Perilous Adventure on the Plain
'No less a person , ' said Reuben .
'And now , my gay cavalieros , round with your horses and trot on your way , for there is no time to be lost .
We ought all to be at Taunton to-morrow . '
'If want of knowledge maketh a dangerous swordsman , ' quoth Reuben , 'then am I even more deadly than the unpronounceable gentleman whom you have mentioned .
To continue my story , however , which I broke off in order to step down from my horse , I found out early in the morning that ye were gone , and Zachary Palmer was able to tell me whither .
I made up my mind , therefore , that I would out into the world also .
To this end I borrowed a sword from Solomon Sprent , and my father having gone to Gosport , I helped myself to the best nag in his stables -- for I have too much respect for the old man to allow one of his flesh and blood to go ill-provided to the wars .
All day I have ridden , since early morning , being twice stopped on suspicion of being ill-affected , but having the good luck to get away each time .
I knew that I was close at your heels , for I found them searching for you at the Salisbury Inn . '
We passed through scattered belts of pinewood , where the wild cat howled and the owl screeched , and across broad stretches of fenland and moor , where the silence was only broken by the booming cry of the bittern or the fluttering of wild duck far above our heads .
The road was in parts overgrown with brambles , and was so deeply rutted and so studded with sharp and dangerous hollows , that our horses came more than once upon their knees .
In one place the wooden bridge which led over a stream had broken down , and no attempt had been made to repair it , so that we were compelled to ride our horses girth deep through the torrent .
At first some scattered lights had shown that we were in the neighbourhood of human habitations , but these became fewer as we advanced , until the last died away and we found ourselves upon the desolate moor which stretched away in unbroken solitude to the shadowy horizon .
The moon had broken through the clouds and now shone hazily through wreaths of mist , throwing a dim light over the wild scene , and enabling us to keep to the track , which was not fenced in in any way and could scarce be distinguished from the plain around it .
'Boot and saddle ! '
he cried , springing into his seat again .
'They are after us as sure as fate .
A dozen troopers by the sound .
We must shake them off , or goodbye to Monmouth . '
'They hold them in leash , ' said Saxon , between his teeth , 'else they would outstrip the horses and be lost in the darkness .
'These horses and their terrors .
The beasts can at times both see and hear more than we , as I could show by divers examples drawn from mine own experience on the Danube and in the Palatinate , were the time and place more fitting .
Let us on , then , before we rest . '
As he spoke , the sharp fierce bay of the hounds rose again , clear and stern on the night air , swelling up from a low hoarse growl to a high angry yelp .
There seemed to be a ring of exultation in their wild cry , as though they knew that their quarry was almost run to earth .
'They have clearly been laid on Saxon 's trail , ' said I .
'We must follow them up , or they will be too many for him .
Can you hear anything of our pursuers ? '
The brave mare snorted , as though she understood her riders words , and stretched her weary limbs into a gallop .
So stoutly did she answer the appeal that , though I pressed Covenant to his topmost speed , she was never more than a few strides behind him .
The same thought had crossed my own mind , for I have heard a similar though lesser din come from a pack of otter hounds when they had overtaken their prey and were tearing it to pieces .
Sick at heart , I drew my sword with the determination that , if we were too late to save our companion , we should at least revenge him upon the four-footed fiends .
Bursting through a thick belt of scrub and tangled gorse bushes , we came upon a scene so unlike what we had expected that we pulled up our horses in astonishment .
'Chloe had to look out for herself .
I found the brutes gaining on me , you see , and I let drive at them with my barkers ; but with a horse flying at twenty mile an hour , what chance is there for a single slug finding its way home ? '
Things looked black then , for I had no time to reload , and the rapier , though the king of weapons in the duello , is scarce strong enough to rely upon on an occasion like this .
As luck would have it , just as I was fairly puzzled , what should I come across but this handy stone , which the good priests of old did erect , as far as I can see , for no other purpose than to provide worthy cavalieros with an escape from such ignoble and scurvy enemies .
I had no time to spare in clambering up it , for I had to tear my heel out of the mouth of the foremost of them , and might have been dragged down by it had he not found my spur too tough a morsel for his chewing .
But surely one of my bullets must have readied its mark . '
Lighting the touch-paper in his tobacco-box , he passed it over the body of the hound which had attacked me , and then of the other .
'Why , this one is riddled like a sieve , ' he cried .
'What do you load your petronels with , good Master Clarke ? '
'With two leaden slugs . '
'Yet two leaden slugs have made a score of holes at the least !
And of all things in this world , here is the neck of a bottle stuck in the brute 's hide ! '
'Why , to recover my mare if it can anywise be done , ' said the adventurer . '
Though on this vast moor , in the dark , she will be as difficult to find as a Scotsman 's breeches or a flavourless line in `` Hudibras . ''
`` An _ignis fatuus_ that bewitches , And leads men into pools and ditches . ''
The strong yellow glare which had attracted us across the moor found its way out through a single narrow slit alongside the door which served the purpose of a rude window .
As we advanced towards it the light changed suddenly to red , and that again to green , throwing a ghastly pallor over our faces , and especially heightening the cadaverous effect of Saxon's austere features .
At the same time we became aware of a most subtle and noxious odour which poisoned the air all round the cottage .
This combination of portents in so lonely a spot worked upon the old man-at-arms ' superstitious feelings to such an extent that he paused and looked back at us inquiringly .
Both Reuben and I were determined , however , to carry the adventure through , so he contented himself with falling a little behind us , and pattering to himself some exorcism appropriate to the occasion .
Walking up to the door , I rapped upon it with the hilt of my sword and announced that we were weary travellers who were seeking a night 's shelter .
'Nay , nay , mine invisible friend , ' quoth Saxon , who was much reassured by the sound of a human voice , 'this is surely but a scurvy reception .
One of our horses is completely foundered , and none of them are in very good plight , so that we could no more make for the Cecil Arms at Amesbury than for the Gruner Mann at Lubeck .
I prythee , therefore , that you will allow us to pass the remainder of the night under your roof . '
'Ah , my friend , I too have served in my time .
My eyes are not so old but that they can tell when horses have been spurred to the utmost , nor is it difficult to see that this young giant 's sword hath been employed in something less innocent than toasting bacon .
Your story , however , can keep .
Every true soldier thinks first of his horse , so I pray that you will tether yours without , since I have neither ostler nor serving man to whom I may entrust them . '
'I should judge from your speech , sir , ' our host observed , 'that you are not one of the sectaries .
How comes it , then , that you are throwing the weight of your sword and your experience into the weaker scale ? '
'Your logic is sound , ' said our host , 'save only that you have omitted the very great chance which you will incur of losing your head if the Duke 's party are borne down by the odds against them . '
'Truly , ' said Saxon , 'there seemeth to be some fatal attraction in this same chemistry , for we met two officers of the Blue Guards in Salisbury , who , though they were stout soldierly men in other respects , had also a weakness in that direction . '
'And pray , sir , what is a lottery cavalier ? '
'Ho , you have prospered then ! '
said Decimus Saxon , with one of his shrewd sidelong looks .
'Perhaps you have yourself found out how to convert pots and pans into gold in the way you have spoken of .
But that can not be , for I see iron and brass in this room which would hardly remain there could you convert it to gold . '
'Come hither , ' said he , beckoning to Reuben .
'It is not meet , lad , that you should go bare-breasted against the enemy when your comrades are girt with steel .
I have here mine own old breastplate and head-piece , which should , methinks , fit you , for if you have more flesh than I , I am a larger framework of a man .
Ah , said I not so !
Were't measured for you by Silas Thomson , the court armourer , it could not grip better .
Now on with the head-piece .
A close fit again .
You are now a cavalier whom Monmouth or any other leader might be proud to see ride beneath his banner . '
Saxon and I shot a sharp glance of surprise at each other at this speech , which showed that our words of the night before were not unknown to him .
Sir Jacob , however , showed no signs of anger , but proceeded to point out our road and to advise us as to our journey .
'All right , Master Morality , ' quoth he , 'I must e'en unlearn some of the tricks of my trade .
Od 's feet , man , if ye object to me , what the henker would ye think of some whom I have known ?
However , let that pass .
It is time that we were at the wars , for our good swords will not bide in their scabbards .
'Why , ' he answered , 'the Saxons of old were a round-faced , contented generation , with their ledgers in their hands for six days and their bibles on the seventh .
If my father did but drink a cup of small beer more than his wont , or did break out upon provocation into any fond oath , as `` Od 's niggers ! ''
or `` Heart alive ! ''
he would mourn over it as though it were the seven deadly sins .
Was this a man , think ye , in the ordinary course of nature to beget ten long lanky children , nine of whom might have been first cousins of Lucifer , and foster-brothers of Beelzebub ? '
'They have all succumbed , ' said Saxon , with a groan .
they were a goodly company could they have turned their talents to better uses .
Prima was our eldest born .
She did well until she attained womanhood .
Secundus was a stout seaman , and owned his own vessel when he was yet a young man .
It was remarked , however , that he started on a voyage in a schooner and came back in a brig , which gave rise to some inquiry .
It may be , as he said , that he found it drifting about in the North Sea , and abandoned his own vessel in favour of it , but they hung him before he could prove it .
Tertia ran away with a north-country drover , and hath been on the run ever since .
Quartus and Nonus have been long engaged in busying themselves over the rescue of the black folk from their own benighted and heathen country , conveying them over by the shipload to the plantations , where they may learn the beauties of the Christian religion .
They are , however , men of violent temper and profane speech , who cherish no affection for their younger brother .
Quintus was a lad of promise , but he found a hogshead of rumbo which was thrown up from a wreck , and he died soon afterwards .
Sextus might have done well , for he became clerk to Johnny Tranter the attorney ; but he was of an enterprising turn , and he shifted the whole business , papers , cash , and all to the Lowlands , to the no small inconvenience of his employer , who hath never been able to lay hands either on one or the other from that day to this .
As to Octavius , Will Spotterbridge broke out early in him , and he was slain in a quarrel over some dice , which were said by his enemies to be so weighted that the six must ever come upwards .
Let this moving recital be a warning to ye , if ye are fools enough to saddle yourselves with a wife , to see that she hath no vice in her , for a fair face is a sorry make-weight against a foul mind . '
'Horse upon the march , ' quoth Saxon .
'It may be our friends of Salisbury , who have made a long day 's journey ; or , as I am inclined to think , it may be some other body of the King 's horse .
They are far distant , and what we see is but the sun shining on their casques ; yet they are bound for this very village , if I mistake not .
It would be wisest to avoid entering it , lest the rustics set them upon our track .
Let us skirt it and push on for Bruton , where we may spare time for bite and sup . '
'Beauty has a claim which persons of quality , and above all cavalieros of the sword , are the first to acknowledge , ' cried Saxon , with his little twinkling eyes fixed in admiration upon her buxom countenance .
'Nay , by my troth , you shall not leave us .
I shall lock the door first .
If you will not eat , you shall at least drink a cup of Alicant with me . '
Our hostess , having brought fresh glasses , withdrew , and Decimus Saxon soon found an opportunity for following her .
Sir Gervas Jerome continued , however , to chatter freely to Reuben and myself over the wine , rattling along as gaily and airily as though we were old acquaintances .
'I do n't care the rind of a rotten orange for life or liberty either , ' cried our acquaintance , snapping his finger and thumb .
'Burn me if it would n't be a new sensation to bandy words with some heavy-chopped country justice , with the Popish plot still stuck in his gizzard , and be thereafter consigned to a dungeon , like the hero in John Dryden's latest .
I have been round-housed many a time by the watch in the old Hawkubite days ; but this would be a more dramatic matter , with high treason , block , and axe all looming in the background . '
'A Daniel come to judgment ! '
cried our new acquaintance .
'What ancient , ancient words from so young a head !
You are , I 'll warrant , five years younger than a scatterbrain like myself , and yet you talk like the seven wise men of Greece .
Wilt take me as a valet ? '
'But , ' said I , 'if you are indeed owner of this fair property , why should you descend to so menial an occupation ? '
'I pledge ye all , ' quoth the gallant .
'Here 's to a fair fight , and may the best men win . '
'And no bad material either , ' I replied , taking note of the sturdy figures and bold hearty faces of the men .
'Think ye that they are bound for Monmouth 's camp , then ? '
Old Samuel hath them to a penstroke !
There is another ahead of him there , with the head of a scythe inside his smock .
Can you not see the outline ?
I warrant there is not one of the rascals but hath a pike-head or sickle-blade concealed somewhere about him .
I begin to feel the breath of war once more , and to grow younger with it .
Hark ye , lad !
I am glad that I did not tarry at the inn . '
Saxon answered , 'we shall extend into a troop of horse if we add to our number every gallant who is in want of a job .
As to this Sir Gervas , however , I think , as I said at the inn , that he hath more mettle in him than one would judge at first sight .
These young sprigs of the gentry will always fight , but I doubt if he is hardened enough or hath constancy enough for such a campaign as this is like to be .
His appearance , too , will be against him in the eyes of the saints ; and though Monmouth is a man of easy virtue , the saints are like to have the chief voice in his councils .
Now do but look at him as he reins up that showy grey stallion and gazes back at us .
Mark his riding-hat tilted over his eye , his open bosom , his whip dangling from his button-hole , his hand on his hip , and as many oaths in his mouth as there are ribbons to his doublet .
Above all , mark the air with which he looks down upon the peasants beside him .
He will have to change his style if he is to fight by the side of the fanatics .
I am much mistaken if they have not already got themselves into trouble . '
'It may be that ye do but seek an opportunity of escaping from our bondage , ' the minister observed , after conferring with one or two of the leading peasants .
'It is our opinion , therefore , that before coming with us ye must deliver unto us your swords , pistols , and other carnal weapons . '
'Nay , good sir , that can not be , ' our leader answered .
'A cavalier may not with honour surrender his blade or his liberty in the manner ye demand .
Keep close to my bridle-arm , Clarke , and strike home at any rogue who lays hands on you . '
'Aye , aye , Master Pettigrue , ' cried the old man .
'The very name given by Dicky Rumbold .
He said that either the old Roundhead Clarke or his son would go with him .
But who are these ? '
'This is Master Reuben Lockarby , also of Havant , and Sir Gervas Jerome of Surrey , ' I replied .
'They are both here as volunteers desiring to serve under the Duke of Monmouth . '
'None , ' Saxon answered .
'We left the Blue Guards at Salisbury , however , and we saw either them or some other horse regiment near this side of the Plain at the village of Mere . '
Who then dreads the violent , Or fears the man of pride ?
Or shall I flee from two or three If He be by my side ?
Who then fears to draw the sword , And fight the battle of the Lord !
My faith is like a citadel Girt round with moat and wall , No mine , or sap , or breach , or gap Can ere prevail at all .
Who then fears to draw the sword , And fight the battle of the Lord ?
Saxon ceased , but the Reverend Joshua Pettigrue waved his long arms and repeated the refrain , which was taken up again and again by the long column of marching peasants .
'What firearms have we amongst us ? '
'Five to four on the soldiers , then ! '
'It is too good a match not to have a stake on it one way or the other . '
I could well believe at that moment that the Spartans had found the lame singer Tyrtaeus the most successful of their generals , for the sound of their own voices increased the confidence of the country folk , while the martial words of the old hymn roused the dogged spirit in their breasts .
So high did their courage run that they broke off their song with a loud warlike shout , waving their weapons above their heads , and ready I verily believe to march out from their barricades and make straight for the horsemen .
In the midst of this clamour and turmoil the young dragoon officer , a handsome , olive-faced lad , rode fearlessly up to the barrier , and pulling up his beautiful roan steed , held up his hand with an imperious gesture which demanded silence .
'Courtesy and honour , ' said the officer , with a sneer , 'are not extended to rebels who are in arms against their lawful sovereign .
If you are the leader of this rabble , I warn you if they are not dispersed within five minutes by this watch ' -- he pulled out an elegant gold time-piece -- 'we shall ride down upon them and cut them to pieces . '
'This exceedeth the limitations of your privileges , ' said Saxon , drawing a pistol from his belt and cocking it .
'If you say another word to seduce these people from their allegiance , I fire . '
'His head within a month shall roll upon the scaffold . '
'At least let my brother and me have a shot or two back at them , ' cried one of the marksmen beside the wheel .
'They are coming , ' cried Saxon .
'Let no man draw trigger until he sees me shoot .
If any does , I shall send a bullet through him , though it was my last shot and the troopers were amongst us . '
So elated were the peasants by their victory , that those who had secured horses were clamorous to be allowed to follow the dragoons , the more so as Sir Gervas Jerome and Reuben were both eager to lead them .
Decimus Saxon refused , however , to listen to any such scheme , nor did he show more favour to the Reverend Joshua Pettigrue 's proposal , that he should in his capacity as pastor mount immediately upon the waggon , and improve the occasion by a few words of healing and unction .
'We left it on the Ilchester and Langport road . '
The skirmish had reduced our numbers , but it had done much to turn our rabble of peasants into a real military force .
The leadership of Saxon , and his stern , short words of praise or of censure had done even more .
The men kept some sort of formation , and stepped together briskly in a compact body .
The old soldier and I rode at the head of the column , with Master Pettigrue still walking between us .
Then came the cartful of our dead , whom we were carrying with us to insure their decent burial .
Behind this walked two score of scythe and sickle men , with their rude weapons over their shoulders , preceding the waggon in which the wounded were carried .
This was followed by the main body of the peasants , and the rear was brought up by ten or twelve men under the command of Lockarby and Sir Gervas , mounted upon captured chargers , and wearing the breastplates , swords , and carbines of the dragoons .
I observed that Saxon rode with his chin upon his shoulder , casting continual uneasy glances behind him , and halting at every piece of rising ground to make sure that there were no pursuers at our heels .
It was not until , after many weary miles of marching , the lights of Taunton could be seen twinkling far off in the valley beneath us that he at last heaved a deep sigh of relief , and expressed his belief that all danger was over .
'I am not prone to be fearful upon small occasion , ' he remarked , 'but hampered as we are with wounded men and prisoners , it might have puzzled Petrinus himself to know what we should have done had the cavalry overtaken us .
I can now , Master Pettigrue , smoke my pipe in peace , without pricking up my ears at every chance rumble of a wheel or shout of a village roisterer . '
'It was through no strength of mine own , ' said Saxon piously .
'In very truth , such men as you are much needed in Monmouth 's army , ' Master Joshua exclaimed .
'They have there several , as I understand , from Holland , Brandenburg , and Scotland , who have been trained in arms , but who care so little for the cause which we uphold that they curse and swear in a manner that affrights the peasants , and threatens to call down a judgment upon the army .
Others there are who cling close to the true faith , and have been born again among the righteous ; but alas !
they have had no experience of camps and fields .
Our blessed Master can work by means of weak instruments , yet the fact remains that a man may be a chosen light in a pulpit , and yet be of little avail in an onslaught such as we have seen this day .
I can myself arrange my discourse to the satisfaction of my flock , so that they grieve when the sand is run out ; ( Note E. Appendix ) but I am aware that this power would stand me in little stead when it came to the raising of barricades and the use of carnal weapons .
In this way it comes about , in the army of the faithful , that those who are fit to lead are hateful to the people , while those to whose words the people will hearken know little of war .
Now we have this day seen that you are ready of head and of hand , of much experience of battle , and yet of demure and sober life , full of yearnings after the word , and strivings against Apollyon .
I therefore repeat that you shall be as a very Joshua amongst them , or as a Samson , destined to tear down the twin pillars of Prelacy and Popery , so as to bury this corrupt government in its fall . '
'There was no great stock of noblemen in Cromwell 's army , I trow , and yet they held their own against the King , who had as many lords by him as there are haws in a thicket .
If ye have the people on your side , why should ye crave for these bewigged fine gentlemen , whose white hands and delicate rapiers are of as much service as so many ladies ' bodkins ? '
'You will have enough of battles before Monmouth exchanges his riding-hat for a crown , and his laced roquelaure for the royal purple , ' quoth Saxon .
'Should our worthy friend here be correctly informed and such an engagement take place , it will but be the prologue to the play .
When Feversham and Churchill come up with the King 's own troops , it is then that Monmouth takes the last spring , that lands him either on the throne or the scaffold . '
Charles 's Council might destroy the battlements which his soldiers had been unable to take , but no royal edict could do away with the resolute spirit and strong opinions of the burghers .
Many of them , born and bred amidst the clash of civil strife , had been fired from their infancy by the tales of the old war , and by reminiscences of the great assault when Lunsford 's babe-eaters were hurled down the main breach by the strong arms of their fathers .
In this way there was bred in Taunton a fiercer and more soldierly spirit than is usual in an English country town , and this flame was fanned by the unwearied ministerings of a chosen band of Nonconformist clergymen , amongst whom Joseph Alleine was the most conspicuous .
No better focus for a revolt could have been chosen , for no city valued so highly those liberties and that creed which was in jeopardy .
'Gad , they 'll have to powder their heads , ' said Sir Gervas , with decision .
The Colonel stopped and sat silent upon his mare .
The long lines of rustic faces looked up , some stolidly , some admiringly , some with an expression of fear at his stern , gaunt face and baneful eyes .
None moved , however , so he continued .
'Nay , for Heaven 's sake do not smile and bow at them , ' said I .
'These courtesies may pass in London , but they may be misunderstood among simple Somerset maidens and their hot-headed , hard-handed kinsfolk . '
'Silence yourself , Master Tetheridge , ' said the chief magistrate severely .
'If your sword and your tongue were both clipped , it would be as well for yourself and us .
Shall I not speak a few words in season to these good people but you must interrupt with your discordant bellowings ? '
Saxon half-turned his fierce face , raising an impatient hand , and the hoarse murmur died away among our men , though our less-disciplined companions to right and left continued to wave their green boughs and to clatter their arms .
The Taunton men opposite stood grim and silent , but their set faces and bent brows showed that their townsman 's oratory had stirred the deep fanatic spirit which distinguished them .
'It is your only son , Master Holt , ' said the Mayor , 'but the Lord also sacrificed His only Son that you and I might drink the waters of eternal life .
The others are Path of Light Regan , James Fletcher , Salvation Smith , and Robert Johnstone . '
'See the mon wi ' a face like a gerfalcon , ' cried one , pointing to Saxon ; ''tis he that slew the Philistine officer yestreen , an ' brought the faithful off victorious . '
'Discharge your message , ' said our Colonel shortly .
'Abraham Willis , ' he shouted as we entered ; 'put him down twenty-six pounds and ten shillings .
You shall receive ten per centum upon this earth , Master Willis , and I warrant that it shall not be forgotten hereafter .
John Standish , two pounds .
William Simons , two guineas .
Stand-fast Healing , forty-five pounds .
That is a rare blow which you have struck into the ribs of Prelacy , good Master Healing .
Solomon Warren , five guineas .
James White , five shillings -- the widow 's mite , James !
Thomas Bakewell , ten pounds .
Nay , Master Bakewell , surely out of three farms on the banks of Tone , and grazing land in the fattest part of Athelney , you can spare more than this for the good cause .
We shall doubtless see you again .
Alderman Smithson , ninety pounds .
There is a slap for the scarlet woman !
A few more such and her throne shall be a ducking-stool .
We shall break her down , worthy Master Smithson , even as Jehu , the son of Nimshi , broke down the house of Baal . '
So he babbled on with praise , precept , and rebuke , though the grave and solemn burghers took little notice of his empty clamour .
At the other side of the hall were several long wooden drinking-troughs , which were used for the storing of pikes and scythes .
Special messengers and tithing-men had been sent out to scour the country for arms , who , as they returned , placed their prizes here under the care of the armourer-general .
Besides the common weapons of the peasants there was a puncheon half full of pistols and petronels , together with a good number of muskets , screw-guns , snaphances , birding-pieces , and carbines , with a dozen bell-mouthed brass blunderbusses , and a few old-fashioned wall-pieces , such as sakers and culverins taken from the manor-houses of the county .
From the walls and the lumber-rooms of these old dwellings many other arms had been brought to light which were doubtless esteemed as things of price by our forefathers , but which would seem strange to your eyes in these days , when a musket may be fired once in every two minutes , and will carry a ball to a distance of four hundred paces .
There were halberds , battle-axes , morning stars , brown bills , maces , and ancient coats of chain mail , which might even now save a man from sword stroke or pike thrust .
In the midst of the coming and the going stood Master Timewell , the Mayor , ordering all things like a skilful and provident commander .
I could understand the trust and love which his townsmen had for him , as I watched him labouring with all the wisdom of an old man and the blithesomeness of a young one .
He was hard at work as we approached in trying the lock of a falconet ; but perceiving us , he came forward and saluted us with much kindliness .
'I 'll warrant that , ' cried Reuben .
'When we have been a morris-dancing , or having a Saturday night game of `` kiss-in-the-ring , '' or `` parson-has-lost-his-coat , '' I have seen Ironside Joe stride past us , and cast a glance at us which hath frozen the smile upon our lips .
I warrant that he would have aided Colonel Pride to shoot the bears and hack down the maypoles . '
They were of all ages , from greybeards down to lads scarce out of their teens , all with the same solemn and austere expression of countenance , and clad in the same homely and sombre garb .
Save their wide white collars and cuffs , not a string of any colour lessened the sad severity of their attire .
Their black coats and doublets were cut straight and close , and their cordovan leather shoes , which in the days of our youth were usually the seat of some little ornament , were uniformly square toed and tied with sad-coloured ribbon .
Most of them wore plain sword-belts of untanned hide , but the weapons themselves , with their broad felt hats and black cloaks , were laid under the benches or placed upon the settles which lined the walls .
They stood with their hands clasped and their heads bent , listening to the untimely address , and occasionally by some groan or exclamation testifying that the preacher's words had moved them .
Whilst this friendly strife was proceeding between the elders , Sir Gervas Jerome and Mistress Ruth had fallen into conversation at the other side of the table .
I have seldom seen , my dear children , so beautiful a face as that of this Puritan damsel ; and it was beautiful with that sort of modest and maidenly comeliness where the features derive their sweetness from the sweet soul which shines through them .
The perfectly-moulded body appeared to be but the outer expression of the perfect spirit within .
Her dark-brown hair swept back from a broad and white forehead , which surmounted a pair of well-marked eyebrows and large blue thoughtful eyes .
The whole cast of her features was gentle and dove-like , yet there was a firmness in the mouth and delicate prominence of the chin which might indicate that in times of trouble and danger the little maid would prove to be no unworthy descendant of the Roundhead soldier and Puritan magistrate .
I doubt not that where more loud-tongued and assertive dames might be cowed , the Mayor 's soft-voiced daughter would begin to cast off her gentler disposition , and to show the stronger nature which underlay it .
It amused me much to listen to the efforts which Sir Gervas made to converse with her , for the damsel and he lived so entirely in two different worlds , that it took all his gallantry and ready wit to keep on ground which would be intelligible to her .
cried the baronet , with a laugh , 'honest John preaches at the church of Will Unwin , commonly known as Will 's , where many a time it is two in the morning before he comes to the end of his sermon .
But why this question ?
Do you think that no one may put pen to paper unless they have also a right to wear a gown and climb up to a pulpit ?
I had thought that all of your sex had read Dryden .
Pray , what are your own favourite books ? '
'There is Alleine 's `` Alarm to the Unconverted , '' ' said she .
'It is a stirring work , and one which hath wrought much good .
Hast thou not found it to fructify within thee ? '
'I have not read it . '
'Of Bull 's `` Spirit Cordial , '' then ? '
'Well and truly spoken , Mistress Timewell , ' cried the lean young Puritan upon the right , who had been an attentive listener to the whole conversation .
'There is more evil in such houses than even in the cities of the plain .
I doubt not that the wrath of the Lord will descend upon them , and destroy them , and wreck them utterly , together with the dissolute men and abandoned women who frequent them . '
'That was the question which we set ourselves to solve .
For a moment I do assure ye that we bethought us that it might be a judgment upon us for our attention to such carnal follies .
Then it crossed my mind that it might be the doing of some malicious sprite , as the Drummer of Tedworth , or those who occasioned the disturbances no very long time since at the old Gast House at Little Burton here in Somersetshire .
With this thought we hallooed to the coachman , and told him what had occurred to us .
The fellow came down from his perch , and having heard our story , he burst straightway into much foul language , and walking round to the back of his calash , showed us that a slit had been made in the leather wherewith it was fashioned .
Through this the thief had thrust his hand and had drawn my wig through the hole , resting the while on the crossbar of the coach .
It was no uncommon thing , he said , and the wig-snatchers were a numerous body who waited beside the peruke-maker 's shops , and when they saw a customer come forth with a purchase which was worth their pains they would follow him , and , should he chance to drive , deprive him of it in this fashion .
Be that as it may , I never saw my wig again , and had to purchase another before I could venture into the royal presence . '
'Nay , that I should never have done ! '
cried the young Puritan , who had listened intently to his elder 's narrative .
'Would it not have been more fitting to have raised up your hands and called down vengeance upon them , as the holy man of old did upon the wicked cities ? '
'And , pray , how fared ye with these rufflers , sir ? '
As Master Stephen Timewell ended his tale a general shuffling and rising announced the conclusion of the meal .
The company filed slowly out in order of seniority , all wearing the same gloomy and earnest expression , with grave gait and downcast eyes .
These Puritan ways were , it is true , familiar to me from childhood , yet I had never before seen a large household conforming to them , or marked their effect upon so many young men .
'I shall have your robes ready , and also the rooms of our guests , ' she answered , and so , with a bright smile to us , tripped away upon her duty .
'Aye , truly , ' said the old man , smiling .
'But what think ye of my young men , sir ?
They must needs be of a very different class to any with whom you are acquainted , if , as I understand , you have frequented court circles . '
'And how has he done so ? '
'Have you the news from a trusty source ? '
asked Decimus Saxon , after a long silence .
'Well , ' said Saxon moodily , 'now that Argyle hath gone under we are face to face with James , with nothing but our own good swords to trust to . '
'To them and to the justice of our cause .
How like ye the news , young sirs ?
Has the wine lost its smack on account of it ?
Are ye disposed to flinch from the standard of the Lord ? '
'And I shall bide where Micah Clarke bides , ' quoth Reuben Lockarby .
As Saxon was firm in this resolution the Mayor forbore to press it upon him , but my two friends gladly joined with me in accepting the worthy wool-worker 's offer , and took up our quarters for the time under his hospitable roof .
Of a Brawl in the Night
'As well stab a Warsash crab with a bodkin , ' said he .
'Thanks to good Sir Jacob Clancing , once of Snellaby Hall and now of Salisbury Plain , their rapiers did no more than scratch my plate of proof .
But how is it with the maid ? '
'Let us homewards , ' she said , in firm , quick tones .
'The neighbours are alarmed , and there will be a rabble collected anon .
Let us escape from the babblement . '
'Nay , nay , ' said she , with uplifted finger , 'you shall not follow the matter further .
As to the men , I can not say with certainty who they may have been .
I had gone forth to visit Dame Clatworthy , who hath the tertian ague , and they did beset me on my return .
Perchance they are some who are not of my grandfather 's way of thinking in affairs of State , and who struck at him through me .
But ye have both been so kind that ye will not refuse me one other favour which I shall ask ye ? '
Reuben and I unharnessed our horses and saw them cared for in silence .
We then entered the house and ascended to our chambers , still without a word .
Outside his room door my friend paused .
And so I learned for the first time , my dears , that my good comrade had been struck by the little god 's arrows .
When a man 's years number one score , love springs up in him , as the gourd grew in the Scriptures , in a single night .
I have told my story ill if I have not made you understand that my friend was a frank , warm-hearted lad of impulse , whose reason seldom stood sentry over his inclinations .
Such a man can no more draw away from a winning maid than the needle can shun the magnet .
He loves as the mavis sings or the kitten plays .
Now , a slow-witted , heavy fellow like myself , in whose veins the blood has always flowed somewhat coolly and temperately , may go into love as a horse goes into a shelving stream , step by step , but a man like Reuben is kicking his heels upon the bank one moment , and is over ears in the deepest pool the nest .
There was not a cloud in the sky , but the great heat had caused a haze to overlie the valley , gathering thickly along the winding course of the river , and hanging in little sprays and feathers over the woodlands which clothe its banks .
Through this filmy vapour there broke from time to time fierce sparkles of brilliant light as the sun 's rays fell upon breastplate or headpiece .
Now and again the gentle summer breeze wafted up sudden pulses of martial music to our ears , with the blare of trumpets and the long deep snarl of the drums .
As we gazed , the van of the army began to roll out from the cover of the trees and to darken the white dusty roads .
The long line slowly extended itself , writhing out of the forest land like a dark snake with sparkling scales , until the whole rebel army -- horse , foot , and ordnance -- were visible beneath us .
The gleam of the weapons , the waving of numerous banners , the plumes of the leaders , and the deep columns of marching men , made up a picture which stirred the very hearts of the citizens , who , from the housetops and from the ruinous summit of the dismantled walls , were enabled to gaze down upon the champions of their faith .
If the mere sight of a passing regiment will cause a thrill in your bosoms , you can fancy how it is when the soldiers upon whom you look are in actual arms for your own dearest and most cherished interests , and have just come out victorious from a bloody struggle .
If every other man 's hand was against us , these at least were on our side , and our hearts went out to them as to friends and brothers .
Of all the ties that unite men in this world , that of a common danger is the strongest .
'A rattlesnake , rather , ' said Reuben , pointing to the guns in the rear .
'It keeps all its noise in its tail . '
A squadron of horse trotted by , closely followed by the fourth regiment , bearing in its van the standards of Beaminster , Crewkerne , Langport , and Chidiock , all quiet Somersetshire villages , which had sent out their manhood to strike a blow for the old cause .
Puritan ministers , with their steeple hats and Geneva gowns , once black , but now white with dust , marched sturdily along beside their flocks .
Then came a strong company of wild half-armed shepherds from the great plains which extend from the Blackdowns on the south to the Mendips on the north -- very different fellows , I promise you , from the Corydons and Strephons of Master Waller or Master Dryden , who have depicted the shepherd as ever shedding tears of love , and tootling upon a plaintive pipe .
I fear that Chloe or Phyllis would have met with rough wooing at the hands of these Western savages .
Behind them were musqueteers from Dorchester , pikemen from Newton Poppleford , and a body of stout infantry from among the serge workers of Ottery St. Mary .
This fourth regiment numbered rather better than eight hundred , but was inferior in arms and in discipline to that which preceded it .
'If it please your Majesty , ' Sir Gervas answered , 'I am of opinion that I could do your royal cause better service at the head of my musqueteers . '
'Has it gone so far then ! '
'Why , lad , I thought that you were but opening your trenches , and you speak as though you had carried the city . '
'Faith , Mistress Ruth has taught you to make pretty speeches , ' said I , 'but methinks she ought to be here amid the beauty of Taunton . '
'Nay , ' said Buyse .
'I have met you in the way of business since then .
Have you forgot the skirmish on the Rhine bank , when you did flash your snapphahn at me ?
Had some rascally schelm not stabbed my horse I should have swept your head off as a boy cuts thistles mit a stick . '
'Some such base offer was indeed made me , ' said the German sternly .
'To which I answered that , though I sold my sword , I did not sell my honour .
It is well that cavaliers of fortune should show that an engagement is with them -- how do ye say it ?
-- unbreakable until the war is over .
Then by all means let him change his paymaster .
'Teufel und hexerei ! '
he cried , wiping away the blood which oozed from under his nails , 'I might as well put my fingers in a rat-trap .
You are the first man that ever yet exchanged fair hand-grips with Anthony Buyse . '
'Do you strike first , sir , ' said I , 'since the challenge is yours . '
cried Wade the lawyer , a square-faced , bold-eyed man .
'Why , the ring is but the girth of your little finger .
A man might do it once by good luck , but none could ensure it . '
A murmur of thanks rose up from the courtiers at this gracious speech , but the German plucked at Saxon 's sleeve and whispered , 'He hath his warm fit upon him .
You shall see him cold anon . '
'To advance to the East would , in my humble judgment , be fatal to us , ' Grey answered , speaking slowly , with the manner of a man who has thought long and deeply before delivering an opinion .
'James Stuart is strong in horse , and we have none .
We can hold our own amongst hedgerows or in broken country , but what chance could we have in the middle of Salisbury Plain ?
With the dragoons round us we should be like a flock of sheep amid a pack of wolves .
Again , every step which we take towards London removes us from our natural vantage ground , and from the fertile country which supplies our necessities , while it strengthens our enemy by shortening the distance he has to convey his troops and his victuals .
Unless , therefore , we hear of some great outbreak elsewhere , or of some general movement in London in our favour , we would do best to hold our ground and wait an attack . '
'Tell me , Colonel Buyse , ' said the King , mastering his emotion by a strong effort .
'Do you , as a soldier , agree with my Lord Grey ? '
'He is , sire , but he may be induced to turn in your favour the weapon which he hath raised against you .
He is a Protestant .
He is said to be a Whig .
Why should we not send a message to him ?
Appeal to his religion .
Coax and threaten him .
He may have private grievances of which we know nothing , and may be ripe for such a move . '
'If it please your Majesty , ' I asked , 'have I permission to speak ? '
But you are so lost in your news that you have not observed my transformation . '
'I have seen enough to tell me that all is well at home , ' I answered , glancing over my father 's letter .
'But how came these things ? '
'From what I have seen of you , ' said I , laughing , 'I could be warranty that those two duties are ever fulfilled . '
'What is the matter ? '
I asked , glancing up from my own letters .
The baronet 's pale face had taken a tinge of red , and he was striding furiously up and down the bedroom with a letter crumpled up in his hand .
'I have never seen you ruffled before , ' said I .
'No , ' he answered , laughing .
'Many have lived with me for years and would give me a certificate for temper .
But this is too much .
Sir Edward Mortimer is my mother 's younger brother , Clarke , but he is not many years older than myself .
A proper , strait-laced , soft-voiced lad he has ever been , and , as a consequence , he throve in the world , and joined land to land after the scriptural fashion .
I had befriended him from my purse in the old days , but he soon came to be a richer man than I , for all that he gained he kept , whereas all I got -- well , it went off like the smoke of the pipe which you are lighting .
When I found that all was up with me I received from Mortimer an advance , which was sufficient to take me according to my wish over to Virginia , together with a horse and a personal outfit .
There was some chance , Clarke , of the Jerome acres going to him should aught befall me , so that he was not averse to helping me off to a land of fevers and scalping knives .
Nay , never shake your head , my dear country lad , you little know the wiles of the world . '
'The worst _is_ proved , ' said Sir Gervas , with a darkening face .
'I have , as I said , done Mortimer some turns which he might remember , though it did not become me to remind him of them .
This Mistress Butterworth is mine old wet-nurse , and it hath been the custom of the family to provide for her .
I could not bear the thought that in the ruin of my fortune she should lose the paltry guinea or so a week which stood between her and hunger .
My only request to Mortimer , therefore , made on the score of old friendship , was that he should continue this pittance , I promising that should I prosper I would return whatever he should disburse .
The mean-hearted villain wrung my hand and swore that it should be so .
How vile a thing is human nature , Clarke !
For the sake of this paltry sum he , a rich man , hath broken his pledge , and left this poor woman to starve .
But he shall answer to me for it .
He thinks that I am on the Atlantic .
If I march back to London with these brave boys I shall disturb the tenor of his sainted existence .
Meanwhile I shall trust to sun-dials , and off goes my watch to Mother Butterworth .
Bless her ample bosoms !
I have tried many liquors , but I dare bet that the first was the most healthy .
But how of your own letters ?
You have been frowning and smiling like an April day . '
' '' Let us take religion upon its broadest base , for the truth must be broader than aught which we can conceive .
The presence of a table doth prove the existence of a carpenter , and so the presence of a universe proves the existence of a universe Maker , call Him by what name you will .
So far the ground is very firm beneath us , without either inspiration , teaching , or any aid whatever .
Since , then , there _must_ be a world Maker , let us judge of His nature by His work .
We can not observe the glories of the firmament , its infinite extent , its beauty , and the Divine skill wherewith every plant and animal hath its wants cared for , without seeing that He is full of wisdom , intelligence , and power .
We are still , you will perceive , upon solid ground , without having to call to our aid aught save pure reason . ''
' '' Master Clarke .
Sir , -- When last we was in company I had run in under the batteries on cutting-out service , while you did stand on and off in the channel and wait signals .
Having stopped to refit and to overhaul my prize , which proved to be in proper trim alow and aloft -- '' '
She to steer by my reckoning . ''
Of the Snare on the Weston Road
I bowed and placed it in the inside of my tunic .
'There is nothing more to be said , Captain , ' said the lawyer , giving me his hand .
'May all good fortune go with you .
Keep a still tongue and a quick ear .
Watch keenly how all things go .
Mark whose face is gloomy and whose content .
The Duke may be at Bristol , but you had best make for his seat at Badminton .
Our sign of the day is Tewkesbury . '
From the high ground to the north I looked back upon the sleeping town , with the broad edging of tents and waggons , which showed how suddenly its population had outgrown it .
The Royal Standard still fluttered from the tower of St. Mary Magdalene , while close by its beautiful brother-turret of St. James bore aloft the blue flag of Monmouth .
As I gazed the quick petulant roll of a drum rose up on the still morning air , with the clear ringing call of the bugles summoning the troops from their slumbers .
Beyond the town , and on either side of it , stretched a glorious view of the Somersetshire downs , rolling away to the distant sea , with town and hamlet , castle turret and church tower , wooded coombe and stretch of grain-land -- as fair a scene as the eye could wish to rest upon .
As I wheeled my horse and sped upon my way I felt , my dears , that this was a land worth fighting for , and that a man 's life was a small thing if he could but aid , in however trifling a degree , in working out its freedom and its happiness .
At a little village over the hill I fell in with an outpost of horse , the commander of which rode some distance with me , and set me on my road to Nether Stowey .
It seemed strange to my Hampshire eyes to note that the earth is all red in these parts -- very different to the chalk and gravel of Havant .
The cows , too , are mostly red .
The cottages are built neither of brick nor of wood , but of some form of plaster , which they call cob , which is strong and smooth so long as no water comes near it .
They shelter the walls from the rain , therefore , by great overhanging thatches .
There is scarcely a steeple in the whole country-side , which also seems strange to a man from any other part of England .
Every church hath a square tower , with pinnacles upon the top , and they are mostly very large , with fine peals of bells .
All day I rode through this beautiful country , meeting few folk , for I kept away from the main roads .
A few shepherds and farmers , a long-legged clergyman , a packman with his mule , and a horseman with a great bag , whom I took to be a buyer of hair , are all that I can recall .
A black jack of ale and the heel of a loaf at a wayside inn were all my refreshments .
Near Combwich , Covenant cast a shoe , and two hours were wasted before I found a smithy in the town and had the matter set right .
It was not until evening that I at last came out upon the banks of the Bristol Channel , at a place called Shurton Bars , where the muddy Parret makes its way into the sea .
At this point the channel is so broad that the Welsh mountains can scarcely be distinguished .
The shore is flat and black and oozy , flecked over with white patches of sea-birds , but further to the east there rises a line of hills , very wild and rugged , rising in places into steep precipices .
These cliffs run out into the sea , and numerous little harbours and bays are formed in their broken surface , which are dry half the day , but can float a good-sized boat at half-tide .
The road wound over these bleak and rocky hills , which are sparsely inhabited by a wild race of fishermen , or shepherds , who came to their cabin doors on hearing the clatter of my horse 's hoofs , and shot some rough West-country jest at me as I passed .
As the night drew in the country became bleaker and more deserted .
An occasional light twinkling in the distance from some lonely hillside cottage was the only sign of the presence of man .
The rough track still skirted the sea , and high as it was , the spray from the breakers drifted across it .
The salt prinkled on my lips , and the air was filled with the hoarse roar of the surge and the thin piping of curlews , who flitted past in the darkness like white , shadowy , sad-voiced creatures from some other world .
The wind blew in short , quick , angry puffs from the westward , and far out on the black waters a single glimmer of light rising and falling , tossing up , and then sinking out of sight , showed how fierce a sea had risen in the channel .
'There you lie , mine goot vriend , ' said the injured man , in weak , quavering tones .
'And I will prove that you lie if you have a flaschen in your pocket . '
As he spoke the edge of the moon peeped over a cliff and threw a flood of cold clear light upon the scene .
Looking up I saw that a strong rope had been tied across the road from one tree trunk to another about eight feet above the ground .
This could not be seen by me , even had I been fully awake , in the dusk ; but catching me across the breast as Covenant trotted under it , it had swept me off and dashed me with great force to the ground .
Either the fall or the blows which I had received had cut me badly , for I could feel the blood trickling in a warm stream past my ear and down my neck .
I made no attempt to move , however , but waited in silence to find out who these men were into whose hands I had fallen .
My one fear was lest my letters should be taken away from me , and my mission rendered of no avail .
That in this , my first trust , I should be disarmed without a blow and lose the papers which had been confided to me , was a chance which made me flush and tingle with shame at the very thought .
Some of the gang laughed , but the man who had spoken before gave the Dutchman a shove that sent him whirling .
'None of that , ' he said sternly .
'We 'll have British fair-play on British soil , and none of your cursed longshore tricks .
I wo n't stand by and see an Englishman kicked , d 'ye see , by a tub-bellied , round-starned , schnapps-swilling , chicken-hearted son of an Amsterdam lust-vrouw .
Hang him , if the skipper likes .
That 's all above board , but by thunder , if it 's a fight that you will have , touch that man again . '
'No fear , ' the Captain answered , laughing .
'While the _Maria_ brings in five thousand good pieces a year , and can show her heels to any cutter on the coast , there is no fear of greedy Pete losing his share of her .
Why , man , at this rate you may have a lust-haus of your own in a year or two , with a trimmed lawn , and the trees all clipped like peacocks , and the flowers in pattern , and a canal by the door , and a great bouncing house-wife just like any Burgomeister .
There 's many such a fortune been made out of Mechlin and Cognac . '
'A King 's crawl-boat , ' said Captain Murgatroyd , with a sneer .
'We can not hang the gauger until Venables brings up the _Fairy Queen_ , for after all it was one of his hands that was snackled .
Let him do his own dirty work . '
'I have been waiting for a civil question after all this brawling and brabbling , ' said I .
'My name is Micah Clarke .
Now , pray inform me who ye may be , and by what warrant ye stop peaceful travellers upon the public highway ? '
'This is too tall talk for a gauger .
He bears himself like a soldier , too .
It is possible that in snaring the owl we have caught the falcon .
Yet we had certain token that he would come this way , and on such another horse . '
'Aye , ' growled the mate Silas .
'He got a wipe over the arm from the gauger 's whinyard .
He 'll know his face , if any will . '
'Why , this fellow would make two of the gauger , and leave enough over to fashion a magistrate 's clerk .
Ye may hang him to make sure , but still he 's not the man . '
'Yes , hang him ! '
is our cave to be the talk of all the country ?
Vere is the pretty _Maria_ to go then , vid her silks and her satins , her kegs and her cases ' ?
Are we to risk our cave for the sake of this fellow ?
Besides , has he not schlagged my kopf -- schlagged your cooper 's kopf -- as if he had hit me mit mine own mallet ?
Is that not vorth a hemp cravat ? '
'It 's Gauger Westhouse ! '
cried a chorus of voices .
'Yes , it is Gauger Westhouse , ' said the man calmly , giving his neck a wriggle as though he were in pain .
'I represent the King 's law , and in its name I arrest ye all , and declare all the contraband goods which I see around me to be confiscate and forfeited , according to the second section of the first clause of the statute upon illegal dealing .
If there are any honest men in this company , they will assist me in the execution of my duty . '
He staggered to his feet as he spoke , but his spirit was greater than his strength , and he sank back upon the sand amid a roar of laughter from the rough seamen .
'I bear despatches , ' said I , 'from the King 's own hand to Henry Duke of Beaufort , at his castle at Badminton .
Ye can find them in my inner pocket , but I pray ye not to break the seal , lest it bring discredit upon my mission . '
'Well , ' said Murgatroyd , 'we could get back by three long tacks .
Venables will need a day or so to get his goods ashore .
If we are to sail back in company we shall have time on our hands .
How would the plan suit you , Captain ? '
I had walked and smoked for an hour or more , when Silas the mate appeared , and said that the lugger was ready and the horse aboard .
Bidding Murgatroyd farewell , I ventured a few more words in favour of the gauger , which were received with a frown and an angry shake of the head .
A boat was drawn up on the sand , inside the cave , at the water's edge .
Into this I stepped , as directed , with my sword and pistols , which had been given back to me , while the crew pushed her off and sprang in as she glided into deep water .
I could see by the dim light of the single torch which Murgatroyd held upon the margin , that the roof of the cave sloped sheer down upon us as we sculled slowly out towards the entrance .
So low did it come at last that there was only a space of a few feet between it and the water , and we had to bend our heads to avoid the rocks above us .
The boatmen gave two strong strokes , and we shot out from under the overhanging ledge , and found ourselves in the open with the stars shining murkily above us , and the moon showing herself dimly and cloudily through a gathering haze .
Right in front of us was a dark blur , which , as we pulled towards it , took the outline of a large lugger rising and falling with the pulse of the sea .
Her tall thin spars and delicate network of cordage towered above us as we glided under the counter , while the creaking of blocks and rattle of ropes showed that she was all ready to glide off upon her journey .
Lightly and daintily she rode upon the waters , like some giant seafowl , spreading one white pinion after another in preparation for her flight .
The boatmen ran us alongside and steadied the dinghy while I climbed over the bulwarks on to the deck .
She was a roomy vessel , very broad in the beam , with a graceful curve in her bows , and masts which were taller than any that I had seen on such a boat on the Solent .
She was decked over in front , but very deep in the after part , with ropes fixed all round the sides to secure kegs when the hold should be full .
In the midst of this after-deck the mariners had built a strong stall , in which my good steed was standing , with a bucket full of oats in front of him .
My old friend shoved his nose against my face as I came aboard , and neighed his pleasure at finding his master once more .
We were still exchanging caresses when the grizzled head of Silas Bolitho the mate popped out of the cabin hatchway .
'I am a little tired , ' I confessed .
'My head is throbbing from the crack I got when that hawser of yours dashed me from my saddle . '
Of the Welcome that met me at Badminton
'In that case , my good fellow , ' I answered , 'ye can set me ashore , for I have not far to go . '
The mate held up his hand , and we all listened for some fresh sign of the whereabouts of our scurvy neighbour .
The wind had freshened a little , and we were slipping through the water at four or five knots an hour .
Of a sudden a hoarse voice was heard roaring at our very side .
'Bear a hand on the lee-braces , there !
Stand by the halliards !
Bear a hand , ye lazy rogues , or I 'll be among ye with my cane , with a wannion to ye ! '
'Ye have one of the hides with the horse still in it , ' cried the officer .
'Run down under our counter .
We must have a closer look at ye . '
'Aye , aye , sir ! '
said the mate , and putting his helm hard down the boom swung across , and the _Maria_ darted off like a scared seabird into the fog .
Looking back there was nothing but a dim loom to show where we had left the great vessel .
We could hear , however , the hoarse shouting of orders and the bustle of men .
A fresh discharge burst from the man-of-war , but this time they had lost all trace of us , and were firing by guess .
Truly Providence works in strange ways , my children , and until a man comes to the autumn of his days he can scarce say what hath been ill-luck and what hath been good .
For of all the seeming misfortunes which have befallen me during my wandering life , there is not one which I have not come to look upon as a blessing .
And if you once take this into your hearts , it is a mighty help in enabling you to meet all troubles with a stiff lip ; for why should a man grieve when he hath not yet determined whether what hath chanced may not prove to be a cause of rejoicing .
Now here ye will perceive that I began by being dashed upon a stony road , beaten , kicked , and finally well-nigh put to death in mistake for another .
Yet it ended in my being safely carried to my journey 's end , whereas , had I gone by land , it is more than likely that I should have been cut off at Weston ; for , as I heard afterwards , a troop of horse were making themselves very active in those parts by blocking the roads and seizing all who came that way .
Being now alone , my first care was to bathe my face and hands in a stream which ran down to the sea , and to wipe away any trace of my adventures of the night before .
My cut was but a small one , and was concealed by my hair .
Having reduced myself to some sort of order I next rubbed down my horse as best I could , and rearranged his girth and his saddle .
I then led him by the bridle to the top of a sandhill hard by , whence I might gain some idea as to my position .
'I am a Hampshire man , ' said I .
'I have come some distance to see the Duke . '
'They have four thousand foot and a thousand horse , ' the farmer answered .
'But the foot are only train-bands , and there 's no trusting them after Axminster .
They say up here that the rebels run to nigh twenty thousand , and that they give no quarter .
Well , if we must have civil war , I hope it may be hot and sudden , not spun out for a dozen years like the last one .
If our throats are to be cut , let it be with a shairp knife , and not with a blunt hedge shears . '
'What say you to a stoup of cider ? '
I asked , for we were passing an ivy-clad inn , with 'The Beaufort Arms ' printed upon the sign .
'You speak of the house as though you knew it well , ' said I .
'And who should know it better ? '
asked the sturdy farmer , wiping his lips , as we resumed our journey .
'Why , it seems but yesterday that I played hide-and-seek wi ' my brothers in the old Boteler Castle , that stood where the new house o ' Badminton , or Acton Turville , as some calls it , now stands .
The Duke hath built it but a few years , and , indeed , his Dukedom itself is scarce older .
There are some who think that he would have done better to stick by the old name that his forebears bore . '
'Hot and hasty , like all of his blood .
Yet when he hath time to think , and hath cooled down , he is just in the main .
Your horse hath been in the water this morning , vriend . '
'Why it is enough to make a man a Whig , ' he cried .
'Even the Roundheads always paid their vair penny for every pennyworth they had , though they wanted a vair pennyworth for each penny .
I have heard my father say that trade was never so brisk as in 'forty-six , when they were down this way .
Old Noll had a noose of hemp ready for horse-stealers , were they for King or for Parliament .
But here comes his Grace 's carriage , if I mistake not . '
As he spoke a great heavy yellow coach , drawn by six cream-coloured Flemish mares , dashed down the road , and came swiftly towards us .
Two mounted lackeys galloped in front , and two others all in light blue and silver liveries rode on either side .
As we drew near the house we came on a large extent of level sward on which a troop of horse were exercising , who were raised , as my companion informed me , entirely from the Duke 's own personal attendants .
Passing them we rode through a grove of rare trees and came out on a broad space of gravel which lay in front of the house .
The building itself was of great extent , built after the new Italian fashion , rather for comfort than for defence ; but on one wing there remained , as my companion pointed out , a portion of the old keep and battlements of the feudal castle of the Botelers , looking as out of place as a farthingale of Queen Elizabeth joined to a court dress fresh from Paris .
The main doorway was led up to by lines of columns and a broad flight of marble steps , on which stood a group of footmen and grooms , who took our horses when we dismounted .
A grey-haired steward or major-domo inquired our business , and on learning that we wished to see the Duke in person , he told us that his Grace would give audience to strangers in the afternoon at half after three by the clock .
In the meantime he said that the guests ' dinner had just been laid in the hall , and it was his master's wish that none who came to Badminton should depart hungry .
My companion and I were but too glad to accept the steward 's invitation , so having visited the bath-room and attended to the needs of the toilet , we followed a footman , who ushered us into a great room where the company had already assembled .
'He is an armourer of Bristol , ' whispered one of my neighbours .
'It is likely that the Duke can not come to terms with him over a contract . '
'The tall man who goes in now is an inventor , ' quoth the first .
'He hath the secret of some very grievous fire , such as hath been used by the Greeks against the Turks in the Levant , which he desires to sell for the better fortifying of Bristol . '
I had just come to this resolution when my name was read out , on which I rose and advanced into the inner chamber .
It was a small but lofty room , hung in blue silk with a broad gold cornice .
In the centre was a square table littered over with piles of papers , and behind this sat his Grace with full-bottomed wig rolling down to his shoulders , very stately and imposing .
He had the same subtle air of the court which I had observed both in Monmouth and in Sir Gervas , which , with his high bold features and large piercing eyes , marked him as a leader of men .
His private scrivener sat beside him , taking notes of his directions , while the others stood behind in a half circle , or took snuff together in the deep recess of the window .
'What think ye , gentlemen ! '
he cried , looking round with scornful eyes ; 'what think ye this private message hath proved to be ?
It is a letter from the traitor Monmouth , calling upon me to resign the allegiance of my natural sovereign and to draw my sword in his behalf !
If I do this I am to have his gracious favour and protection .
If not , I incur sequestration , banishment , and ruin .
He thinks Beaufort 's loyalty is to be bought like a packman 's ware , or bullied out of him by ruffling words .
The descendant of John of Gaunt is to render fealty to the brat of a wandering playwoman ! '
'I am in the hands of God here as elsewhere , ' I answered , with some flash of my father 's fatalism .
'I have done what I promised to do , and the rest is no concern of mine . '
'I should clap on the thumbikins , ' said one fierce-faced old soldier .
'I have known a lighted match between the fingers work wonders , ' another suggested .
'Sir Thomas Dalzell hath in the Scottish war been able to win over several of that most stubborn and hardened race , the Western Covenanters , by such persuasion . '
'Sir , ' the other answered hotly , 'I have been in battles when you were in your baby-linen , and I handled a battoon when you could scarce shake a rattle .
In leaguer or onfall a soldier 's work is sharp and stern , but I say that the use of torture , which the law of England hath abolished , should also be laid aside by the law of nations . '
'Shall we take him to the strong room , your Grace ? '
asked the Captain of the guard .
Thus left to myself I tried to follow Captain Sinclair 's advice as to the keeping up of my heart , though his talk was far from being of a cheering nature .
In my young days , more particularly among the sectaries with whom I had been brought most in contact , a belief in the occasional appearance of the Prince of Darkness , and his interference in bodily form with the affairs of men , was widespread and unquestioning .
Philosophers in their own quiet chambers may argue learnedly on the absurdity of such things , but in a dim-lit dungeon , cut off from the world , with the grey gloaming creeping down , and one 's own fate hanging in the balance , it becomes a very different matter .
The escape , if the Captain 's story were true , appeared to border upon the miraculous .
I examined the walls of the cell very carefully .
They were formed of great square stones cunningly fitted together .
The thin slit or window was cut through the centre of a single large block .
All over , as high as the hand could reach , the face of the walls was covered with letters and legends cut by many generations of captives .
The floor was composed of old foot-worn slabs , firmly cemented together .
The closest search failed to show any hole or cranny where a rat could have escaped , far less a man .
'How did you come to know where I was ? '
I asked in astonishment .
'I am much beholden to you , sir , ' I answered , 'but I fear that there is no help which you can give me , unless , indeed , you could convey news to my friends in the army of what hath befallen me . '
'I might do that , ' whispered Farmer Brown .
'Hark ye in your ear , lad , what I never breathed to man yet .
Mine own conscience pricks me at times over this bolstering up of a Papist to rule over a Protestant nation .
Let like rule like , say I .
At the 'lections I rode to Sudbury , and I put in my vote for Maister Evans , of Turnford , who was in favour o ' the Exclusionists .
Sure enough , if that same Bill had been carried , the Duke would be sitting on his father 's throne .
The law would have said yes .
Now , it says nay .
A wonderful thing is the law with its yea , yea , and nay , nay , like Barclay , the Quaker man , that came down here in a leather suit , and ca 'd the parson a steepleman .
There 's the law .
It 's no use shootin ' at it , or passin ' pikes through it , no , nor chargin ' at it wi' a troop of horse .
If it begins by saying `` nay '' it will say `` nay '' to the end of the chapter .
Ye might as well fight wi ' the book o ' Genesis .
Let Monmouth get the law changed , and it will do more for him than all the dukes in England .
For all that he 's a Protestant , and I would do what I might to serve him . '
'Good-bye then , my brave heart , ' he whispered , and the honest grey eye and corner of ruddy cheek disappeared from the casement .
Many a time during the course of the long evening I glanced up with some wild hope that he might return , and every creak of the branches outside brought me on to the chair , but it was the last that I saw of Farmer Brown .
'Truly , sir , ' I answered , 'I can scarce credit that it is other than a dream .
It is wondrous that my dungeon should be so easily broken into , and more wondrous still that I should find a friend who would be willing to risk so much for my sake . '
'Especially when it talks of hemp and dungeons , ' he answered , with a smile .
'But if I clapped you into prison , you must confess that I have made you amends by pulling you out again at the end of my line , like a minnow out of a bottle .
But how came you to deliver such papers in the presence of my council ? '
'I would have you tell Monmouth , ' he said at last , 'that I thank him for the papers which he hath sent me , and that I will duly read and weigh them .
Tell him also that I wish him well in his enterprise , and would help him were it not that I am hemmed in by those who watch me closely , and who would denounce me were I to show my true thoughts .
Tell him that , should he move his army into these parts , I may then openly declare myself ; but to do so now would be to ruin the fortunes of my house , without in any way helping him .
Can you bear him that message ? '
It 's Micah ! '
he gasped , with his mouth open , and the tears hopping down his honest face .
'Od 's pitlikins , man , how did you come here ? '
asked Sir Gervas , poking me with his forefinger as though to see if I were really of flesh and blood .
'We were leading a forlorn of horse into Beaufort 's country to beat him up , and to burn his fine house about his ears if you had come to harm .
There has just come a groom from some farmer in those parts who hath brought us news that you were under sentence of death , on which I came away with my wig half frizzled , and found that friend Lockarby had leave from Lord Grey to go north with these troopers .
But how have you fared ? '
'Aye , and King Monmouth will be on thorns to see you .
Right about , my lads , and back for the camp .
Never was errand so rapidly and happily finished as this of ours .
It would have fared ill with Badminton had you been hurt . '
The troopers turned their horses and trotted slowly back to Taunton , while I rode behind them between my two faithful friends , hearing from them all that had occurred in my absence , and telling my own adventures in return .
The night had fallen ere we rode through the gates , where I handed Covenant over to the Mayor 's groom , and went direct to the castle to deliver an account of my mission .
King Monmouth 's council was assembled at the time of my coming , and my entrance caused the utmost surprise and joy , as they had just heard news of my sore danger .
Even the royal presence could not prevent several members , among whom were the old Mayor and the two soldiers of fortune , from springing to their feet and shaking me warmly by the hand .
Monmouth himself said a few gracious words , and requested that I should be seated at the board with the others .
'And his private message was that he wished us well , and would join us if we were in his country ? '
'He would fain stand upon both sides of the hedge at once , ' said King Monmouth .
'Such a man is very like to find himself on neither side , but in the very heart of the briars .
It may be as well , however , that we should move his way , so as to give him the chance of declaring himself . '
'The Doctor is right , ' said a square-faced , leather-skinned English Independent .
'We talk too much o ' carnal means and worldly chances , without leaning upon that heavenly goodwill which should be to us as a staff on stony and broken paths .
Yes , gentlemen , ' he continued , raising his voice and glancing across the table at some of the courtiers , 'ye may sneer at words of piety , but I say that it is you and those like you who will bring down God 's anger upon this army . '
`` Such as do build their faith upon The holy text of sword and gun . ''
'Ah , that is indeed a graver matter .
All creeds may be welded together , but the Puritan and the scoffer are like oil and water .
Yet the Puritan is the oil , for he will be ever atop .
These courtiers do but stand for themselves , while the others are backed up by the pith and marrow of the army .
It is well that we are afoot to-morrow .
The King 's troops are , I hear , pouring across Salisbury Plain , but their ordnance and stores are delaying them , for they know well that they must bring all they need , since they can expect little from the goodwill of the country folk .
Ah , friend Buyse , wie geht es ? '
At the summit , where the road begins to dip down upon the other side , a halt was called to enable the regiments to close up , and we looked back at the fair town which many of us were never to see again .
From the dark walls and house roofs we could still mark the flapping and flutter of white kerchiefs from those whom we left behind .
Reuben sat his horse beside me , with his spare shirt streaming in the wind and his great pikemen all agrin behind him , though his thoughts and his eyes were too far away to note them .
As we gazed , a long thin quiver of sunshine slipped out between two cloud banks and gilded the summit of the Magdalene tower , with the Royal standard which still waved from it .
The incident was hailed as a happy augury , and a great shout spread from rank to rank at the sight of it , with a waving of hats and a clattering of weapons .
Then the bugles blew a fanfare , the drums struck up a point of war , Reuben thrust his shirt into his haversack , and on we marched through mud and slush , with the dreary clouds bending low over us , and buttressed by the no less dreary hills on either side .
A seeker for omens might have said that the heavens were weeping over our ill-fated venture .
'If you should chance to dwindle to nought , ' said I , laughing , 'what account are we to give of you in Taunton ?
Since you have donned armour and taken to winning the hearts of fair maidens , you have outstripped us all in importance , and become a man of weight and substance . '
'I have spoken to him , ' my friend answered , 'but he was so busy in filling ammunition cases that I could not gain his attention .
When I tried once more he was counting the spare pikes in the Castle armoury with a tally and an ink-horn .
I told him that I had come to crave his granddaughter 's hand , on which he turned to me and asked , `` which hand ? ''
with so blank a stare that it was clear that his mind was elsewhere .
On the third trial , though , the day that you did come back from Badminton , I did at last prefer my request , but he flashed out at me that this was no time for such fooleries , and he bade me wait until King Monmouth was on the throne , when I might ask him again .
I warrant that he did not call such things fooleries fifty years ago , when he went a-courting himself . '
'At least he did not refuse you , ' said I .
'It is as good as a promise that ; should the cause be successful , you shall be so too . '
'Thank God that you are unhurt , ' said I .
'See , our horse are advancing along the upper road .
Lord Grey himself rides at their head .
We had best take our prisoner into camp , since we can do nought here . '
'There are foot there , ' I answered , puckering my eyes .
'It seems to me that I can discern four or five regiments and as many colours of horse .
King Monmouth should know of this with all speed . '
'But we had no thought that the enemy 's foot was so near ! '
'We have not yet summoned Bath , ' said Wade .
'Let us do as Colonel Saxon proposes , and let us in the meantime march in that direction and send a trumpet to the governor . '
As we returned to our quarters after dismissing our men we came upon a great throng of the rough Bagworthy and Oare miners , who were assembled in the open space in front of the Cathedral , listening to one of their own number , who was addressing them from a cart .
The wild and frenzied gestures of the man showed us that he was one of those extreme sectaries whose religion runs perilously near to madness .
The hums and groans which rose from the crowd proved , however , that his fiery words were well suited to his hearers , so we halted on the verge of the multitude and hearkened to his address .
A red-bearded , fierce-faced man he was , with tangled shaggy hair tumbling over his gleaming eyes , and a hoarse voice which resounded over the whole square .
'Shall we pluck it down , then , until no one stone is left upon another ? '
'Yes , yes ! '
The riot had now changed into open mutiny among these marshmen and miners .
Pikes , scythes , and knives glimmered through the dim light , while their wild cries re-echoed from the high arched roof like the howling of a pack of wolves .
'Go forward , my brothers , ' cried the fanatic preacher , who had been the cause of the outbreak -- 'go forward against them !
What though they be in high places !
There is One who is higher than they .
Shall we shrink from His work because of a naked sword ?
Shall we suffer the Prelatist altar to be preserved by these sons of Amalek ?
In the name of the Lord ! '
I can say nothing of what took place to right or left of me during the ruffle , for indeed there were so many pressing upon us , and the fight was so hot , that it was all that each of us could do to hold our own .
The very number of our assailants was in our favour , by hampering their sword-arms .
One burly miner cut fiercely at me with his scythe , but missing me he swung half round with the force of the blow , and I passed my sword through his body before he could recover himself .
It was the first time that I had ever slain a man in anger , my dear children , and I shall never forget his white startled face as he looked over his shoulder at me ere he fell .
Another closed in with me before I could get my weapon disengaged , but I struck him out with my left hand , and then brought the flat of my sword upon his head , laying him senseless upon the pavement .
God knows , I did not wish to take the lives of the misguided and ignorant zealots , but our own were at stake .
A marshman , looking more like a shaggy wild beast than a human being , darted under my weapon and caught me round the knees , while another brought a flail down upon my head-piece , from which it glanced on to my shoulder .
A third thrust at me with a pike , and pricked me on the thigh , but I shore his weapon in two with one blow , and split his head with the next .
The man with the flail gave back at sight of this , and a kick freed me from the unarmed ape-like creature at my feet , so that I found myself clear of my assailants , and none the worse for my encounter , save for a touch on the leg and some stiffness of the neck and shoulder .
But this idea , my dear children , was a noble one , and one which a man might very well sacrifice all for , and yet feel that all was well spent .
For though these poor peasants , in their dumb , blundering fashion , would have found it hard to give all their reasons in words , yet in the inmost heart of them they knew and felt that it was England 's cause which they were fighting for , and that they were upholding their country 's true self against those who would alter the old systems under which she had led the nations .
Three more years made all this very plain , and showed that our simple unlettered followers had seen and judged the signs of the times more correctly than those who called themselves their betters .
There are , to my thinking , stages of human progress for which the Church of Rome is admirably suited .
Where the mind of a nation is young , it may be best that it should not concern itself with spiritual affairs , but should lean upon the old staff of custom and authority .
But England had cast off her swaddling-clothes , and was a nursery of strong , thinking men , who would bow to no authority save that which their reason and conscience approved .
It was hopeless , useless , foolish , to try to drive such men back into a creed which they had outgrown .
Such an attempt was , however , being made , backed by all the weight of a bigoted king with a powerful and wealthy Church as his ally .
In three years the nation would understand it , and the King would be flying from his angry people ; but at present , sunk in a torpor after the long civil wars and the corrupt reign of Charles , they failed to see what was at stake , and turned against those who would warn them , as a hasty man turns on the messenger who is the bearer of evil tidings .
Is it not strange , my dears , how quickly a mere shadowy thought comes to take living form , and grow into a very tragic reality ?
At one end of the chain is a king brooding over a point of doctrine ; at the other are six thousand desperate men , chivied and chased from shire to shire , standing to bay at last amid the bleak Bridgewater marshes , with their hearts as bitter and as hopeless as those of hunted beasts of prey .
A king 's theology is a dangerous thing for his subjects .
But if the idea for which these poor men fought was a worthy one , what shall we say of the man who had been chosen as the champion of their cause ?
Alas , that such men should have had such a leader !
Swinging from the heights of confidence to the depths of despair , choosing his future council of state one day and proposing to fly from the army on the next , he appeared from the start to be possessed by the very spirit of fickleness .
Yet he had borne a fair name before this enterprise .
In Scotland he had won golden opinions , not only for his success , but for the moderation and mercy with which he treated the vanquished .
On the Continent he had commanded an English brigade in a way that earned praise from old soldiers of Louis and the Empire .
Yet now , when his own head and his own fortunes were at stake , he was feeble , irresolute , and cowardly .
In my father 's phrase , 'all the virtue had gone out of him . '
I declare when I have seen him riding among his troops , with his head bowed upon his breast and a face like a mute at a burying , casting an air of gloom and of despair all round him , I have felt that , even in case of success , such a man could never wear the crown of the Tudors and the Plantagenets , but that some stronger hand , were it that of one of his own generals , would wrest it from him .
I will do Monmouth the justice to say that from the time when it was at last decided to fight -- for the very good reason that no other course was open -- he showed up in a more soldierly and manlier spirit .
For the first few days in July no means were neglected to hearten our troops and to nerve them for the coming battle .
From morning to night we were at work , teaching our foot how to form up in dense groups to meet the charge of horse , and how to depend upon each other , and look to their officers for orders .
At night the streets of the little town from the Castle Field to the Parret Bridge resounded with the praying and the preaching .
There was no need for the officers to quell irregularities , for the troops punished them amongst themselves .
One man who came out on the streets hot with wine was well-nigh hanged by his companions , who finally cast him out of the town as being unworthy to fight in what they looked upon as a sacred quarrel .
As to their courage , there was no occasion to quicken that , for they were as fearless as lions , and the only danger was lest their fiery daring should lead them into foolhardiness .
Their desire was to hurl themselves upon the enemy like a horde of Moslem fanatics , and it was no easy matter to drill such hot-headed fellows into the steadiness and caution which war demands .
That ride comes very clearly before me as I think of it .
The dark loom of the club-headed willows flitting by us , the moaning of the breeze among the withies , the vague , blurred figures of the troopers , the dull thud of the hoofs , and the jingling of scabbard against stirrup -- eye and ear can both conjure up those old-time memories .
The Baronet and I rode in front , knee against knee , and his light-hearted chatter of life in town , with his little snatches of verse or song from Cowley or Waller , were a very balm of Gilead to my sombre and somewhat heavy spirit .
Sir Gervas was about to reply , when of a sudden out of the silence of the night there rose a long-drawn piercing scream , which thrilled through every nerve of our bodies .
I have never heard such a wail of despair .
We pulled up our horses , as did the troopers behind us , and strained our ears for some sign as to whence the sound proceeded , for some were of opinion that it came from our right and some from our left .
The main body with the waggons had come up , and we all listened intently for any return of the terrible cry .
Presently it broke upon us again , wild , shrill , and agonised : the scream of a woman in mortal distress .
'And who are you ? '
'And how came you into this ruffle ?
S'bud , you are a game little rooster to fight four such great cockerels ! '
'Nay , I can take little credit for that , ' our new acquaintance answered .
'Indeed , I had other scores to settle with Colonel Kirke 's horse , and was but too glad to have this breather with them . '
'You say well , gaffer ! '
cried Hector Marot ; 'you show the true spirit .
Methinks I see an old birding-piece on yonder hooks , which , with a brace of slugs in it and a bold man behind it , might bring down one of these fine birds for all their gay feathers . '
'I 'll goo at once , ' said the countryman .
'I 'm bound to zee him if he be on the Athelney road . '
So saying he set spurs to his horse and galloped off through the darkness .
'There is a right and there is a wrong , ' I answered , 'which no words can do away with , and it is a dangerous and unprofitable trick to juggle with them . '
'And what came of it ? '
I asked , for our new acquaintance was laughing silently to himself .
'Well , my three friends ran down their hare , and pulled out their flasks , as men who had done a good stroke of work .
They were still hobnobbing and laughing over the slaughtered bunny , and one had dismounted to cut off its ears as the prize of their chase , when I came up at a hand-gallop .
`` Good-morrow , gentlemen , '' said I , `` we have had rare sport . ''
They looked at me blankly enough , I promise you , and one of them asked me what the devil I did there , and how I dared to join in a private sport .
`` Nay , I was not chasing your hare , gentlemen , '' said I .
`` What then , fellow ? ''
asked one of them .
`` Why , marry , I was chasing you , '' I answered , `` and a better run I have not had for years . ''
With that I lugged out my persuaders , and made the thing clear in a few words , and I 'll warrant you would have laughed could you have seen their faces as they slowly dragged the fat leather purses from their fobs .
Seventy-one pounds was my prize that morning , which was better worth riding for than a hare 's ears . '
'It is a bold thing with raw peasants to attack old soldiers , ' quoth Sir Stephen Timewell .
'Yet if it is to be done , I know well that there is not a man born within sound of the bells of St. Mary Magdalene who will flinch from it . '
'Being desirous of seeing all that I could of the enemy , I clambered up a lofty tree which stands just without the town .
From this post , by the aid of a glass , I was able to make out their lines and camp .
Whilst I was gazing I chanced to observe a man slinking along under cover of the birch-trees half-way between their lines and the town .
Watching him , I found that he was indeed moving in our direction .
Presently he came so near that I was able to distinguish who it was -- for it was one whom I know -- but instead of entering the town by my gate he walked round under cover of the peat cuttings , and so made his way doubtless to some other entrance .
He is a man , however , who I have reason to believe has no true love for the cause , and it is my belief that he hath been to the Royal camp with news of our doings , and hath now come back for further information . '
'Love again , ' quoth I .
'This same love is a pretty flower when it grows unchecked , but a sorry weed if thwarted . '
she cried , still waving her hands and shaking her kerchief .
Granny told me to tell any one that came to go 'way ! '
'But if they would not go away , little mistress , ' asked Reuben , 'what were you to do then ? '
'Were ever two men-at-arms so tyrannised over by a little dolly such as this ! '
said I , laughing .
'Nay , little one , we shall compound with you by paying you this shilling , which will buy all your milk .
We can stay here and drink it at our ease . '
'Nay , then ye may stay , ' quoth she , climbing up upon my knee as grave as a sparrow upon a bough .
'What a great boy you are ! '
'And why not a man ? '
'Because granny says that they are all the children of the great Father , ' she answered .
'If they have all one father they must be brothers , must n't they ? '
'Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings , Micah , ' quoth Reuben , staring out of the window .
'It is he , sure enough , ' cried Reuben , peeping through the diamond-paned window .
'On what grounds do you arrest me ? '
he asked , in hoarse , broken tones .
'Where is your warranty ?
Who hath given you a commission to molest travellers upon the King 's highway ? '
'It is the truth , ' said Reuben .
'I saw you myself on your return .
Let us see that paper which peeps from your doublet . '
'He has left even now , ' said Major Ogilvy .
'He pronounces our friend to be doing right well , but hath warned me against allowing him to talk . '
'Treason , Major , rank treason , ' I answered , laughing .
'Yet if we could order a leader as one does a coat we might , perchance , have chosen one of a stronger texture .
We are in arms not for him , but for the old liberties and rights of Englishmen .
Have you seen Sir Gervas ? '
He was standing before a table which was littered all over with pots , brushes , boxes , and a score of the like trifles , which he had either bought or borrowed for the occasion .
A large hand-mirror was balanced against the wall , with rush-lights on either side of it .
In front of this , with a most solemn and serious expression upon his pale , handsome face , the Baronet was arranging and re-arranging a white berdash cravat .
His riding-boots were brightly polished , and the broken seam repaired .
His sword-sheath , breastplate , and trappings were clear and bright .
He wore his gayest and newest suit , and above all he had donned a most noble and impressive full-bottomed periwig , which drooped down to his shoulders , as white as powder could make it .
From his dainty riding-hat to his shining spur there was no speck or stain upon him -- a sad set-off to my own state , plastered as I was with a thick crust of the Sedgemoor mud , and disordered from having ridden and worked for two days without rest or repose .
Well , there , it boots not to argue with you .
Your bucolic mind would never rise to the subtle import which may lie in such matters -- the rest of mind which it is to have them right , and the plaguey uneasiness when aught is wrong .
It comes , doubtless , from training , and it may be that I have it more than others of my class .
I feel as a cat who would lick all day to take the least speck from her fur .
Is not the patch over the eyebrow happily chosen ?
Nay , you can not even offer an opinion ; I would as soon ask friend Marot , the knight of the pistol .
Fill up your glass ! '
'Then mayhap the Major may care to finish it .
It is not often I ask help with a bottle , but I would keep my head cool this night .
Let us go down and see to our men . '
'There is a hogshead of Zoyland cider in the yard of yonder inn , ' said Sir Gervas .
'Here , Dawson , do you take those gold sleeve links and give them to mine host in exchange .
Broach the barrel , and let each man have his horn full .
Sink me , if they shall fight with nought but cold water in them . '
'Of a surety , ' Saxon answered gladly , 'we could not do better ; ' so shaking our bridles we rode off , our horses ' hoofs striking fire from the flint-paved streets as we passed .
Behind the horse , in a long line which stretched from the Eastover gate , across the bridge , along the High Street , up the Cornhill , and so past the church to the Pig Cross , stood our foot , silent and grim , save when some woman 's voice from the windows called forth a deep , short answer from the ranks .
The fitful light gleamed on scythes-blade or gun-barrel , and showed up the lines of rugged , hard set faces , some of mere children with never a hair upon their cheeks , others of old men whose grey beards swept down to their cross-belts , but all bearing the same stamp of a dogged courage and a fierce self-contained resolution .
Here were still the fisher folk of the south .
Here , too , were the fierce men from the Mendips , the wild hunters from Porlock Quay and Minehead , the poachers of Exmoor , the shaggy marshmen of Axbridge , the mountain men from the Quantocks , the serge and wool-workers of Devonshire , the graziers of Bampton , the red-coats from the Militia , the stout burghers of Taunton , and then , as the very bone and sinew of all , the brave smockfrocked peasants of the plains , who had turned up their jackets to the elbow , and exposed their brown and corded arms , as was their wont when good work had to be done .
As I speak to you , dear children , fifty years rolls by like a mist in the morning , and I am riding once more down the winding street , and see again the serried ranks of my gallant companions .
They showed to all time how little training it takes to turn an Englishman into a soldier , and what manner of men are bred in those quiet , peaceful hamlets which dot the sunny slopes of the Somerset and Devon downs .
If ever it should be that England should be struck upon her knees , if those who fight her battles should have deserted her , and she should find herself unarmed in the presence of her enemy , let her take heart and remember that every village in the realm is a barrack , and that her real standing army is the hardy courage and simple virtue which stand ever in the breast of the humblest of her peasants .
'You speak as though it wore a cocking-match or a bull-baiting , 'I answered , with some little coldness .
'It is a solemn and a sad occasion .
Win who will , English blood must soak the soil of England this night . '
'I have no great curiosity to see it , ' he remarked , with a laugh .
'It will be much as yesterday 's .
though I have never risen to see one in my life , I have looked on many a hundred ere I went to bed . '
'If I live and you should fall , I shall do what may be done for her , ' said I .
'Have you aught else to say ? '
'Only that Hacker of Paul 's Yard is the best for vests , ' he answered .
'It is a small piece of knowledge , yet like most other knowledge it hath been bought and paid for .
I have a trinket or two left which might serve as a gift for the pretty Puritan maid , should our friend lead her to the altar .
Od 's my life , but she will make him read some queer books !
How now , Colonel , why are we stuck out on the moor like a row of herons among the sedges ? '
'May not our horse advance ? '
'They will fight none the worse for that , ' I remarked ; 'but surely the troops are advancing ! '
'Nay , sir , for God 's sake ! '
said a trooper , laying his hand upon his bridle .
'Sergeant Sexton hath sprung in even now , and horse and man have gone to the bottom ! '
I caught a pike out of a footman 's hand , and probed into the black oozy mud , standing myself up to the waist in it , and holding Covenant's bridle in my left hand .
Nowhere could I touch bottom or find any hope of solid foothold .
'Here , fellow ! '
cried Saxon , seizing a trooper by the arm .
'Make for the rear !
Gallop as though the devil were behind you !
Bring up a pair of ammunition waggons , and we shall see whether we can not bridge this infernal puddle . '
cried Saxon , as we all gave a cry of horror and execration ; 'do not dishearten our brave lads !
Cowardice is catching and will run through an army like the putrid fever . '
'That 's what I mean , ' he answered , flicking some dirt from his cravat .
'Do n't ye mind !
Look out for yourselves .
Present my compliments to -- ' The dragoons charged down upon us again .
We were all borne backwards , fighting desperately , and when we could look round the Baronet was gone for ever .
We heard afterwards that the King 's troops found upon the field a body which they mistook for that of Monmouth , on account of the effeminate grace of the features and the richness of the attire .
No doubt it was that of our undaunted friend , Sir Gervas Jerome , a name which shall ever be dear to my heart .
When , ten years afterwards , we heard much of the gallantry of the young courtiers of the household of the French King , and of the sprightly courage with which they fought against us in the Lowlands at Steinkirk and elsewhere , I have always thought , from my recollection of Sir Gervas , that I knew what manner of men they were .
Looking back from the summit of the low hills which lie to the westward of the moor , we could see the cloud of horse-men streaming over the bridge of the Parret and into the town of Bridgewater , with the helpless drove of fugitives still flying in front of them .
We had pulled up our horses , and were looking sadly and silently back at the fatal plain , when the thud of hoofs fell upon our ears , and , turning round , we found two horsemen in the dress of the guards riding towards us .
They had made a circuit to cut us off , for they were riding straight for us with drawn swords and eager gestures .
'It is our friend who set the hounds upon our track at Salisbury , ' he said .
'This is a happy meeting .
I have a score to settle with him . '
'Not in cold blood , ' I said firmly .
'I shall not abide it . '
There were many scattered bodies of horse riding hither and thither over the marshes , but I was able to avoid them , and trotted onwards , keeping to the waste country until I found myself eight or ten miles from the battlefield .
The few cottages and houses which I passed wore deserted , and many of them bore signs of having been plundered .
Not a peasant was to be seen .
The evil fame of Kirke 's lambs had chased away all those who had not actually taken arms .
At last , after riding for three hours , I bethought me that I was far enough from the main line of pursuit to be free from danger , so I chose out a sheltered spot where a clump of bushes overhung a little brook .
There , seated upon a bank of velvet moss , I rested my weary limbs , and tried to wash the stains of battle from my person .
The incident is historically true , and may serve to show what sort of men they were who had learned their soldiering under Cromwell .
'I am but a poor scrivener man , your serene Highness , ' he bawled .
'Indeed , I am a most unhappy clerk , your Honour , who has been driven into these courses by the tyranny of those above him .
A more loyal man , your Grace , never wore neat 's leather , but when the mayor says `` Yes , '' can the clerk say `` No '' ?
Spare me , your lordship ; spare a most penitent wretch , whose only prayer is that he may be allowed to serve King James to the last drop of his blood ! '
'I do -- from my heart ! '
'Why , marry , in this wise , ' he answered , with his mouth full of dough .
'It was a wile or ruse , after the fashion of the greatest commanders , who have always been famous for concealing their movements , and lurking where they were least expected .
For when the fight was lost , and I had cut and hacked until my arm was weary and my edge blunted , I found that I was left alone alive of all the Taunton men .
Were we on the field you could see where I had stood by the ring of slain which would be found within the sweep of my sword-arm .
Finding that all was lost and that our rogues were fled , I mounted our worthy Mayor 's charger , seeing that the gallant gentleman had no further need for it , and rode slowly from the field .
I promise you that there was that in my eye and bearing which prevented their horse from making too close a pursuit of me .
One trooper did indeed throw himself across my path , but mine old back-handed cut was too much for him .
Alas , I have much upon my conscience ?
I have made both widows and orphans .
Why will they brave me when -- God of mercy , what is that ? '
''Tis but my horse in the stall below , ' I answered .
'I thought it was the dragoons , ' quoth the clerk , wiping away the drops which had started out upon his brow .
'You and I would have gone forth and smitten them . '
I shall moderate my spirit , ' he cried .
'In such troublous times you will find yourself none the worse for the company of a tried fighting man . '
'Nay , you need not be so hot about it , ' he exclaimed , shrinking away from me .
'In any case , we had best stay here until nightfall , when we may make our way to the coast . '
'Nay , John , you are too absurd ! '
cried the other impatiently .
'The mask and the buskins are well enough in their place , but you look upon the play as a reality and upon the reality as but a play .
What this reptile hath said is true .
We must keep faith with him if we wish that others of the country folk should give up the fugitives .
There is no help for it ! '
'I am sorry for you , ' said the officer .
'You know , no doubt , that the human bite under such circumstances is as deadly as that of the mad dog , so that you may find yourself snapping and barking one of these fine mornings .
Nay , turn not pale !
I have heard you preach patience and courage to your victims .
You are not afraid of death ? '
Three or four troopers caught me by the arms , but I shook them off as best I might , and walked with , as I trust , a steady step and a cheerful face under the beam , which was a great smoke-blackened rafter passing from one side of the chamber to the other .
The rope was thrown over this , and the noose placed round my neck with trembling fingers by the hangman , who took particular care to keep beyond the range of my teeth .
Half-a-dozen dragoons seized the further end of the coil , and stood ready to swing me into eternity .
Through all my adventurous life I have never been so close upon the threshold of death as at that moment , and yet I declare to you that , terrible as my position was , I could think of nothing but the tattoo marks upon old Solomon Sprent 's arm , and the cunning fashion in which he had interwoven the red and the blue .
Yet I was keenly alive to all that was going on around me .
The scene of the bleak stone-floored room , the single narrow window , the two lounging elegant officers , the pile of arms in the corner , and even the texture of the coarse red serge and the patterns of the great brass buttons upon the sleeve of the man who held me , are all stamped clearly upon my mind .
The two officers looked at each other , and the smaller one gave a long whistle .
'It is the very man ! '
'This comes of asking questions !
Rat me , if I had not misgivings that it might prove to be so .
They said that he was large of limb . '
Your wife , sweetheart , betrothed , what you will . '
'It is an evil season , ' said I , 'when men who call themselves Christians inflict such vengeance upon poor simple peasants , who have done no more than their conscience urged them .
That the leaders and officers should suffer is but fair .
They stood to win in case of success , and should pay forfeit now that they have lost .
But it goes to my heart to see those poor godly country folk so treated . '
'An apt comparison ! '
'But how comes it , sergeant , that you have given attention to these matters ?
Unless they are much belied , the Royal Dragoons find other things to think of . '
Of the Coming of Solomon Sprent
I do not wish to say too much of the cruelty and barbarity of the victors , for it is not good for your childish ears to hear of such doings .
The sluggard Feversham and the brutal Kirke have earned themselves a name in the West , which is second only to that of the arch villain who came after them .
As for their victims , when they had hanged and quartered and done their wicked worst upon them , at least they left their names in their own little villages , to be treasured up and handed from generation to generation , as brave men and true who had died for a noble cause .
Go now to Milverton , or to Wiveliscombe , or to Minehead , or to Colyford , or to any village through the whole breadth and length of Somersetshire , and you will find that they have not forgotten what they proudly call their martyrs .
But where now is Kirke and where is Feversham ?
Their names are preserved , it is true , but preserved in a county 's hatred .
Who can fail to see now that these men in punishing others brought a far heavier punishment upon themselves ?
Their sin hath indeed found them out .
Early in August we were brought from Bridgewater to Taunton , where we were thrown with hundreds of others into the same wool storehouse where our regiment had been quartered in the early days of the campaign .
We gained little by the change , save that we found that our new guards were somewhat more satiated with cruelty than our old ones , and were therefore less exacting upon their prisoners .
Not only were friends allowed in occasionally to see us , but books and papers could be obtained by the aid of a small present to the sergeant on duty .
We were able , therefore , to spend our time with some degree of comfort during the month or more which passed before our trial .
One evening I was standing listlessly with my back against the wall , looking up at a thin slit of blue sky which showed itself through the narrow window , and fancying myself back in the meadows of Havant once more , when a voice fell upon my ear which did , indeed , recall me to my Hampshire home .
Those deep , husky tones , rising at times into an angry roar , could belong to none other than my old friend the seaman .
I approached the door from which the uproar came , and all doubt vanished as I listened to the conversation .
'We do n't know nothing about admirals here , ' said the sergeant of the guard .
'The time for seeing prisoners is over for the day , and if you do not take your ill-favoured body out of this I may try the weight o ' my halberd on your back . '
'Aye , and a rough one , too , when I have fools to deal with , ' returned the seaman .
'If I had you in my watch , lad , for a three years ' cruise , I would make a man of you yet . '
A brace of kegs and a slow match would do it any dark night .
Then where would be these walls which now shut ye in ? '
'Sink me if I like going back without a blow struck , ' he growled .
'Yet if it is your will there is an end of the matter .
Tell me , lad .
Has that lank-sparred , slab-sided , herring-gutted friend of yours played you false ?
for if he has , by the eternal , old as I am , my hanger shall scrape acquaintance with the longshore tuck which hangs at his girdle .
I know where he hath laid himself up , moored stem and stern , all snug and shipshape , waiting for the turn of the tide . '
Of the Devil in Wig and Gown
The court should have opened at nine , but my Lord Chief Justice was indisposed , having sat up somewhat late with Colonel Kirke .
It was nearly eleven before the trumpeters and criers announced that he had taken his seat .
One by one my fellow-prisoners were called out by name , the more prominent being chosen first .
They went out from amongst us amid hand-shakings and blessings , but we saw and heard no more of them , save that a sudden fierce rattle of kettledrums would rise up now and again , which was , as our guards told us , to drown any dying words which might fall from the sufferers and bear fruit in the breasts of those who heard them .
With firm steps and smiling faces the roll of martyrs went forth to their fate during the whole of that long autumn day , until the rough soldiers of the guard stood silent and awed in the presence of a courage which they could not but recognise as higher and nobler than their own .
Folk may call it a trial that they received , and a trial it really was , but not in the sense that we Englishmen use it .
It was but being haled before a Judge , and insulted before being dragged to the gibbet .
The court-house was the thorny path which led to the scaffold .
What use to put a witness up , when he was shouted down , cursed at , and threatened by the Chief Justice , who bellowed and swore until the frightened burghers in Fore Street could hear him ?
I have heard from those who were there that day that he raved like a demoniac , and that his black eyes shone with a vivid vindictive brightness which was scarce human .
The jury shrank from him as from a venomous thing when he turned his baleful glance upon them .
At times , as I have been told , his sternness gave place to a still more terrible merriment , and he would lean back in his seat of justice and laugh until the tears hopped down upon his ermine .
Nearly a hundred were either executed or condemned to death upon that opening day .
'I trust that we shall come well out of this ! '
'I trust that no judgment will fall upon this building !
Was ever so much wickedness fitted into one court-house before ?
Who ever saw such an array of villainous faces ?
Ah , rogues , I see a rope ready for every one of ye !
Art not afraid of judgment ?
Art not afraid of hell-fire ?
You grey-bearded rascal in the corner , how comes it that you have not had more of the grace of God in you than to take up arms against your most gracious and loving sovereign ? '
'I crave your Lordship 's pardon ! '
cried the faint-hearted barrister , with his face the colour of his brief .
'Was ever such unparalleled impudence ?
Was there ever such brazen effrontery ?
Have they expressed their repentance for this sin against a most kind and long-suffering monarch !
Put down those words on the record , clerk ! '
'Eleven devils , my Lord , ' interrupted Jeffreys .
'An alibi , your Lordship . '
'Never heard the gentleman speak , sir -- at least not to my knowledge , sir , ' said the sergeant .
'If this is the clerk I would I had a parson to match him , ' cried the fop , sniffing at his bottle .
'Do you see the pleasantry , sergeant .
Does your sluggish mind rise to the occasion ?
Strike me purple , but I am in excellent fettle !
There is yonder man with the brown face , you can mark him down .
And the young man beside him , also .
Ha , he waves his hand towards me !
Stand firm , sergeant !
Where are my salts ?
What is it , man , what is it ? '
'Then this , ' said the other , pointing with his whip .
'It is a disgrace , ' the squire cried hotly .
'A shame and a disgrace .
We must needs fight for the King and risk our skins , and then when all is done , down come a drove of lacqueys in waiting , and snap up the pickings before their betters are served . '
'Fit for a duchess , s'help me ! '
'Look to this one , Jem .
He is a lusty rogue .
Look to his great hands .
He might work for years in the rice-swamps ere the land crabs have the picking of him . '
'What , you must have your whims and fancies !
You must pick and you must choose !
I tell you , sirrah , that you are mine , body and soul !
Twelve good pieces I paid for you , and now , forsooth , I am to be told that you will not eat !
Turn to it at this instant , you saucy rogue , or I shall have you triced to the triangles ! '
A single oil-lamp swinging from a beam in the centre of the gangway which led between the rows of cells was the only light which was vouchsafed us .
By its yellow , murky glimmer we could dimly see the great wooden ribs of the vessel , arching up on either side of us , and crossed by the huge beams which held the deck .
A grievous stench from foul bilge water poisoned the close , heavy air .
Every now and then , with a squeak and a clutter , a rat would dart across the little zone of light and vanish in the gloom upon the further side .
Heavy breathing all round me showed that my companions , wearied out by their journey and their sufferings , had dropped into a slumber .
From time to time one could hear the dismal clank of fetters , and the start and incatching of the breath , as some poor peasant , fresh from dreams of his humble homestead amid the groves of the Mendips , awoke of a sudden to see the great wooden coffin around him , and to breathe the venomous air of the prison ship .
'Ho , ho ! '
laughed the old soldier .
'I am a free man , my lad !
I hold my pardon , and care not a maravedi for spy or informer .
Who should I meet but Colonel Kirke a day or so back .
I met him in the street , and I cocked my hat in his face .
The villain laid his hand upon his hilt , and I should have out bilbo and sent his soul to hell had they not come between us .
I care not the ashes of this pipe for Jeffreys or any other of them .
I can snap this finger and thumb at them , so !
They would rather see Decimus Saxon 's back than his face , I promise ye ! '
'But how comes this about ? '
'Why , marry , it is no mystery .
Cunning old birds are not to be caught with chaff .
When I left you I made for a certain inn where I could count upon finding a friend .
There I lay by for a while , en cachette , as the Messieurs call it , while I could work out the plan that was in my head .
but I got a fright from that old seaman friend of yours , who should be sold as a picture , for he is of little use as a man .
Well , I bethought me early in the affair of your visit to Badminton , and of the Duke of B .
We shall mention no names , but you can follow my meaning .
To him I sent a messenger , to the effect that I purposed to purchase my own pardon by letting out all that I knew concerning his double dealing with the rebels .
The message was carried to him secretly , and his answer was that I should meet him at a certain spot by night .
I sent my messenger instead of myself , and he was found in the morning stiff and stark , with more holes in his doublet than ever the tailor made .
On this I sent again , raising my demands , and insisting upon a speedy settlement .
He asked my conditions .
I replied , a free pardon and a command for myself .
For you , money enough to land you safely in some foreign country where you can pursue the noble profession of arms .
I got them both , though it was like drawing teeth from his head .
His name hath much power at Court just now , and the King can refuse him nothing .
I have my pardon and a command of troops in New England .
For you I have two hundred pieces , of which thirty have been paid in ransom to the captain , while twenty are due to me for my disbursements over the matter .
In this bag you will find the odd hundred and fifty , of which you will pay fifteen to the fishermen who have promised to see you safe to Flushing . '
Saxon burst out laughing , and leaned back in his seat with his long legs stretched straight out and his hands in his breeches pockets .
Yes , surely I knew him well .
A highwayman he was , but a mighty stout man with a kind heart beneath a thief 's jacket . '
'Nay , it is surely plain enough to you now .
Marot 's end was to baffle his pursuers and to benefit the exiles .
How could he do this better than by engaging as a seaman aboard this brig , the _Dorothy Fox_ , and sailing away from England in her ?
There are but thirty of a crew .
Below hatches are close on two hundred men , who , simple as they may be , are , as you and I know , second to none in the cut-and-thrust work , without order or discipline , which will be needed in such an affair .
Marot has but to go down amongst them some dark night , knock off their anklets , and fit them up with a few stanchions or cudgels .
Ho , ho , Micah !
The planters may dig their plantations themselves for all the help they are like to get from West countrymen this bout . '
'Mark ye there ! '
whispered Saxon , grasping me by the arm .
'See where the moonlight falls beside the hatchway !
Do you not see that short squat seaman who stands alone , lost in thought , with his head sunk upon his breast ?
I tell you that if I were Captain Pogram I would rather have the devil himself , horns , hoofs , and tail , for my first mate and bunk companion , than have that man aboard my ship .
You need not concern yourself about the prisoners , Micah .
Their future is decided . '
'Spoken like a man , ' said he ; 'is there aught which I may do for thee in England ?
though , by the Mass , I may not be here very long myself , for , as I understand , I am to be entrusted with the command of an expedition that is fitting out against the Indians , who have ravaged the plantations of our settlers .
It will be good to get to some profitable employment , for such a war , without either fighting or plunder , I have never seen .
I give you my word that I have scarce fingered silver since the beginning of it .
I would not for the sacking of London go through with it again . '
'I thought he would tack round , ' the captain said , staggering towards us with a gait which showed that he had made the rum bottle his companion since we had left him .
'S'help me , I was sure of it !
Though , by the Mass , I do n't wonder that he thought twice before leaving the _Dorothy Fox_ , for she is fitted up fit for a duchess , s'help me !
Where is your boat ? '
And so , my dear children , I come to the end of the history of a failure -- a brave failure and a noble one , but a failure none the less .
In three more years England was to come to herself , to tear the fetters from her free limbs , and to send James and his poisonous brood flying from her shores even as I was flying then .
We had made the error of being before our time .
Yet there came days when folk thought kindly of the lads who had fought so stoutly in the West , and when their limbs , gathered from many a hangman 's pit and waste place , were borne amid the silent sorrow of a nation to the pretty country burial-grounds where they would have chosen to lie .
There , within the sound of the bell which from infancy had called them to prayer , beneath the turf over which they had wandered , under the shadow of those Mendip and Quantock Hills which they loved so well , these brave hearts lie still and peaceful , like tired children in the bosom of their mother .
One word of another friend -- the last mentioned , but not the least valued .
When Dutch William had been ten years upon the English throne there was still to be seen in the field by my father 's house a tall , strong-boned horse , whose grey skin was flecked with dashes of white .
And it was ever observed that , should the soldiers be passing from Portsmouth , or should the clank of trumpet or the rattle of drum break upon his ear , he would arch his old neck , throw out his grey-streaked tail , and raise his stiff knees in a pompous and pedantic canter .
The country folk would stop to watch these antics of the old horse , and then the chances are that one of them would tell the rest how that charger had borne one of their own village lads to the wars , and how , when the rider had to fly the country , a kindly sergeant in the King 's troops had brought the steed as a remembrance of him to his father at home .
So Covenant passed the last years of his life , a veteran among steeds , well fed and cared for , and much given , mayhap , to telling in equine language to all the poor , silly country steeds the wonderful passages which had befallen him in the West .
In the collection of loyal ballads reprinted in 1731 , the Royalist bard harps upon the same characteristic :
The substitution of the a for the o was a common affectation in the speech of the fops of the period , as may be found in Vanbrugh's _Relapse_ .
The notorious Titus Oates , in his efforts to be in the mode , pushed this trick to excess , and his cries of 'Oh Lard !
were familiar sounds in Westminster Hall at the time when the Salamanca doctor was at the flood of his fortune .
In those days it was customary to have an hour-glass stationed in a frame of iron at the side of the pulpit , and visible to the whole congregation .
It was turned up as soon as the text was announced , and a minister earned a name as a lazy preacher if he did not hold out until the sand had ceased to run .
If , on the other hand , he exceeded that limit , his audience would signify by gapes and yawns that they had had as much spiritual food as they could digest .
Sir Roger L'Estrange ( _Fables_ , Part II .
262 ) tells of a notorious spin-text who , having exhausted his glass and being half-way through a second one , was at last arrested in his career by a valiant sexton , who rose and departed , remarking as he did so , 'Pray , sir , be pleased when you have done to leave the key under the door . '
Note F. -- Disturbances at the old Gast House of Little Burton .
'His Grace the Duke of Monmouth honoured in his progress in the West of England , in an account of an extraordinary cure of the king 's evil .
'Henry Clark , minister ; Captain James Bale , & c & c. Whoever doubts the truth of this relation may see the original under the hands of the persons mentioned at the Amsterdam Coffee House , Bartholomew Lane , Royal Exchange . '
Sir Patrick Hume , relating a talk with Monmouth before his expedition , says : 'I urged if he considered himself as lawful son of King Charles , late deceased .
He said he did .
I asked him if he were able to make out and prove the marriage of his mother to King Charles , and whether he intended to lay claim to the crown .
He answered that he had been able lately to prove the marriage , and if some persons are not lately dead , of which he would inform himself , he would yet be able to prove it .
As for his claiming the crown , he intended not to do it unless it were advised to be done by those who should concern themselves and join for the delivery of the nations . '
A curious little sidelight upon the battle is afforded by the two following letters exhibited to the Royal Archaeological Institute by the Rev .
'Now besides these two troops , whose officers though they had no great skill yet had courage enough to have done something honourably , had they not for want of a guide met with the aforesaid obstruction , there was no one of all the rest of our troops that ever advanced to charge or approached as near to the enemy as to give or receive a wound .
Mr. Hacker , one of our captains , came no sooner within view of their camp than he villainously fired a pistol to give them notice of our approach , and then forsook his charge and rode oft with all the speed he could , to take the benefit of a proclamation emitted by the King , offering pardon to all such as should return home within such a time .
And this he pleaded at his tryal , but was answered by Jeffreys `` that he above all other men deserved to be hanged , and that for his treachery to Monmouth as well as his treason to the King . ''
And though no other of our officers acted so villainously , yet they were useless and unserviceable , as never once attempting to charge , nor so much as keeping their men in a body .
And I dare affirm that if our horse had never fired a pistol , but only stood in a posture to have given jealousy and apprehension to the enemy , our foot alone would have carried the day and been triumphant .
But our horse standing scattered and disunited , and flying upon every approach of a squadron of theirs , commanded by Oglethorpe , gave that body of their cavalry an advantage , after they had hovered up and down in the field without thinking it necessary to attack those whom their own fears had dispersed , to fall in at last in the rear of our battalions , and to wrest that victory out of their hands which they were grasping at , and stood almost possessed of .
Nor was that party of their horse above three hundred at most , whereas we had more than enough had they had any courage , and been commanded by a gallant man , to have attacked them with ease both in front and flank .
These things I can declare with more certainty , because I was a doleful spectator of them ; for having contrary to my custom left attending upon the Duke , who advanced with the foot , I betook myself to the horse , because the first of that morning 's action was expected from them , which was to break in and disorder the enemy 's camp .
Against the time that our battalions should come up , I endeavoured whatsoever I was capable of performing , for I not only struck at several troopers who had forsaken their station , but upbraided divers of the captains for being wanting in their duty .
But I spoke with great warmth to my Lord Grey , and conjured him to charge , and not suffer the victory , which our foot had in a manner taken hold of , to be ravished from us .
But instead of hearkening , he not only as an unworthy man and cowardly poltroon deserted that part of the field and forsook his command , but rode with the utmost speed to the Duke , telling him that all was lost and it was more than time to shift for himself .
Wherebye , as an addition to all the mischief he had been the occasion of before , he drew the easy and unfortunate gentleman to leave the battalions while they were courageously disputing on which side the victory should fall .
And this fell most unhappily out , while a certain person was endeavouring to find out the Duke to have begged of him to come and charge at the head of his own troops .
However , this I dare affirm , that if the Duke had been but master of two hundred horse , well mounted , completely armed , personally valiant , and commanded by experienced officers , they would have been victorious .
This is acknowledged by our enemies , who have often confessed they were ready to fly through the impressions made upon them by our foot , and must have been beaten had our horse done their part , and not tamely looked on till their cavalry retrieved the day by falling into the rear of our battalions .
Nor was the fault in the private men , who had courage to have followed their leaders , but it was in those who led them , particularly my Lord Grey , in whom , if cowardice may be called treachery , we may safely charge him with betraying our cause . '
`` Those dark bands are Fraunhofer 's lines , '' said he .
`` The colours are just light itself .
Every light , if you can split it up with a prism , gives the same colours .
They tell us nothing .
It is the lines that count , because they vary according to what it may be that produces the light .
It is these lines that have been blurred instead of clear this last week , and all the astronomers have been quarreling over the reason .
Here 's a photograph of the blurred lines for our issue to-morrow .
The public have taken no interest in the matter up to now , but this letter of Challenger 's in the Times will make them wake up , I 'm thinking . ''
`` Well , well !
I have had one too , and , as you see , very much against the grain , I have acted upon it .
Our good friend is as impossible as ever .
The need for oxygen could not have been so urgent that he must desert the usual means of supply and encroach upon the time of those who are really busier than himself .
Why could he not order it direct ? ''
`` Have you seen his letter in the Times ? ''
`` Stuff and nonsense ! ''
`` Well , it 's at the bottom of this oxygen business , or I am mistaken , '' said I .
But Summerlee was in no humour for compromise .
His face was screwed up in rigid disapproval , and thick curls of angry smoke rolled up from his pipe .
Summerlee thrust out his chin , with its little wagging tuft of goatee beard .
He gave me the amused hand-shake and encouraging smile which the head master bestows upon the small boy , and , having greeted the others and helped to collect their bags and their cylinders of oxygen , he stowed us and them away in a large motor-car which was driven by the same impassive Austin , the man of few words , whom I had seen in the character of butler upon the occasion of my first eventful visit to the Professor .
Our journey led us up a winding hill through beautiful country .
I sat in front with the chauffeur , but behind me my three comrades seemed to me to be all talking together .
Lord John was still struggling with his buffalo story , so far as I could make out , while once again I heard , as of old , the deep rumble of Challenger and the insistent accents of Summerlee as their brains locked in high and fierce scientific debate .
Suddenly Austin slanted his mahogany face toward me without taking his eyes from his steering-wheel .
`` Dear me ! ''
Everything seemed strange to-day .
Everyone said queer , unexpected things .
It was like a dream .
`` It 's forty-seven times , '' said Austin reflectively .
`` When do you go ? ''
I asked , for want of some better observation .
`` I don't go , '' said Austin .
`` Well , they would n't make allowances , same as I do .
'E 's a very clever man , the master -- so clever that 'e 's clean balmy sometimes .
I 've seen 'im right off 'is onion , and no error .
Well , look what 'e did this morning . ''
`` So you 'd say , sir , if you could see some of the goings on .
'E don't make friends with the neighbors .
There 's some of them thinks that when 'e was up among those monsters you wrote about , it was just ''Ome , Sweet 'Ome ' for the master , and 'e was never in fitter company .
That 's what _they_ say .
But I 've served 'im ten years , and I 'm fond of 'im , and , mind you , 'e 's a great man , when all 's said an ' done , and it 's an honor to serve 'im .
But 'e does try one cruel at times .
Now look at that , sir .
That ai n't what you might call old-fashioned 'ospitality , is it now ?
Just you read it for yourself . ''
`` Well , my dear , '' said Challenger , bustling out of the car , `` here are our visitors .
It is something new for us to have visitors , is it not ?
No love lost between us and our neighbors , is there ?
If they could get rat poison into our baker 's cart , I expect it would be there . ''
`` Really , '' he said as he gathered them up , `` I begin to think that it would save my correspondents ' money if I were to adopt a telegraphic address .
Possibly 'Noah , Rotherfield , ' would be the most appropriate . ''
Then , even as I said the word , my mind flashed back over the whole morning 's experiences , past Lord John with his buffalo , past my own hysterical tears , past the outrageous conduct of Professor Summerlee , to the queer happenings in London , the row in the park , the driving of the chauffeur , the quarrel at the oxygen warehouse .
Everything fitted suddenly into its place .
`` Of course , '' I cried again .
`` It is poison .
We are all poisoned . ''
We looked at each other in amazed silence .
No comment seemed to meet the situation .
`` I 'll look out for that buffalo , '' said Lord John .
`` And I for the football match . ''
Challenger slapped his colleague good-humouredly upon the shoulder .
`` We progress , '' said he .
`` Decidedly we progress . ''
He stood , tall and strong , in the sunshine at the window , with his brown hand upon the shoulder of Summerlee .
I was lying back in an armchair , an extinguished cigarette between my lips , in that sort of half-dazed state in which impressions become exceedingly distinct .
It may have been a new phase of the poisoning , but the delirious promptings had all passed away and were succeeded by an exceedingly languid and , at the same time , perceptive state of mind .
I was a spectator .
It did not seem to be any personal concern of mine .
But here were three strong men at a great crisis , and it was fascinating to observe them .
Challenger bent his heavy brows and stroked his beard before he answered .
One could see that he was very carefully weighing his words .
`` Events have been moving somewhat rapidly since then , '' said Challenger , picking up his pile of telegrams .
`` I am in close touch both with the authorities and with the press , so that news is converging upon me from all parts .
There is , in fact , a general and very insistent demand that I should come to London ; but I see no good end to be served .
From the accounts the poisonous effect begins with mental excitement ; the rioting in Paris this morning is said to have been very violent , and the Welsh colliers are in a state of uproar .
So far as the evidence to hand can be trusted , this stimulative stage , which varies much in races and in individuals , is succeeded by a certain exaltation and mental lucidity -- I seem to discern some signs of it in our young friend here -- which , after an appreciable interval , turns to coma , deepening rapidly into death .
I fancy , so far as my toxicology carries me , that there are some vegetable nerve poisons -- -- ''
`` I 've done my duty , sir . ''
`` I have not an idea .
We will not turn them on until our symptoms become unbearable .
Then we shall dole the gas out as it is urgently needed .
It may give us some hours , possibly even some days , on which we may look out upon a blasted world .
Our own fate is delayed to that extent , and we will have the very singular experience , we five , of being , in all probability , the absolute rear guard of the human race upon its march into the unknown .
Perhaps you will be kind enough now to give me a hand with the cylinders .
It seems to me that the atmosphere already grows somewhat more oppressive . ''
`` How to get rid of our excessive carbon dioxide without unduly wasting our oxygen is a delicate and vital question , '' said Challenger , looking round him after the five iron tubes had been laid side by side against the wall .
`` With longer time for preparation I could have brought the whole concentrated force of my intelligence to bear more fully upon the problem , but as it is we must do what we can .
The shrubs will be of some small service .
Two of the oxygen tubes are ready to be turned on at an instant 's notice , so that we can not be taken unawares .
At the same time , it would be well not to go far from the room , as the crisis may be a sudden and urgent one . ''
I rushed down to the instrument .
It was McArdle speaking from London .
Challenger smiled and shook his head .
`` Well , I suppose it would , '' said Lord John .
`` It could n't help him and would scatter our gas all over the house , even if we ever got back alive .
My word , look at the little birds under the trees ! ''
In the immediate foreground , beneath our very eyes , was the small yard with the half-cleaned motor-car standing in it .
Austin , the chauffeur , had received his final notice at last , for he was sprawling beside the wheel , with a great black bruise upon his forehead where it had struck the step or mud-guard in falling .
He still held in his hand the nozzle of the hose with which he had been washing down his machine .
A couple of small plane trees stood in the corner of the yard , and underneath them lay several pathetic little balls of fluffy feathers , with tiny feet uplifted .
The sweep of death 's scythe had included everything , great and small , within its swath .
We heard the roar of it , and presently it came flying into sight , going at what seemed to me to be a prodigious speed .
Whence it had come , or how far , we had no means of knowing .
Only by some miracle of luck could it have gone any distance .
But now we were to see the terrific end of its career .
A train of coal trucks stood motionless upon the line .
We held our breath as the express roared along the same track .
The crash was horrible .
Engine and carriages piled themselves into a hill of splintered wood and twisted iron .
Red spurts of flame flickered up from the wreckage until it was all ablaze .
For half an hour we sat with hardly a word , stunned by the stupendous sight .
`` Upon my word ! ''
`` It would be like you if you used up our last gasp of oxygen in abusing each other .
What can it matter whether folk come back or not ?
It surely wo n't be in our time . ''
`` In that remark , sir , you betray your own very pronounced limitations , '' said Challenger severely .
`` The true scientific mind is not to be tied down by its own conditions of time and space .
It builds itself an observatory erected upon the border line of present , which separates the infinite past from the infinite future .
From this sure post it makes its sallies even to the beginning and to the end of all things .
As to death , the scientific mind dies at its post working in normal and methodic fashion to the end .
It disregards so petty a thing as its own physical dissolution as completely as it does all other limitations upon the plane of matter .
Am I right , Professor Summerlee ? ''
`` Everything is quite safe , dear .
But my head begins to throb again .
What a dreadful atmosphere ! ''
`` No one in the whole wide world , dear , '' said she , and put her arms round his bull neck .
We three walked to the window and stood amazed at the sight which met our eyes .
Darkness had fallen and the dead world was shrouded in gloom .
But right across the southern horizon was one long vivid scarlet streak , waxing and waning in vivid pulses of life , leaping suddenly to a crimson zenith and then dying down to a glowing line of fire .
There were several red glares at different points , and the pile of _debris_ upon the railway line was still smoldering darkly , but they all seemed mere pin-points of light compared to that monstrous conflagration throbbing beyond the hills .
What copy it would have made for the Gazette !
Had ever a journalist such an opening and so little chance of using it -- the scoop of scoops , and no one to appreciate it ?
And then , suddenly , the old instinct of recording came over me .
If these men of science could be so true to their life 's work to the very end , why should not I , in my humble way , be as constant ?
No human eye might ever rest upon what I had done .
But the long night had to be passed somehow , and for me at least , sleep seemed to be out of the question .
My notes would help to pass the weary hours and to occupy my thoughts .
Thus it is that now I have before me the notebook with its scribbled pages , written confusedly upon my knee in the dim , waning light of our one electric torch .
Had I the literary touch , they might have been worthy of the occasion , As it is , they may still serve to bring to other minds the long-drawn emotions and tremors of that awful night .
`` I 'm not troublin ' my head whether he 's alive or dead , '' said he .
`` We do n't so much as know each other by sight , so why should I take it to heart ?
I do n't suppose he 's worryin ' himself over the state of _our_ health . ''
`` My dear George , do n't be so peppery , '' said his wife , with her hand on the black mane that drooped over the microscope .
`` What can it matter whether the amoeba is alive or not ? ''
`` Well , we need n't feel lonely , '' said Lord John laughing .
`` There's somebody livin ' besides us on the earth . ''
`` Fifthly and lastly , '' said he , glancing at the tube .
`` Say , young fellah , do n't tell me you 've been writin ' up your impressions in that paper on your knee . ''
`` It might be a winding sheet , '' said Mrs .
Challenger , who had entered in her dressing-gown .
`` There 's that song of yours , George , 'Ring out the old , ring in the new . '
But you are shivering , my poor dear friends .
I have been warm under a coverlet all night , and you cold in your chairs .
But I 'll soon set you right . ''
`` I used to be frightened , '' said his wife .
`` But the nearer I get to it , the easier it seems .
Do n't you think we ought to pray , George ? ''
`` I can not truthfully describe my mental attitude as acquiescence and far less cheerful acquiescence , '' grumbled Summerlee over his pipe .
`` I submit because I have to .
I confess that I should have liked another year of life to finish my classification of the chalk fossils . ''
`` What about you ? ''
`` So we are to be cheated out of the last hour of our lives , '' Summerlee remarked bitterly .
`` An excellent final illustration of the sordid age in which we have lived .
Well , Challenger , now is your time if you wish to study the subjective phenomena of physical dissolution . ''
His wife gave a little groan and sank her face against his leg .
`` You would open the window and face the ether ? ''
Summerlee nodded his reluctant acquiescence and held out his thin hand to Challenger .
`` Good-by , young fellah ! ''
`` The window 's plastered up .
You ca n't open it . ''
Challenger stooped and raised his wife , pressing her to his breast , while she threw her arms round his neck .
`` Give me that field-glass , Malone , '' said he gravely .
Full in our flushed faces , before the last tinkle of falling fragments had died away , there came the wholesome breath of the wind , blowing strong and sweet .
`` Without being a fatalist to the point of nonresistance , '' said he , `` I have always found that the highest wisdom lies in an acquiescence with the actual . ''
He spoke slowly , and there was a vibration of feeling in his sonorous voice .
`` I do n't see that it matters a row of pins whether you acquiesce or whether you do n't , '' remarked Lord John .
`` You 've got to take it , whether you take it fightin ' or take it lyin ' down , so what 's the odds whether you acquiesce or not ?
`` Later than that , '' said Mrs .
`` As late as eight o'clock I distinctly felt the same choking at my throat which came at the outset . ''
`` Then your conclusion is that everyone is certainly dead ? ''
`` We must come back once more to our fatalism , '' said he .
`` If the world has undergone this experience before , which is not outside the range of possibility ; it was certainly a very long time ago .
Therefore , we may reasonably hope that it will be very long before it occurs again . ''
`` Where should we go , then ? ''
`` If you could see your way , sir , to confining your remarks to your own physical peculiarities , you would find that you had an ample field for comment , '' he cried .
`` Do you suggest taking a train ? ''
asked Challenger , still simmering .
`` What 's the matter with the motor-car ?
Why should we not go in that ? ''
`` Why , I 've driven one for years , '' said he .
`` By George ! ''
`` I never thought I 'd live to take the whole human race in one load .
There's just room for five , as I remember it .
Get your things on , and I 'll be ready at the door by ten o'clock . ''
Sure enough , at the hour named , the car came purring and crackling from the yard with Lord John at the wheel .
I took my seat beside him , while the lady , a useful little buffer state , was squeezed in between the two men of wrath at the back .
Then Lord John released his brakes , slid his lever rapidly from first to third , and we sped off upon the strangest drive that ever human beings have taken since man first came upon the earth .
Above all , there was the fate of the children .
That , I remember , filled us with the strongest sense of intolerable injustice .
We could have wept -- Mrs .
Challenger did weep -- when we passed a great council school and saw the long trail of tiny figures scattered down the road which led from it .
They had been dismissed by their terrified teachers and were speeding for their homes when the poison caught them in its net .
Great numbers of people were at the open windows of the houses .
In Tunbridge Wells there was hardly one which had not its staring , smiling face .
At the last instant the need of air , that very craving for oxygen which we alone had been able to satisfy , had sent them flying to the window .
The sidewalks too were littered with men and women , hatless and bonnetless , who had rushed out of the houses .
Many of them had fallen in the roadway .
It was a lucky thing that in Lord John we had found an expert driver , for it was no easy matter to pick one 's way .
Passing through the villages or towns we could only go at a walking pace , and once , I remember , opposite the school at Tonbridge , we had to halt some time while we carried aside the bodies which blocked our path .
`` I feared that I was abandoned here forever , '' said she , `` for I am an invalid and can not stir . ''
`` I do n't know how it strikes you , '' Lord John remarked as he brought his engine to a standstill , `` but it seems to me the country is more cheerful than the town .
Dead London is gettin ' on my nerves .
I 'm for a cast round and then gettin ' back to Rotherfield . ''
A dozen motor-buses towered up like islands in this flood , the passengers who crowded the roofs lying all huddled together and across each others' laps like a child 's toys in a nursery .
On a broad lamp pedestal in the centre of the roadway , a burly policeman was standing , leaning his back against the post in so natural an attitude that it was hard to realize that he was not alive , while at his feet there lay a ragged newsboy with his bundle of papers on the ground beside him .
A paper-cart had got blocked in the crowd , and we could read in large letters , black upon yellow , `` Scene at Lord 's .
County Match Interrupted . ''
This must have been the earliest edition , for there were other placards bearing the legend , `` Is It the End ?
Great Scientist 's Warning . ''
And another , `` Is Challenger Justified ?
`` We can do nothing more , '' said Mrs .
`` For God 's sake , George , let us get back to Rotherfield .
Another hour of this dreadful , silent city would drive me mad . ''
We got into the car without another word .
Lord John backed her round and turned her to the south .
To us the chapter seemed closed .
Little did we foresee the strange new chapter which was to open .
I rushed downstairs , but the hall door was open , and I heard the voices of my companions , loud in astonishment and congratulation , in the yard .
How we all shook hands and laughed as we came together , and how Mrs .
Challenger kissed us all in her emotion , before she finally threw herself into the bear-hug of her husband .
`` Young fat-head ! ''
`` Ca n't leave things alone ! ''
`` With all them millions inside and everybody asleep ? ''
`` And I not there ! ''
he groaned , and turned dismally once more to the hosing of his car .
`` You 'll see him ? ''
The pressman looked at him in mild surprise .
It was Challenger 's turn to look surprised .
`` This morning ? ''
`` No London Times was published this morning . ''
`` Yes , sir . ''
`` And came at once to interview me ? ''
`` Well , now , what hour did you leave Victoria ? ''
`` It happens to interest me .
Do you recall the hour ? ''
`` And you hired a cab ? ''
`` That was so . ''
`` So how long do you think it took you ? ''
`` Well , half an hour , maybe , with that asthmatic in front . ''
`` Yes , or a trifle after it . ''
And `` right here , '' as my American colleague would say , I may bring this narrative to an end .
It is , as you are probably aware , only a fuller and more detailed version of the account which appeared in the Monday edition of the Daily Gazette -- an account which has been universally admitted to be the greatest journalistic scoop of all time , which sold no fewer than three-and-a-half million copies of the paper .
Framed upon the wall of my sanctum I retain those magnificent headlines : --
TWENTY-EIGHT HOURS ' WORLD COMA UNPRECEDENTED EXPERIENCE CHALLENGER JUSTIFIED OUR CORRESPONDENT ESCAPES ENTHRALLING NARRATIVE THE OXYGEN ROOM WEIRD MOTOR DRIVE DEAD LONDON REPLACING THE MISSING PAGE GREAT FIRES AND LOSS OF LIFE WILL IT RECUR ?
`` I 'm relying on you , Mr. Stephens , to tell me all about Abousir , '' said Miss Sadie Adams .
`` I do like to know what I am looking at right there at the time , and not six hours afterwards in my state-room .
I haven't got Abou-Simbel and the wall pictures straight in my mind yet , though I saw them yesterday . ''
`` A memo -- a memorandum , you know .
We put _re_ so-and-so to show what it is about . ''
`` I wonder if it is true that the English have less humour than the Americans , or whether it 's just another kind of humour , '' said the girl .
She had a quiet , abstracted way of talking as if she were thinking aloud .
`` I used to imagine they had less , and yet , when you come to think of it , Dickens and Thackeray and Barrie , and so many other of the humourists we admire most are Britishers .
Besides , I never in all my days heard people laugh so hard as in that London theatre .
There was a man behind us , and every time he laughed Auntie looked round to see if a door had opened , he made such a draught .
But you have some funny expressions , Mr .
`` What else strikes you as funny , Miss Sadie ? ''
`` It 's just too beautiful , this purple sky and the great silver stars , '' said Sadie .
`` Look at the silent desert and the black shadows of the hills .
It 's grand , but it 's terrible too ; and then when you think that we really _are_ , as that dragoman said just now , on the very end of civilisation , and with nothing but savagery and bloodshed down there where the Southern Cross is twinkling so prettily , why , it 's like standing on the beautiful edge of a live volcano . ''
But the American lady had risen , and her face showed that her nerves had been ruffled .
`` If I had my time over again I would n't have come past Assouan , '' said she .
`` I ca n't think what possessed me to bring you all the way up here , Sadie .
Your mother will think that I am clean crazy , and I 'd never dare to look her in the eye if anything went wrong with us .
I 've seen all I want to see of this river , and all I ask now is to be back at Cairo again . ''
`` Well , I do n't know how it is , Sadie , but I feel a bit unstrung , and that beast caterwauling over yonder was just more than I could put up with .
There 's one consolation , we are scheduled to be on our way home to-morrow , after we 've seen this one rock or temple , or whatever it is .
I 'm full up of rocks and temples , Mr. Stephens .
I should n't mope if I never saw another .
And the two ladies passed down to their cabins .
`` You do n't say ! ''
`` Pah , my friend , you do not know the English .
You look at them as you see them with their pipes and their contented faces , and you say , 'Now , these are good , simple folk , who will never hurt any one . '
But all the time they are thinking and watching and planning .
'Here is Egypt weak , ' they cry .
_ ' and down they swoop like a gull upon a crust .
'You have no right there , ' says the world .
'Come out of it ! '
But England has already begun to tidy everything , just like the good Miss Adams when she forces her way into the house of an Arab .
'Come out , ' says the world .
'Certainly , ' says England ; 'just wait one little minute until I have made everything nice and proper . '
So the world waits for a year or so , and then it says once again , 'Come out . '
'Just wait a little , ' says England ; 'there is trouble at Khartoum , and when I have set that all right I shall be very glad to come out . '
So they wait until it is all over , and then again they say , 'Come out . '
'How can I come out , ' says England , 'when there are still raids and battles going on ?
If we were to leave , Egypt would be run over . '
'But there are no raids , ' says the world .
'Oh , are there not ? '
says England , and then within a week sure enough the papers are full of some new raid of Dervishes .
We are not all blind , Mister Headingly .
We understand very well how such things can be done .
A few Bedouins , a little backsheesh , some blank cartridges , and , behold -- a raid ! ''
`` Well , then , she gives the contracts to Britishers ? ''
`` They do n't seem to get much for their trouble , '' said he .
`` Still , of course , there must be some indirect pull somewhere .
For example , Egypt no doubt has to pay and keep all those red-coats in Cairo . ''
`` I can always recognise the confidential stoop of his shoulders when he discusses _la haute politique_ , '' said the dandy diplomatist .
`` But what a sacrilege upon a night like this !
What a nocturne in blue and silver might be suggested by that moon rising above the desert .
There is a movement in one of Mendelssohn 's songs which seems to embody it all -- a sense of vastness , of repetition , the cry of the wind over an interminable expanse .
The subtler emotions which can not be translated into words are still to be hinted at by chords and harmonies . ''
`` Come now , Colonel , '' cried Headingly , laughing , `` surely you do n't mean that they would shift the pyramids ? ''
`` Events -- inexorable , inevitable events -- will decide it .
Take this Egyptian business as an example .
In 1881 there was nothing in this world further from the minds of our people than any interference with Egypt ; and yet 1882 left us in possession of the country .
There was never any choice in the chain of events .
A massacre in the streets of Alexandria , and the mounting of guns to drive out our fleet -- which was there , you understand , in fulfilment of solemn treaty obligations -- led to the bombardment .
The bombardment led to a landing to save the city from destruction .
The landing caused an extension of operations -- and here we are , with the country upon our hands .
At the time of trouble we begged and implored the French , or any one else , to come and help us to put the thing to rights , but they all deserted us when there was work to be done , although they are ready enough to scold and to impede us now .
When we tried to get out of it , up came this wild Dervish movement , and we had to sit tighter than ever .
We never wanted the task ; but , now that it has come , we must put it through in a workmanlike manner .
We 've brought justice into the country , and purity of administration , and protection for the poor man .
It has made more advance in the last twelve years than since the Moslem invasion in the seventh century .
Except the pay of a couple of hundred men , who spend their money in the country , England has neither directly nor indirectly made a shilling out of it , and I do n't believe you will find in history a more successful and more disinterested bit of work . ''
Headingly puffed thoughtfully at his cigarette .
`` Sorry your wife is n't coming , Belmont , '' said the Colonel .
`` It must be certain , for we are taking no lunch with us , and we shall be famished by then . ''
`` Now , ladies and gentlemen ! ''
cried Mansoor , the dragoman , moving forward with something of the priest in his flowing garments and smooth , clean-shaven face .
`` We must start early that we may return before the meridial heat of the weather . ''
He ran his dark eyes over the little group of his tourists with a paternal expression .
`` You take your green glasses , Miss Adams , for glare very great out in the desert .
Ah , Mr. Stuart , I set aside very fine donkey for you -- prize donkey , sir , always put aside for the gentleman of most weight .
Never mind to take your monument ticket to-day .
Now , ladies and gentlemen , if _you_ please ! ''
Pah , Anglais , Anglais -- toujours Anglais !
_ '' cried the angry Frenchman .
`` Well , who could help feeling good with this dry , clear air , and the blue sky , and the crisp yellow sand , and a superb donkey to carry you ?
I 've just got everything in the world to make me happy . ''
`` Well , so long as they are not wanted , they look right elegant in those blue jackets , '' Miss Adams observed .
`` But if there was any trouble , I guess we would wish they were less ornamental and a bit whiter . ''
So far their road had lain along the side of the river , which was swirling down upon their left hand deep and strong from the cataracts above .
Here and there the rush of the current was broken by a black shining boulder over which the foam was spouting .
Higher up they could see the white gleam of the rapids , and the banks grew into rugged cliffs , which were capped by a peculiar , outstanding semi-circular rock .
It did not require the dragoman 's aid to tell the party that this was the famous landmark to which they were bound .
A long , level stretch lay before them , and the donkeys took it at a canter .
At the farther side were scattered rocks , black upon orange ; and in the midst of them rose some broken shafts of pillars and a length of engraved wall , looking in its greyness and its solidity more like some work of Nature than of man .
The fat , sleek dragoman had dismounted , and stood waiting in his petticoats and his cover-coat for the stragglers to gather round him .
Cecil Brown and Headingly had dropped behind , for the glib comments of the dragoman , and the empty , light-hearted chatter of the tourists jarred upon their sense of solemnity .
They stood in silence watching the grotesque procession , with its sun-hats and green veils , as it passed in the vivid sunshine down the front of the old grey wall .
Above them two crested hoopoes were fluttering and calling amid the ruins of the pylon .
`` And that jay of a dragoman speaking his piece , '' said Headingly ; `` I want to stand and think all the time , and I never seem to get the chance .
I was ripe for manslaughter when I stood before the Great Pyramid , and could n't get a quiet moment because they would boost me on to the top .
I took a kick at one man which would have sent _him_ to the top in one jump if I had hit meat .
But fancy travelling all the way from America to see the pyramid , and then finding nothing better to do than to kick an Arab in front of it ! ''
`` It seemed all right in the saloon of the _Korosko_ , but now that we are here we _do_ seem rather up in the air , '' said he .
`` Still , you know , a party comes here every week , and nothing has ever gone wrong . ''
`` It is a very remote chance , '' said Belmont stoutly , but he was glad in his heart that his wife was safe and snug on board the steamer .
`` On the far side , '' said the dragoman , waving his donkey-whip towards the east , `` is the military line which conducts Wady Halfa to Sarras .
Sarras lies to the south , under that black hill .
Those two blue mountains which you see very far away are in Dongola , more than a hundred miles from Sarras .
The railway there is forty miles long , and has been much annoyed by the Dervishes , who are very glad to turn the rails into spears .
The telegraph wires are also much appreciated thereby .
Now , if you will kindly turn round , I will explain , also , what we see upon the other side . ''
The dragoman made an effort to compose himself , and licked his dry lips before he answered .
`` You do no good by exposing yourself , '' said Belmont , drawing Colonel Cochrane behind a large jagged boulder , which already furnished a shelter for three of the Soudanese .
`` A bullet is the best we have to hope for , '' said Cochrane grimly .
`` What an infernal fool I have been , Belmont , not to protest more energetically against this ridiculous expedition !
I deserve whatever I get , but it _is_ hard on these poor souls who never knew the danger . ''
`` My poor Norah !
My poor little Norah ! ''
muttered Belmont , in the depths of his grizzled moustache .
`` As far as I can make out , it is that one on the white camel on their right front .
I mean the fellow who is peering at us from under his two hands . ''
`` Did you see any sand fly ? ''
`` No , I saw nothing . ''
Man and rifle and rock were equally steady , but again the camel and chief remained un-harmed .
The third shot must have been nearer , for he moved a few paces to the right , as if he were becoming restless .
Belmont threw the empty rifle down , with an exclamation of disgust .
`` It 's this confounded light , '' he cried , and his cheeks flushed with annoyance .
`` Think of my wasting three cartridges in that fashion !
If I had him at Bisley I 'd shoot the turban off him , but this vibrating glare means refraction .
What 's the matter with the Frenchman ? ''
`` What 's that , Cochrane ? ''
`` Why is he making an exhibition of himself ? ''
The excited gestures of Monsieur Fardet drew the sinister eyes of the Baggara chief upon him .
Again he asked a curt question , and Mansoor , kneeling in front of him , answered it .
`` The chief asks what religion you call your own , '' said Mansoor .
`` The Khalifa , he says , has no necessity for any friendship from those who are infidels and unbelievers . ''
`` What is it , Cochrane ? ''
asked Cecil Brown -- for the Colonel had served in the East , and was the only one of the travellers who had a smattering of Arabic .
`` Oh , you villain ! ''
`` Hold your tongue , you miserable creature !
Better die -- a thousand times better die ! ''
The Dervishes riding near were all Baggara with the exception of one negro -- an uncouth fellow with a face pitted with small-pox .
His expression seemed good-natured when compared with that of his Arab comrades , and Stephens ventured to touch his elbow and to point to his water-skin , and then to the exhausted lady .
The negro shook his head brusquely , but at the same time he glanced significantly towards the Arabs , as if to say that , if it were not for them , he might act differently .
Then he laid his black forefinger upon the breast of his jibbeh .
`` What 's that ? ''
Hicks Pasha , '' the negro repeated .
`` I believe the fellow is friendly to us , but I ca n't quite make him out , '' said Cochrane to Belmont .
`` Do you think that he means that his name is Tippy Tilly , and that he killed Hicks Pasha ? ''
`` Give them an hour . ''
`` Do n't take on , Sadie , '' said her aunt ; `` remember what the minister said just now , that we are all right there in the hollow of God 's hand .
Where do you think we are going , Mr .
The red edge of his Baedeker still projected from the lawyer 's pocket , for it had not been worth their captor 's while to take it .
He glanced down at it .
`` We are going to halt presently , Belmont , '' said Cochrane .
`` I told Tippy Tilly that , if he could help us , we would turn him into a Bimbashi when we got him back into Egypt .
I think he 's willing enough if he only had the power .
By Jove , Belmont , do look back at the river . ''
The two bodies of camel-men had united , and the Arabs , in their grave , dignified fashion , were exchanging salutations and experiences , while the negroes grinned , chattered , and shouted , with the careless good-humour which even the Koran has not been able to alter .
The leader of the new-comers was a greybeard , a worn , ascetic , high-nosed old man , abrupt and fierce in his manner , and soldierly in his bearing .
The dragoman groaned when he saw him , and flapped his hands miserably with the air of a man who sees trouble accumulating upon trouble .
`` Who 's that nice-looking old gentleman in the white beard ? ''
asked Miss Adams , who had been the first to rally from the bitter disappointment .
`` Well , that 's good for us .
He puts me in mind of Elder Mathews who was at the Presbyterian Church in Minister Scott 's time .
Anyhow , I had rather be in his power than in the hands of that black-haired one with the flint eyes .
Sadie , dear , you feel better now its cooler , don't you ? ''
`` Yes , auntie ; do n't you fret about me .
How are you yourself ? ''
`` Well , I 'm stronger in faith than I was .
I set you a poor example , Sadie , for I was clean crazed at first at the suddenness of it all , and at thinking of what your mother , who trusted you to me , would think about it .
My land , there 'll be some head-lines in the _Boston Herald_ over this !
I guess somebody will have to suffer for it . ''
`` They are bringing her over , '' cried he .
We shall hear all about it .
They have n't hurt you , Norah , have they ? ''
He ran forward to grasp and kiss the hand which his wife held down to him as he helped her from the camel .
The kind grey eyes and calm sweet face of the Irishwoman brought comfort and hope to the whole party .
She was a devout Roman Catholic , and it is a creed which forms an excellent prop in hours of danger .
To her , to the Anglican Colonel , to the Nonconformist minister , to the Presbyterian American , even to the two Pagan black riflemen , religion in its various forms was fulfilling the same beneficent office -- whispering always that the worst which the world can do is a small thing , and that , however harsh the ways of Providence may seem , it is , on the whole , the wisest and best thing for us that we should go cheerfully whither the Great Hand guides us .
They had not a dogma in common , these fellows in misfortune ; but they held the intimate , deep-lying spirit , the calm , essential fatalism which is the world-old framework of religion , with fresh crops of dogmas growing like ephemeral lichens upon its granite surface .
`` One boat escaped .
Mrs. Shlesinger and her child and maid were in it .
I was downstairs in my cabin when the Arabs rushed on to the vessel .
Those on deck had time to escape , for the boat was alongside .
I don't know whether any of them were hit .
The Arabs fired at them for some time . ''
The great red sun was down with half its disc slipped behind the violet bank upon the horizon .
It was the hour of Arab prayer .
An older and more learned civilisation would have turned to that magnificent thing upon the skyline and adored _that_ .
But these wild children of the desert were nobler in essentials than the polished Persian .
To them the ideal was higher than the material , and it was with their backs to the sun and their faces to the central shrine of their religion that they prayed .
And how they prayed , these fanatical Moslems !
Rapt , absorbed , with yearning eyes and shining faces , rising , stooping , grovelling with their foreheads upon their praying carpets .
Who could doubt , as he watched their strenuous , heart-whole devotion , that here was a great living power in the world , reactionary but tremendous , countless millions all thinking as one from Cape Juby to the confines of China ?
Let a common wave pass over them , let a great soldier or organiser arise among them to use the grand material at his hand , and who shall say that this may not be the besom with which Providence may sweep the rotten , decadent , impossible , half-hearted south of Europe , as it did a thousand years ago , until it makes room for a sounder stock ?
`` Well , some slight artificial support , '' said the Colonel stiffly , and switched the conversation off to the chances of the morrow .
`` And I a better man .
I suppose it is just for that that trouble comes to us .
Look how it has brought out the virtues of all our friends .
Take poor Mr. Stuart , for example .
Should we ever have known what a noble , constant man he was ?
And see Belmont and his wife , in front of us there , going fearlessly forward , hand in hand , thinking only of each other .
And Cochrane , who always seemed on board the boat to be a rather stand-offish , narrow sort of man !
Look at his courage , and his unselfish indignation when any one is ill used .
Fardet , too , is as brave as a lion .
I think misfortune has done us all good . ''
It was the first time that he had ever dropped the formal Miss , but the girl was too much in earnest to notice it .
`` I will be more tender to others , '' she said .
`` I will try to make some one else happy in memory of the miseries which I have endured . ''
`` Oh , I have a very good circulation .
I can manage very well in my shirt-sleeves . ''
`` Can I speak to you , Colonel Cochrane ? ''
`` But it is very important -- all our safety may come from it . ''
`` Well , what is it ? ''
he asked at last .
`` You must trust to me , for it is as much to me as to you to get back to Egypt .
My wife and home , and children , are on one part , and a slave for life upon the other .
You have no cause to doubt it . ''
`` He said that there were eight Egyptian soldiers among the Arabs -- six black and two fellaheen .
He said that he wished to have your promise that they should all have very good reward if they helped you to escape . ''
`` They shall have it . ''
With bows and suppliant sweepings of his hands the dragoman explained that the Christians were already full of doubt , and that it needed but a little more light of knowledge to guide them on to the path of Allah .
The two Emirs stroked their beards and gazed suspiciously at them .
Then Abderrahman spoke in his crisp , stern fashion to the dragoman , and the two strode away together .
An instant later the bugle rang out as a signal to mount .
`` How far do you suppose we are from the Nile ? ''
He rode with his chin on his shoulder and his eyes straining wistfully to the eastern skyline .
`` Never say die ! ''
cried the cheery Irishman .
`` There 's plenty of time between this and mid-day .
Hamilton and Hedley of the Camel Corps are good boys , and they 'll be after us like a streak .
They 'll have no baggage-camels to hold them back , you can lay your life on that !
Little did I think , when I dined with them at mess that last night , and they were telling me all their precautions against a raid , that I should depend upon them for our lives . ''
The Puritan aunt shook her head at the idea .
`` It 's a terrible thing to go unprepared into the presence of your Maker , '' said she .
`` It 's the loneliness of death that is terrible , '' said Mrs. Belmont .
`` If we and those whom we loved all passed over simultaneously , we should think no more of it than of changing our house . ''
`` Drift sand , '' Mansoor answered .
`` Every sometimes the wind bring it all in one long place like that .
To-morrow , if a wind comes , perhaps there will not be one grain left , but all will be carried up into the air again .
An Arab will sometimes have to go fifty or a hundred miles to go round a drift .
Suppose he tries to cross , his camel breaks its legs , and he himself is sucked in and swallowed . ''
Right across the desert , from north to south , there was drawn a white line , as straight and clear as if it had been slashed with chalk across a brown table .
It was very thin , but it extended without a break from horizon to horizon .
Tippy Tilly said something to the dragoman .
It seemed incredible , and yet it was true , for as they drew nearer they saw that it was indeed a beaten track across the desert , hollowed out by long usage , and so covered with bones that they gave the impression of a continuous white ribbon .
Long , snouty heads were scattered everywhere , and the lines of ribs were so continuous that it looked in places like the framework of a monstrous serpent .
The endless road gleamed in the sun as if it were paved with ivory .
For thousands of years this had been the highway over the desert , and during all that time no animal of all those countless caravans had died there without being preserved by the dry , antiseptic air .
No wonder , then , that it was hardly possible to walk down it now without treading upon their skeletons .
And now , as the critical moment approached which was to decide their fate , Colonel Cochrane , weighed down by his fears lest something terrible should befall the women , put his pride aside to the extent of asking the advice of the renegade dragoman .
The fellow was a villain and a coward , but at least he was an Oriental , and he understood the Arab point of view .
His change of religion had brought him into closer contact with the Dervishes , and he had overheard their intimate talk .
Cochrane 's stiff , aristocratic nature fought hard before he could bring himself to ask advice from such a man , and when he at last did so , it was in the gruffest and most unconciliatory voice .
`` You know the rascals , and you have the same way of looking at things , '' said he .
`` Our object is to keep things going for another twenty-four hours .
After that it does not much matter what befalls us , for we shall be out of the reach of rescue .
But how can we stave them off for another day ? ''
`` You know my advice , '' the dragoman answered ; `` I have already answered it to you .
If you will all become as I have , you will certainly be carried to Khartoum in safety .
If you do not , you will never leave our next camping-place alive . ''
`` What is the use of asking me , if you become angry when I answer ?
If you do not wish to do what I say , then try your own attempt .
At least you can not say that I have not done all I could to save you . ''
`` You will do as you like , '' said Mansoor .
`` I have told you once for ever what I think .
If you wish that I speak to the Moolah , I will do so .
It is the fat , little man with the grey beard , upon the brown camel in front there .
I may tell you that he has a name among them for converting the infidel , and he has a great pride in it , so that he would certainly prefer that you were not injured if he thought that he might bring you into Islam . ''
`` No , sir .
He has kept his men together , but he does not understand yet how he can help you . ''
`` Pardon me ! ''
`` I will not say a word against our friend the Colonel , but it is not possible that a man should be fitted for everything .
It will all come to nothing if he attempts it .
The priest will see through the Colonel . ''
The sun was now high , and it shone with dazzling brightness upon the bleached bones which lay upon the road .
Again the torture of thirst fell upon the little group of survivors , and again , as they rode with withered tongues and crusted lips , a vision of the saloon of the _Korosko_ danced like a mirage before their eyes , and they saw the white napery , the wine-cards by the places , the long necks of the bottles , the siphons upon the sideboard .
Sadie , who had borne up so well , became suddenly hysterical , and her shrieks of senseless laughter jarred horribly upon their nerves .
Her aunt on one side of her , and Mr. Stephens on the other , did all they could to soothe her , and at last the weary , overstrung girl relapsed into something between a sleep and a faint , hanging limp over her pommel , and only kept from falling by the friends who clustered round her .
The baggage-camels were as weary as their riders , and again and again they had to jerk at their nose-ropes to prevent them from lying down .
From horizon to horizon stretched that one huge arch of speckless blue , and up its monstrous concavity crept the inexorable sun , like some splendid but barbarous deity , who claimed a tribute of human suffering as his immemorial right .
`` Yes , if you will talk slowly . ''
said the Colonel abruptly , and settled down as if to sleep once more .
He knew that with Orientals it is the silent man who is most likely to have his way .
`` Damn your impudence ! ''
`` Gentlemen , gentlemen , here are the ladies ! ''
cried Stephens , and the angry , over-strained men relapsed into a gloomy silence , pacing up and down , and jerking viciously at their moustaches .
It is a very catching thing , ill-temper , for even Stephens began to be angry at their anger , and to scowl at them as they passed him .
Here they were at a crisis in their fate , with the shadow of death above them , and yet their minds were all absorbed in some personal grievance so slight that they could hardly put it into words .
Misfortune brings the human spirit to a rare height , but the pendulum still swings .
But a Frenchman 's wounded dignity is not so easily appeased .
Monsieur Fardet sat moodily with his back against the palm-tree , and his black brows drawn down .
He said nothing , but he still pulled at his thick , strong moustache .
`` I am sure , Monsieur Fardet , '' said Mrs. Belmont , `` that you , who are a Frenchman , and therefore a man of gallantry and honour , would not permit your own wounded feelings to interfere with the fulfilment of your promise and your duty towards three helpless ladies . ''
Fardet was on his feet in an instant , with his hand over his heart .
Behind all his dignity and reserve , the Arab has a good fund of curiosity .
The hush among the listening Arabs showed how the words of the Frenchman as translated by Mansoor appealed to them .
Fardet looked helplessly round at his companions .
`` I can do no more ; you asked for five minutes .
You have had them , '' said he to Colonel Cochrane .
`` And perhaps it is enough , '' the soldier answered .
`` Here are the Emirs . ''
`` After all , '' said he , `` it is stupid to pray all your life , and not to pray now when we have nothing to hope for except through the goodness of Providence . ''
He dropped upon his knees with a rigid , military back , but his grizzled , unshaven chin upon his chest .
The Frenchman looked at his kneeling companions , and then his eyes travelled onwards to the angry faces of the Emir and Moolah .
The four men writhed as they saw the women dragged away from them .
All their agonies had been nothing to this .
Sadie and her aunt appeared to be half senseless from fear .
Only Mrs. Belmont kept a brave face .
When they were seated the camels rose , and were led under the tree behind where the four men were standing .
`` Well , then , '' said Belmont , `` let us all refuse to go . ''
`` The chief says , '' said Mansoor , `` that if you can not settle who is to go , you had better leave it to Allah and draw lots . ''
It was the Moolah who approached them with four splinters of palm-bark protruding from between his fingers .
`` Do n't be afraid for your aunt and for yourself , '' said he .
`` I am sure that you will escape .
Colonel Cochrane will look after you .
The Egyptians can not be far behind .
I do hope you will have a good drink before you leave the wells .
I wish I could give your aunt my jacket , for it will be cold to-night .
I 'm afraid I ca n't get it off .
She should keep some of the bread , and eat it in the early morning . ''
He spoke quite quietly , like a man who is arranging the details of a picnic .
A sudden glow of admiration for this quietly consistent man warmed her impulsive heart .
`` What did you wish to say ? ''
`` Not very long now , '' said Belmont grimly , as the Arabs closed in around them .
`` Two men , '' said Miss Adams , in a voice of despair .
The self-contained , methodical soldier had suddenly turned almost inarticulate with his excitement .
There was a red flash upon the top of the sand-hill , and then another , followed by the crack of the rifles .
Then with a whisk the two figures were gone , as swiftly and silently as two trout in a stream .
I think , '' cried Mrs. Belmont , `` that something is moving in front of us . ''
Miss Adams , who had been frozen into silence during the long cold night , began to thaw now in the cheery warmth of the rising sun .
She looked about her , and rubbed her thin hands together .
`` It must be .
`` You see he is looking towards us and waving his hand . ''
They 'll shoot him !
Get down , you fool , or you 'll be shot ! ''
But his dry throat would only emit a discordant croaking .
`` Good God , Cochrane , is it really you ?
I could not have believed it .
Great Scott , what you must have been through !
I 've heard before of fellows going grey in a night , but , by Jove -- ''
Archer drew a thick satisfying partaga from his case , and handed it down , with half-a-dozen wax vestas .
Then he cantered after his men , and the old soldier leaned back against the rock and drew in the fragrant smoke .
It was then that his jangled nerves knew the full virtue of tobacco , the gentle anodyne which stays the failing strength and soothes the worrying brain .
He watched the dim blue reek swirling up from him , and he felt the pleasant aromatic bite upon his palate , while a restful languor crept over his weary and harassed body .
The three ladies sat together upon a flat rock .
`` When I saw you standing on that rock up yonder , I put it down to delirium , '' said the Colonel .
`` If the ladies had not seen you , I should never have ventured to believe it . ''
`` I am afraid that I behaved very badly .
Captain Archer says that I nearly spoiled all their plans , and that I deserved to be tried by a drumhead court-martial and shot .
The fact is that , when I heard the Arabs beneath me , I forgot myself in my anxiety to know if any of you were left . ''
`` Where can we see what is going on ? ''
The drama beneath them was rapidly approaching its climax .
The Halfa Corps was well up , and a ring of smoke and flame surrounded the clump of kneeling Dervishes , who answered it as best they could .
Many of them were already down , but the rest loaded and fired with the unflinching courage which has always made them worthy antagonists .
A dozen khaki-dressed figures upon the sand showed that it was no bloodless victory for the Egyptians .
But now there was a stirring bugle call from the Sarras men , and another answered it from the Halfa Corps .
Their camels were down also , and the men had formed up into a single , long , curved line .
One last volley , and they were charging inwards with the wild inspiriting yell which the blacks had brought with them from their central African wilds .
For a minute there was a mad vortex of rushing figures , rifle butts rising and falling , spear-heads gleaming and darting among the rolling dust cloud .
Then the bugle rang out once more , the Egyptians fell back and formed up with the quick precision of highly disciplined troops , and there in the centre , each upon his sheepskin , lay the gallant barbarian and his raiders .
The nineteenth century had been revenged upon the seventh .
`` Good Heavens , Mrs. Belmont , what _is_ the matter ? ''
For answer she pointed out over the desert .
Far away , miles on the other side of the scene of the fight , a small body of men were riding towards them .
`` And you , Mr .
`` Oh , Shepheard 's , decidedly . ''
`` We have our duty to do in Ireland , and we have been too long away from it already .
My husband has his business , and I have my home , and they are both going to rack and ruin .
Besides , '' she added slyly , `` it is just possible that if we did come to the States we might not find you there . ''
Mr. Stuart had limped on to the deck with an open book in his hand , a thick stick supporting his injured leg .
`` And I , '' cried Sadie .
`` It has taught me more than all my life put together .
I have learned so much and unlearned so much .
I am a different girl . ''
`` I never understood my own nature before , '' said Stephens .
`` I can hardly say that I had a nature to understand .
I lived for what was unimportant , and I neglected what was vital . ''
`` Oh , a good shake-up does nobody any harm , '' the Colonel remarked .
`` Too much of the feather-bed-and-four-meals-a-day life is not good for man or woman . ''
They all sat in thoughtful silence for a little , while the scarlet streaks turned to carmine , and the grey shadows deepened , and the wild-fowl flew past in dark straggling V 's over the dull metallic surface of the great smooth-flowing Nile .
A cold wind had sprung up from the eastward , and some of the party rose to leave the deck .
Stephens leaned forward to Sadie .
`` Then I must do so . ''
THE HOUSE OF LORING II .
HOW THE DEVIL CAME TO WAVERLEY III .
THE YELLOW HORSE OF CROOKSBURY IV .
HOW THE SUMMONER CAME TO THE MANOR HOUSE OF TILFORD V. HOW NIGEL WAS TRIED BY THE ABBOT OF WAVERLEY VI .
IN WHICH LADY ERMYNTRUDE OPENS THE IRON COFFER VII .
HOW NIGEL WENT MARKETING TO GUILFORD VIII .
HOW THE KING HAWKED ON CROOKSBURY HEATH IX .
HOW NIGEL HELD THE BRIDGE AT TILFORD X .
HOW THE KING GREETED HIS SENESCHAL OF CALAIS XI .
IN THE HALL OF THE KNIGHT OF DUPLIN XII .
HOW NIGEL FOUGHT THE TWISTED MAN OF SHALFORD XIII .
HOW THE COMRADES JOURNEYED DOWN THE OLD , OLD ROAD XIV .
HOW NIGEL CHASED THE RED FERRET XV .
HOW THE RED FERRET CAME TO COSFORD XVI .
HOW THE KING 'S COURT FEASTED IN CALAIS CASTLE XVII .
THE SPANIARDS ON THE SEA XVIII .
HOW BLACK SIMON CLAIMED FORFEIT FROM THE KING OF SARK XIX .
HOW A SQUIRE OF ENGLAND MET A SQUIRE OF FRANCE XX .
HOW THE ENGLISH ATTEMPTED THE CASTLE OF LA BROHINIERE XXI .
HOW THE SECOND MESSENGER WENT TO COSFORD XXII .
HOW ROBERT OF BEAUMANOIR CAME TO FLOERMEL XXIII .
HOW THIRTY OF JOSSELIN ENCOUNTERED THIRTY OF FLOERMEL XXIV .
HOW NIGEL WAS CALLED TO HIS MASTER XXV .
HOW THE KING OF FRANCE HELD COUNSEL AT MAUPERTUIS XXVI .
HOW NIGEL FOUND HIS THIRD DEED XXVII .
HOW THE THIRD MESSENGER CAME TO COSFORD INTRODUCTION Dame History is so austere a lady that if one , has been so ill-advised as to take a liberty with her , one should hasten to make amends by repentance and confession .
Events have been transposed to the extent of some few months in this narrative in order to preserve the continuity and evenness of the story .
I hope so small a divergence may seem a venial error after so many centuries .
For the rest , it is as accurate as a good deal of research and hard work could make it .
The matter of diction is always a question of taste and discretion in a historical reproduction .
In the year 1350 the upper classes still spoke Norman-French , though they were just beginning to condescend to English .
The lower classes spoke the English of the original Piers Plowman text , which would be considerably more obscure than their superiors ' French if the two were now reproduced or imitated .
The most which the chronicles can do is to catch the cadence and style of their talk , and to infuse here and there such a dash of the archaic as may indicate their fashion of speech .
I am aware that there are incidents which may strike the modern reader as brutal and repellent .
It is useless , however , to draw the Twentieth Century and label it the Fourteenth .
It was a sterner age , and men's code of morality , especially in matters of cruelty , was very different .
There is no incident in the text for which very good warrant may not be given .
The fantastic graces of Chivalry lay upon the surface of life , but beneath it was a half-savage population , fierce and animal , with little ruth or mercy .
It was a raw , rude England , full of elemental passions , and redeemed only by elemental virtues .
Such I have tried to draw it .
For good or bad , many books have gone to the building of this one .
I look round my study table and I survey those which lie with me at the moment , before I happily disperse them forever .
I see La Croix's `` Middle Ages , '' Oman 's `` Art of War , '' Rietstap 's `` Armorial General , '' De la Borderie 's `` Histoire de Bretagne , '' Dame Berner 's `` Boke of St. Albans , '' `` The Chronicle of Jocelyn of Brokeland , '' `` The Old Road , '' Hewitt's `` Ancient Armour , '' Coussan 's `` Heraldry , '' Boutell 's `` Arms , '' Browne's `` Chaucer 's England , '' Cust 's `` Scenes of the Middle Ages , '' Husserand's `` Wayfaring Life , '' Ward 's `` Canterbury Pilgrims ; '' Cornish 's `` Chivalry , '' Hastings ' `` British Archer , '' Strutt 's `` Sports , '' Johnes Froissart , Hargrove 's `` Archery , '' Longman 's `` Edward III , '' Wright 's `` Domestic Manners . ''
With these and many others I have lived for months .
If I have been unable to combine and transfer their effect , the fault is mine .
`` UNDERSHAW , '' November 30 , 1905 .
THE HOUSE OF LORING In the month of July of the year 1348 , between the feasts of St. Benedict and of St. Swithin , a strange thing came upon England , for out of the east there drifted a monstrous cloud , purple and piled , heavy with evil , climbing slowly up the hushed heaven .
In the shadow of that strange cloud the leaves drooped in the trees , the birds ceased their calling , and the cattle and the sheep gathered cowering under the hedges .
A gloom fell upon all the land , and men stood with their eyes upon the strange cloud and a heaviness upon their hearts .
They crept into the churches where the trembling people were blessed and shriven by the trembling priests .
Outside no bird flew , and there came no rustling from the woods , nor any of the homely sounds of Nature .
All was still , and nothing moved , save only the great cloud which rolled up and onward , with fold on fold from the black horizon .
To the west was the light summer sky , to the east this brooding cloud-bank , creeping ever slowly across , until the last thin blue gleam faded away and the whole vast sweep of the heavens was one great leaden arch .
Then the rain began to fall .
All day it rained , and all the night and all the week and all the month , until folk had forgotten the blue heavens and the gleam of the sunshine .
It was not heavy , but it was steady and cold and unceasing , so that the people were weary of its hissing and its splashing , with the slow drip from the eaves .
Always the same thick evil cloud flowed from east to west with the rain beneath it .
None could see for more than a bow-shot from their dwellings for the drifting veil of the rain-storms .
Every morning the folk looked upward for a break , but their eyes rested always upon the same endless cloud , until at last they ceased to look up , and their hearts despaired of ever seeing the change .
It was raining at Lammas-tide and raining at the Feast of the Assumption and still raining at Michaelmas .
The crops and the hay , sodden and black , had rotted in the fields , for they were not worth the garnering .
The sheep had died , and the calves also , so there was little to kill when Martinmas came and it was time to salt the meat for the winter .
They feared a famine , but it was worse than famine which was in store for them .
For the rain had ceased at last , and a sickly autumn sun shone upon a land which was soaked and sodden with water .
Wet and rotten leaves reeked and festered under the foul haze which rose from the woods .
The fields were spotted with monstrous fungi of a size and color never matched before -- scarlet and mauve and liver and black .
It was as though the sick earth had burst into foul pustules ; mildew and lichen mottled the walls , and with that filthy crop Death sprang also from the water-soaked earth .
Men died , and women and children , the baron of the castle , the franklin on the farm , the monk in the abbey and the villein in his wattle-and-daub cottage .
All breathed the same polluted reek and all died the same death of corruption .
Of those who were stricken none recovered , and the illness was ever the same -- gross boils , raving , and the black blotches which gave its name to the disease .
All through the winter the dead rotted by the wayside for want of some one to bury them .
In many a village no single man was left alive .
Then at last the spring came with sunshine and health and lightness and laughter -- the greenest , sweetest , tenderest spring that England had ever known -- but only half of England could know it .
The other half had passed away with the great purple cloud .
Yet it was there in that stream of death , in that reek of corruption , that the brighter and freer England was born .
There in that dark hour the first streak of the new dawn was seen .
For in no way save by a great upheaval and change could the nation break away from that iron feudal system which held her limbs .
But now it was a new country which came out from that year of death .
The barons were dead in swaths .
No high turret nor cunning moat could keep out that black commoner who struck them down .
Oppressive laws slackened for want of those who could enforce them , and once slackened could never be enforced again .
The laborer would be a slave no longer .
The bondsman snapped his shackles .
There was much to do and few left to do it .
Therefore the few should be freemen , name their own price , and work where and for whom they would .
It was the black death which cleared the way for that great rising thirty years later which left the English peasant the freest of his class in Europe .
But there were few so far-sighted that they could see that here , as ever , good was coming out of evil .
At the moment misery and ruin were brought into every family .
The dead cattle , the ungarnered crops , the untilled lands -- every spring of wealth had dried up at the same moment .
Those who were rich became poor ; but those who were poor already , and especially those who were poor with the burden of gentility upon their shoulders , found themselves in a perilous state .
All through England the smaller gentry were ruined , for they had no trade save war , and they drew their living from the work of others .
On many a manor-house there came evil times , and on none more than on the Manor of Tilford , where for many generations the noble family of the Lorings had held their home .
`` You have done well , brother . ''
`` There is the matter of the fish-ponds . ''
`` Carp prosper only upon a gravel bottom .
They must be put in also in their due proportion , three milters to one spawner , brother sacrist , and the spot must be free from wind , stony and sandy , an ell deep , with willows and grass upon the banks .
Mud for tench , brother , gravel for carp . ''
`` Bethink you of the pike in the carp pond ! ''
The Abbot hardened his heart at the thought .
`` It was indeed a devil's deed -- when we had but newly stocked it with char and with carp .
Well , well , the law is the law , and if you can use it to hurt , it is still lawful to do so .
Have these claims been advanced ? ''
`` Deacon the bailiff with his two varlets went down to the Hall yesternight on the matter of the escuage , and came screaming back with this young hothead raging at their heels .
He is small and slight , yet he has the strength of many men in the hour of his wrath .
The bailiff swears that he will go no more , save with half a score of archers to uphold him . ''
Hence the wild announcement of the frightened monk seemed terrible rather than incredible to those whom he addressed .
The Abbot 's ruddy face paled for a moment , it is true , but he plucked the crucifix from his desk and rose valiantly to his feet .
`` Lead me to him ! ''
`` Show me the foul fiend who dares to lay his grip upon brethren of the holy house of Saint Bernard !
Run down to my chaplain , brother !
Bid him bring the exorcist with him , and also the blessed box of relics , and the bones of Saint James from under the altar !
With these and a contrite and humble heart we may show front to all the powers of darkness . ''
`` If it please you , holy father , and you , reverend sacrist , it came about in this way .
James the subprior , and Brother John and I had spent our day from sext onward on Hankley , cutting bracken for the cow-houses .
We were coming back over the five-virgate field , and the holy subprior was telling us a saintly tale from the life of Saint Gregory , when there came a sudden sound like a rushing torrent , and the foul fiend sprang over the high wall which skirts the water-meadow and rushed upon us with the speed of the wind .
The lay brother he struck to the ground and trampled into the mire .
Then , seizing the good subprior in his teeth , he rushed round the field , swinging him as though he were a fardel of old clothes .
Fetlock deep in the lush grass there stood a magnificent horse , such a horse as a sculptor or a soldier might thrill to see .
His color was a light chestnut , with mane and tail of a more tawny tint .
Seventeen hands high , with a barrel and haunches which bespoke tremendous strength , he fined down to the most delicate lines of dainty breed in neck and crest and shoulder .
He was indeed a glorious sight as he stood there , his beautiful body leaning back from his wide-spread and propped fore legs , his head craned high , his ears erect , his mane bristling , his red nostrils opening and shutting with wrath , and his flashing eyes turning from side to side in haughty menace and defiance .
Such was the youth who , cracking his whip joyously , and followed by half a score of dogs , cantered on his rude pony down the Tilford Lane , and thence it was that with a smile of amused contempt upon his face he observed the comedy in the field and the impotent efforts of the servants of Waverley .
But this time there was no hasty flight , no rapturous pursuit to the wall .
The little man braced himself straight , flung up his metal-headed whip , and met the horse with a crashing blow upon the head , repeated again and again with every attack .
In vain the horse reared and tried to overthrow its enemy with swooping shoulders and pawing hoofs .
Cool , swift and alert , the man sprang swiftly aside from under the very shadow of death , and then again came the swish and thud of the unerring blow from the heavy handle .
The Abbot flushed at the bold words , and bit his lip with vexation .
But the stout red-faced farmer shook his head at the proposal .
`` Not I , in faith ! ''
`` The beast hath chased me twice round the paddock ; it has nigh slain my boy Samkin .
He would never be happy till he had ridden it , nor has he ever been happy since .
There is not a hind in my employ who will enter his stall .
Ill fare the day that ever I took the beast from the Castle stud at Guildford , where they could do nothing with it and no rider could be found bold enough to mount it !
When the sacrist here took it for a fifty-shilling debt he made his own bargain and must abide by it .
He comes no more to the Crooksbury farm . ''
`` That I will most readily , '' cried the sacrist .
`` The pittance-master can stop the fifty shillings from my very own weekly dole , and so the Abbey be none the poorer .
In the meantime here is Wat with his arbalist and a bolt in his girdle .
Let him drive it to the head through this cursed creature , for his hide and his hoofs are of more value than his wicked self . ''
Never had the dull round of the lives of the gentle brethren of Waverley been broken by so fiery a scene .
Springing to right and swooping to left , now with its tangled wicked head betwixt its forefeet , and now pawing eight feet high in the air , with scarlet , furious nostrils and maddened eyes , the yellow horse was a thing of terror and of beauty .
But the lithe figure on his back , bending like a reed in the wind to every movement , firm below , pliant above , with calm inexorable face , and eyes which danced and gleamed with the joy of contest , still held its masterful place for all that the fiery heart and the iron muscles of the great beast could do .
And now came such a ride as still lingers in the gossip of the lowly country folk and forms the rude jingle of that old Surrey ballad , now nearly forgotten , save for the refrain :
`` Where are they , fair son ? ''
`` He has such an engine at his back , Nigel , that even the bravest must fear him .
The ban which blasts a man 's soul is in the keeping of his church , and what have we to place against it ?
I pray you to speak him fair , Nigel . ''
Ah , give me a horse !
To bear me out afar , Where blackest need and grimmest deed And sweetest perils are .
Hold thou my ways from glutted days Where poisoned leisure lies , And point the path of tears and wrath Which mounts to high emprise !
But a sudden and rude interruption broke in upon their gentle contest .
A dog pricked its ears and barked .
The others ran growling to the door .
And then there came a sharp clash of arms , a dull heavy blow as from a club or sword-pommel , and a deep voice from without summoned them to open in the King 's name .
The old dame and Nigel had both sprung to their feet , their table overturned and their chessmen scattered among the rushes .
Nigel 's hand had sought his crossbow , but the Lady Ermyntrude grasped his arm .
The summoner cleared his throat pompously , and turning his parchment to the light of the cressets he read out a long document in Norman-French , couched in such a style and such a language that the most involved and foolish of our forms were simplicity itself compared to those by which the men of the long gown made a mystery of that which of all things on earth should be the plainest and the most simple .
Despair fell cold upon Nigel 's heart and blanched the face of the old dame as they listened to the dread catalogue of claims and suits and issues , questions of peccary and turbary , of house-bote and fire-bote , which ended by a demand for all the lands , hereditaments , tenements , messuages and curtilages , which made up their worldly all .
The eighty white-clad brethren looked with half resentful , half amused eyes as they listened to this frank address to one who , in their small lives , seemed to be the direct vice-regent of Heaven .
The archers had stood back from Nigel , as though he was at liberty to go , when the loud voice of the summoner broke in upon the silence --
The Abbot seemed for an instant taken aback by these bold words , and by the high and strenuous voice in which they were uttered .
But the sterner sacrist came as ever to stiffen his will .
He held up the old parchment in his hand .
`` By Saint Paul ! ''
said he , `` I never thought to find honorable advancement under the roof of an abbey , but perchance there may , be some room for it ere you hale me to your prison . ''
The man in question , a tall bushy-bearded fellow , clad like the others in green jerkin and breeches with high brown boots , advanced slowly , sword in hand , against Nigel .
His heart was not in the business , for these clerical courts were not popular , and everyone had a tender heart for the fallen fortunes of the house of Loring and wished well to its young heir .
`` Come and fetch me , good fellow , '' said Nigel , with a dangerous smile .
So fierce was his eye and so menacing his blade as he crouched in the narrow bay of the window that the little knot of archers were at a loss what to do .
The Abbot had forced his way through the crowd and stood , purple with outraged dignity , at their side .
The man , who was one of the Abbey 's lay servants , put his weight upon his long bow and slipped the loose end of the string into the upper notch .
Then , drawing one of the terrible three-foot arrows , steel-tipped and gaudily winged , from his waist , he laid it to the string .
`` Now draw your bow and hold it ready ! ''
cried the furious Abbot .
`` Squire Nigel , it is not for Holy Church to shed blood , but there is naught but violence which will prevail against the violent , and on your head be the sin .
Cast down the sword which you hold in your hand ! ''
`` Will you give me freedom to leave your Abbey ? ''
The formidable appearance of this ally and his high reputation among his fellows gave a further chill to the lukewarm ardor of the attack .
Aylward 's left arm was passed through his strung bow , and he was known from Woolmer Forest to the Weald as the quickest , surest archer that ever dropped a running deer at tenscore paces .
`` It is for me , fair sir . ''
`` I had thought as much .
I knew your father , Eustace Loring , and though he would have made two of you , yet he has left his stamp plain enough upon your face . ''
`` The message , mon ami , is that your friend comes into these parts and would have a night 's lodging at the manor house of Tilford for the love and respect that he bears your family . ''
`` Nay , he is most welcome , '' said Nigel , `` and yet I hope that he is one who can relish a soldier 's fare and sleep under a humble roof , for indeed we can but give our best , poor as it is . ''
`` I have few friends , fair sir , '' said Nigel , with a puzzled face .
`` I pray you give me this gentleman 's name . ''
`` Well , '' said Aylward , `` what have you to say to me , young sir ? ''
`` Your gold is nothing to me , '' said Aylward shortly , `` nor would you buy my loyalty if you filled my wallet with rose nobles , so long as you were not a man after my own heart .
But I have seen you back the yellow horse , and I have seen you face the Abbot of Waverley , and you are such a master as I would very gladly serve if you have by chance a place for such a man .
I have seen your following , and I doubt not that they were stout fellows in your grandfather 's time ; but which of them now would draw a bow-string to his ear ?
Through you I have left the service of the Abbey of Waverley , and where can I look now for a post ?
If I stay here I am all undone like a fretted bow-string . ''
I have arrived a la bonne heure , '' said Chandos .
`` I rode from Windsor and came to your manor house , to find it empty save for a fine old dame , who told me of your troubles .
From her I walked across to the Abbey , and none too soon , for what with cloth-yard shafts for your body , and bell , book and candle for your soul , it was no very cheerful outlook .
But here is the very dame herself , if I mistake not . ''
Nigel perched himself upon the side of the high bed , swinging his legs over the edge and gazing with wonder and amusement at the quaint face , the ruffled yellow hair , and the sinewy shoulders of the famous warrior , dimly seen amid a pillar of steam .
He was in a mood for talk ; so Nigel with eager lips plied him with a thousand questions about the wars , hanging upon every word which came back to him , like those of the ancient oracles , out of the mist and the cloud .
To Chandos himself , the old soldier for whom war had lost its freshness , it was a renewal of his own ardent youth to listen to Nigel 's rapid questions and to mark the rapt attention with which he listened .
`` I have had only one to teach me , the Lady Ermyntrude . ''
`` Then we have only to find some one who has no use for a suit of armor and will give it to you .
Yet I trust that you will think better of it and let me , since that good lady proves that I am your kinsman , fit you for the wars . ''
So Chandos went his way that evening , walking his horse through the peaceful lanes and twanging his citole as he went , for he loved music and was famous for his merry songs .
The cottagers came from their huts and laughed and clapped as the rich full voice swelled and sank to the cheery tinkling of the strings .
There were few who saw him pass that would have guessed that the quaint one-eyed man with the yellow hair was the toughest fighter and craftiest man of war in Europe .
Once only , as he entered Farnham , an old broken man-at-arms ran out in his rags and clutched at his horse as a dog gambols round his master .
Chandos threw him a kind word and a gold coin as he passed on to the castle .
The old dame wrung her hands in despair .
`` Nay , take it not to heart , dear lady ! ''
`` We have but to say the word and the King would stop at Waverley , where he and his court would find all that they could wish . ''
`` The bracelet was the prize for the Queen of Beauty which was given to me before all the high-born ladies of England by Sir Nele Loring a month before our marriage -- the Queen of Beauty , Nigel -- I , old and twisted , as you see me .
Five strong men went down before his lance ere he won that trinket for me .
And now in my last years -- ''
HOW NIGEL WENT MARKETING TO GUILDFORD
`` Nay , Samkin , if it was like that , then perhaps what you did was not so far amiss .
But it is hard to lose the old farm when my heart is buried deep in the good brown soil . ''
`` God preserve us from the wenches , Samkin !
But indeed I think that if there is money to be gathered you are as likely to get your fist full as any man who goes to the war .
But hasten , lad , hasten !
Already your young master is over the brow . ''
`` There are several with him . ''
`` Yes , she is ever at his side , and has saved him many a time , for if he has the strength it is she who has the wit .
I hope to see their heads together upon the green grass one of these mornings . ''
The patrol passed downward toward Farnham , and so , as it proved , away from the robbers , who had doubtless watched them closely from the dense brushwood which skirted the road .
Coming round a curve , Nigel and Aylward were aware of a tall and graceful woman who sat , wringing her hands and weeping bitterly , upon the bank by the side of the track .
At such a sight of beauty in distress Nigel pricked Pommers with the spur and in three bounds was at the side of the unhappy lady .
`` Tut , tut !
he will suffer no scathe .
Squire Nigel will bring him back to you anon . ''
The outlaw , who had opened his eyes , looked with a scowl from his captor to the new-comer .
`` You are in luck , archer , '' said he , `` for I have come to grips with many a man , but I can not call to mind any who have had the better of me . ''
`` Holy Mary ! ''
`` Where is the saddle-bag ? ''
It had been cut away by a sharp knife .
Only the two ends of strap remained .
Aylward and Nigel stared at each other in blank dismay .
Then the young Squire shook his clenched hands and pulled at his yellow curls in his despair .
`` Dear and sweet lord , '' she cried , `` I trust they have done you no hurt .
I waited by the old ash , and my heart sank when you came not . ''
`` They will speak for me at Guildford , '' said the `` Wild Man . ''
`` They have sworn it .
But hand them first the bag that you have taken . ''
So they jogged on together until passing Saint Catherine 's shrine they crossed the winding Wey once more , and so found themselves in the steep high street with its heavy-caved gabled houses , its monkish hospitium upon the left , where good ale may still be quaffed , and its great square-keeped castle upon the right , no gray and grim skeleton of ruin , but very quick and alert , with blazoned banner flying free , and steel caps twinkling from the battlement .
A row of booths extended from the castle gate to the high street , and two doors from the Church of the Trinity was that of Thorold the goldsmith , a rich burgess and Mayor of the town .
He looked long and lovingly at the rich rubies and at the fine work upon the goblet .
Then he stroked his flowing gray beard as he pondered whether he should offer fifty nobles or sixty , for he knew well that he could sell them again for two hundred .
If he offered too much his profit would be reduced .
If he offered too little the youth might go as far as London with them , for they were rare and of great worth .
The young man was ill-clad , and his eyes were anxious .
Perchance he was hard pressed and was ignorant of the value of what he bore .
He would sound him .
`` These things are old and out of fashion , fair sir , '' said he .
`` Of the stones I can scarce say if they are of good quality or not , but they are dull and rough .
Yet , if your price be low I may add them to my stock , though indeed this booth was made to sell and not to buy .
What do you ask ? ''
`` Well , well , take a hundred ! ''
`` Fleece me , skin me , leave me a loser , and take for your wares the full hundred ! ''
The two travelers had dinner at the monk 's hospitium , Nigel at the high table and Aylward among the commonalty .
Then again they roamed the high street on business intent .
Nigel bought taffeta for hangings , wine , preserves , fruit , damask table linen and many other articles of need .
At last he halted before the armorer 's shop at the castle-yard , staring at the fine suits of plate , the engraved pectorals , the plumed helmets , the cunningly jointed gorgets , as a child at a sweet-shop .
`` To anyone else , two hundred and fifty rose nobles .
To you two hundred . ''
`` Hearken then , armorer !
I can not at this moment buy a suit of plate , and yet I sorely need steel harness on account of a small deed which it is in my mind to do .
Now I have at my home at Tilford that very suit of mail of which you speak , with which my father first rode to the wars .
Could you not so alter it that it should guard my limbs also ? ''
`` Right gladly would I lend you a suit of plate for this one venture , Squire Loring , but I know well that if you should be overthrown your harness becomes prize to the victor .
I am a poor man with many children , and I dare not risk the loss of it .
But as to what you say of the old suit of mail , is it indeed in good condition ? ''
`` Heh , Jenkin , fetch out the cob ! ''
cried the worthy Wat .
`` May my right hand lose its cunning if I do not send you into battle in your father's suit !
To-morrow I must be back in my booth , but to-day I give to you without fee and for the sake of the good-will which I bear to your house .
I will ride with you to Tilford , and before night you shall see what Wat can do . ''
Meanwhile the Squire and the armorer sat with their heads touching and the old suit of mail with its gorget of overlapping plates laid out across their knees .
Again and again old Wat shrugged his shoulders , as one who has been asked to do more than can be demanded from mortal man .
At last , at a suggestion from the Squire , he leaned back in his chair and laughed long and loudly in his bushy beard , while the Lady Ermyntrude glared her black displeasure at such plebeian merriment .
Then taking his fine chisel and his hammer from his pouch of tools , the armorer , still chuckling at his own thoughts , began to drive a hole through the center of the steel tunic .
The picture of gallant man on gallant horse was completed by the noble Falcon of the Isles which fluttered along some twelve feet above his head , `` waiting on , '' as it was termed , for any quarry which might arise .
The second bird of the cast was borne upon the gauntleted wrist of Raoul the chief falconer in the rear .
`` Is she not a noble bird , fair son ? ''
he asked , glancing up as her shadow fell upon him .
`` I trust , dear father , that the day may come when we shall lay our hands on all three , '' said the Prince , looking with shining eyes upon the King .
`` Is the Holy Land to lie forever in the grasp of these unbelieving savages , or the Holy Temple to be defiled by their foul presence ?
my dear and most sweet lord , give to me a thousand lances with ten thousand bowmen like those I led at Crecy , and I swear to you by God 's soul that within a year I will have done homage to you for the Kingdom of Jerusalem ! ''
A stout churchman who had ridden behind the King on a solid bay cob , well-suited to his weight and dignity , jogged up to the monarch 's elbow .
`` How say you , sire ?
I was watching the goshawk on the partridge and heard you not . ''
`` Had I said that I would add two manors to the See of Chichester , I warrant that you would have heard me , my Lord Bishop . ''
`` Nay , fair lord , test the matter by saying so , '' cried the jovial Bishop .
Straightway the conversation came back to the mystery of the woods and the mystery of the rivers , to the dark-eyed hawks and the yellow-eyed , to hawks of the lure and hawks of the fist .
The Bishop was as steeped in the lore of falconry as the King , and the others smiled as the two wrangled hard over disputed and technical questions : if an eyas trained in the mews can ever emulate the passage hawk taken wild , or how long the young hawks should be placed at hack , and how long weathered before they are fully reclaimed .
`` Nay , nay , he is overfar .
She would fly at check . ''
The King gave the shrill whistle , and the well-trained hawk raked out to the right and to the left to make sure which quarry she was to follow .
Then , spying the heron , she shot up in a swift ascending curve to meet him .
The quick eyes of the Bishop had perceived a drift of rooks when on their evening flight to the rookery were passing along the very line which divided the hawk from the heron .
A rook is a hard temptation for a hawk to resist .
In an instant the inconstant bird had forgotten all about the great heron above her and was circling over the rooks , flying westward with them as she singled out the plumpest for her stoop .
`` There is yet time , sire !
Shall I cast off her mate ? ''
Smaller than the royal gerfalcon , the Bishop 's bird was none the less a swift and beautiful creature .
From her perch upon his wrist she had watched with fierce , keen eyes the birds in the heaven , mantling herself from time to time in her eagerness .
Now when the button was undone and the leash uncast the peregrine dashed off with a whir of her sharp-pointed wings , whizzing round in a great ascending circle which mounted swiftly upward , growing ever smaller as she approached that lofty point where , a mere speck in the sky , the heron sought escape from its enemies .
Still higher and higher the two birds mounted , while the horsemen , their faces upturned , strained their eyes in their efforts to follow them .
She still rings ! ''
`` She is above him !
She has gained her pitch . ''
There could be no doubt that they were falling rapidly .
Already they grew larger to the eye .
Presently the heron disengaged himself and flapped heavily away , the worse for that deadly embrace , while the peregrine , shaking her plumage , ringed once more so as to get high above the quarry and deal it a second and more fatal blow .
The Bishop smiled , for nothing , as it seemed , could hinder his victory .
Chandos ' quaint face quivered with suppressed amusement and his one eye twinkled like a star .
`` Have you had sport , my liege ? ''
`` Is this a riddle , John ?
What mean you ? ''
`` Is this the sport that you have promised us , Sir John ?
How can you make good your words ? ''
`` I will make them good , my liege . ''
Such ventures as these where an aspirant for fame would wait for days at a cross-road , a ford , or a bridge , until some worthy antagonist should ride that way , were very common in the old days of adventurous knight erranty , and were still familiar to the minds of all men because the stories of the romancers and the songs of the trouveres were full of such incidents .
Their actual occurrence however had become rare .
There was the more curiosity , not unmixed with amusement , in the thoughts of the courtiers as they watched Chandos ride down to the bridge and commented upon the somewhat singular figure of the challenger .
His build was strange , and so also was his figure , for the limbs were short for so tall a man .
His head also was sunk forward as if he were lost in thought or overcome with deep dejection .
`` Perchance he hath a weak neck , '' said the King .
The King raised his hand ; there was a clang from the falconer 's horn , and the two riders , with a thrust of their heels and a shake of their bridles , dashed furiously at each other .
In the center the green strip of marshy meadowland , with the water squirting from the galloping hoofs , and the two crouching men , gleaming bright in the evening sun , on one side the half circle of motionless horsemen , some in steel , some in velvet , silent and attentive , dogs , hawks , and horses all turned to stone ; on the other the old peaked bridge , the blue lazy river , the group of openmouthed rustics , and the dark old manor-house with one grim face which peered from the upper window .
The last prayer was shot out of the Bishop with an energy and earnestness unusual in his orisons .
It was caused by the sudden outcry of one of the Squires who , having lifted the helmet from the ground , cast it down again with a scream of horror .
`` I thank you all for your very gentle courtesy , '' said a booming voice from the figure upon the ground .
Nigel , red to the roots of his flaxen hair , stammered out some words of thanks .
`` There spoke your father 's spirit ! ''
`` By the rood !
Nigel , I like you full well .
Let the matter bide in my hands .
But I marvel much that Sir Aymery the Lombard hath not come to us yet from Windsor . ''
`` I am Sir Aymery of Pavia , '' he whispered .
`` For God 's sake , tell me !
is the King within ? ''
`` I pray you , Nigel , to send out the servants , so that we may be alone .
I would have two men-at-arms at every door lest we be disturbed in our debate , for it is a matter of privacy .
And now , Sir Aymery , these noble lords as well as I , your master , would fain hear from your own lips how all goes forward in France . ''
`` You set my mind much at ease , Aymery , '' said the King ; `` for if nothing has come to your ears , then surely it can not be .
It was said that the wild Knight de Chargny had come down to St. Omer with his eyes upon my precious jewel and his mailed hands ready to grasp it . ''
`` Yes , sire , I am the guard . ''
`` I pray you that you will let me see it , sire , '' said Chandos .
`` De Chargny was my prisoner , and so many letters passed ere his ransom was paid that his script is well-known to me .
Yes , yes , I will swear that this is indeed his .
If my salvation were at stake I could swear it . ''
`` This letter , '' said the King , `` was given by de Chargny to one Dom Beauvais , a priest of St. Omer , to carry into Calais .
The said priest , smelling a reward , brought it to one who is my faithful servant , and so it came to me .
Straightway I sent for this man that he should come to me .
Meanwhile the priest has returned so that de Chargny may think that his message is indeed delivered . ''
`` I pray you , my dear and honored liege , not to act with overmuch haste in the matter , '' said Manny .
`` Bind him and hold him until the morning , for other counsels may prevail . ''
The King leaned back in his chair .
`` Speak and have done , '' said he .
`` You double traitor !
You would sell Calais to de Chargny , and then in turn you would sell de Chargny to me .
How dare you suppose that I or any noble knight had such a huckster 's soul as to think only of ransoms where honor is to be won ?
Could I or any true man be so caitiff and so thrall ?
You have sealed your own doom .
Lead him out ! ''
`` By the rood , fair son , you are right ! ''
cried the King , his face shining with the thought .
`` Now which of you , John Chandos or Walter Manny , will take the thing in charge ? ''
He looked mischievously from one to the other like a master who dangles a bone betwixt two fierce old hounds .
All they had to say was in their burning , longing eyes .
`` Nay , John , you must not take it amiss ; but it is Walter 's turn , and he shall have it . ''
`` What is it , man ?
What do you crave ? ''
IN THE HALL OF THE KNIGHT OF DUPLIN
There he had gone first to the goldsmith and had bought back cup and salver and bracelet , mourning with the merchant over the evil chance that gold and gold-work had for certain reasons which only those in the trade could fully understand gone up in value during the last week , so that already fifty gold pieces had to be paid more than the price which Nigel had received .
In vain the faithful Aylward fretted and fumed and muttered a prayer that the day would come when he might feather a shaft in the merchant 's portly paunch .
The money had to be paid .
Nigel stood in front of a burnished shield which served as a mirror , and he turned this way and that , preening himself like a little shining bird .
His smooth breastplate , his wondrous joints with their deft protection by the disks at knee and elbow and shoulder , the beautifully flexible gauntlets and sollerets , the shirt of mail and the close-fitting greave-plates were all things of joy and of beauty in his eyes .
He sprang about the shop to show his lightness , and then running out he placed his hand on the pommel and vaulted into Pommers ' saddle , while Wat and his boy applauded in the doorway .
Mary was dark as night , grave-featured , plain-visaged , with steady brown eyes looking bravely at the world from under a strong black arch of brows .
None could call her beautiful , and when her fair sister cast her arm round her and placed her cheek against hers , as was her habit when company was there , the fairness of the one and the plainness of the other leaped visibly to the eyes of all , each the clearer for that hard contrast .
And yet , here and there , there was one who , looking at her strange , strong face , and at the passing gleams far down in her dark eyes , felt that this silent woman with her proud bearing and her queenly grace had in her something of strength , of reserve and of mystery which was more to them than all the dainty glitter of her sister .
An instant later the rock and his vague fear and all things else had passed from his mind , for there , down the yellow sandy path , the setting sun gleaming on her golden hair , her lithe figure bending and swaying with every heave of the cantering horse , was none other than the same fair Edith , whose face had come so often betwixt him and his sleep .
His blood rushed hot to his face at the sight , for fearless of all else , his spirit was attracted and yet daunted by the delicate mystery of woman .
To his pure and knightly soul not Edith alone , but every woman , sat high and aloof , enthroned and exalted , with a thousand mystic excellencies and virtues which raised her far above the rude world of man .
There was joy in contact with them ; and yet there was fear , fear lest his own unworthiness , his untrained tongue or rougher ways should in some way break rudely upon this delicate and tender thing .
Such was his thought as the white horse cantered toward him ; but a moment later his vague doubts were set at rest by the frank voice of the young girl , who waved her whip in merry greeting .
`` Hail and well met , Nigel ! ''
`` Whither away this evening ?
Sure I am that it is not to see your friends of Cosford , for when did you ever don so brave a doublet for us ?
Come , Nigel , her name , that I may hate her for ever . ''
`` Then we shall ride back together , for I will go no farther .
How think you that I am looking ? ''
`` It was so rumored after the King had been to Tilford .
The story goes that the King goes to France and you in his train .
Is that true ? ''
`` He is no smaller than yourself , Nigel , and as to his back there are many folk that I know who would be glad to have his face . ''
`` He has flouted me , Nigel , and I would have revenge . ''
Her eyes flashed at him in contempt .
`` And you are a man-at-arms ! ''
she cried , laughing in bitter scorn .
`` You are afraid of a little man who can scarce walk .
Yes , yes , say what you will , I shall ever believe that you have heard of his skill at fence and of his great spirit , and that your heart has failed you !
You are right , Nigel .
He is indeed a perilous man .
Had you done what I asked he would have slain you , and so you have shown your wisdom . ''
`` I know it , fair sir . ''
`` Good , Nigel -- a nye of pheasants , even as it is a gaggle of geese or a badling of ducks , a fall of woodcock or a wisp of snipe .
But a covey of pheasants !
What sort of talk is that ?
I made him sit even where you are sitting , Nigel , and I saw the bottom of two pots of Rhenish ere I let him up .
Even then I fear that he had no great profit from his lesson , for he was casting his foolish eyes at Edith when he should have been turning his ears to her father .
But where is the wench ? ''
Amid the richer classes there was rude profusion , great joints ever on the sideboard , huge pies , beasts of the field and beasts of the chase , with ale and rough French or Rhenish wines to wash them down .
But the very rich had attained to a high pitch of luxury in their food , and cookery was a science in which the ornamentation of the dish was almost as important as the dressing of the food .
It was gilded , it was silvered , it was painted , it was surrounded with flame .
From the boar and the peacock down to such strange food as the porpoise and the hedgehog , every dish had its own setting and its own sauce , very strange and very complex , with flavorings of dates , currants , cloves , vinegar , sugar and honey , of cinnamon , ground ginger , sandalwood , saffron , brawn and pines .
It was the Norman tradition to eat in moderation , but to have a great profusion of the best and of the most delicate from which to choose .
From them came this complex cookery , so unlike the rude and often gluttonous simplicity of the old Teutonic stock .
`` Her honor ? ''
Sir John 's ruddy face had turned redder still , as he stared at the troubled features of the priest .
`` Her honor , say you -- the honor of my daughter ?
Make good those words , or never set your foot over the threshold of Cosford again ! ''
`` I pray you , fair and honored sir , '' said Nigel , `` that you will take me for your son this night , that I may handle this matter in the way which seems best .
On jeopardy of my honor I will do all that a man may . ''
`` Nay , Nigel , she may sorely need a woman 's aid , and what woman should it be save her own sister ?
I can take my tire-woman with us . ''
`` Nay , I shall ride with you myself if your impatience can keep within the powers of my mule , '' said the old priest .
`` But it is not your road , father ? ''
`` Nay , nay , our master needs no more ! ''
cried one , with a hoarse laugh .
`` Stand back , mistress , whoever you be !
The house is shut , and our lord sees no guests to-night . ''
`` Nay , father , I pray you to stay here for the nonce , '' said Nigel .
`` And you , Mary , do you bide with the good priest , for we know not what may be within . ''
`` That is indeed my name . ''
At the farther end the light beat strongly upon the harsh face and the high-drawn misshapen shoulders of the lord of the house .
A tangle of black hair surmounted a high rounded forehead , the forehead of a thinker , with two deep-set cold gray eyes twinkling sharply from under tufted brows .
His nose was curved and sharp , like the beak of some cruel bird , but below the whole of his clean-shaven powerful face was marred by the loose slabbing mouth and the round folds of the heavy chin .
His knife in one hand and a half-gnawed bone in the other , he looked fiercely up , like some beast disturbed in his den , as the two intruders broke in upon his hall .
`` It is not a time for bitter words , dear sister , '' said she , and again she laid her hand upon her sister 's sleeve .
`` All that you say may be true .
There was indeed a time when this man was friend to us both , and I know even as you do the power which he may have to win a woman 's heart .
But I know him now , and you do not .
I know the evil that he has wrought , the dishonor that he has brought , the perjury that lies upon his soul , the confidence betrayed , the promise unfulfilled -- all this I know .
Am I to see my own sister caught in the same well-used trap ?
Has it shut upon you , child ?
Am I indeed already too late ?
For God 's sake , tell me , Edith , that it is not so ? ''
Edith plucked her sleeve from her sister and made two swift steps to the head of the table .
Paul de la Fosse still sat silent with his eyes upon Nigel .
Edith laid her hand upon his shoulder : `` This is the man I love , and the only man that I have ever loved .
This is my husband , '' said she .
`` Well spoken , on my faith , my golden bird ! ''
said the little master of Shalford .
`` Let me add my own word to that which has been said .
You would not grant me any virtue in your unkindly speech , good Lady Mary , and yet you must needs confess that at least I have good store of patience , since I have not set my dogs upon your friends who have come between me and my ease .
But even to the most virtuous there comes at last a time when poor human frailty may prevail , and so I pray you to remove both yourself , your priest and your valiant knight errant , lest perhaps there be more haste and less dignity when at last you do take your leave .
Sit down , my fair love , and let us turn once more to our supper . ''
He motioned her to her chair , and he filled her wine-cup as well as his own .
Nigel had said no word since he had entered the room , but his look had never lost its set purpose , nor had his brooding eyes ever wandered from the sneering face of the deformed master of Shalford .
Now he turned with swift decision to Mary and to the priest .
`` There is no glory and little venture , '' said he ; `` but I have come for a purpose and I must do it .
I learn from your own lips , Edith , that you will not leave this man . ''
The woman , half swooning and yet spellbound and fascinated , looked on at that strange combat .
For a moment the cripple stood with an air of doubt , the sword grasped in his nerveless fingers .
Then as he saw the tiny blade in Nigel 's hand the greatness of the advantage came home to him , and a cruel smile tightened his loose lips .
Slowly , step by step he advanced , his chin sunk upon his chest , his eyes glaring from under the thick tangle of his brows like fires through the brushwood .
Nigel waited for him , his left hand forward , his knife down by his hip , his face grave , still and watchful .
And so it was that the master of Shalford , livid and brooding , was left with his wine at his lonely table , while the golden beauty of Cosford , hot with shame and anger , her fair face wet with tears , passed out safe from the house of infamy into the great calm and peace of the starry night .
Nigel had to decline the draft , for it meant riding into Guildford town , a mile out of his course , but very gladly he agreed with Mary that they should climb the path to the old shrine and offer a last orison together .
The knight and Aylward waited below with the horses ; and so it came about that Nigel and Mary found themselves alone under the solemn old Gothic arches , in front of the dark shadowed recess in which gleamed the golden reliquary of the saint .
In silence they knelt side by side in prayer , and then came forth once more out of the gloom and the shadow into the fresh sunlit summer morning .
They stopped ere they descended the path , and looked to right and left at the fair meadows and the blue Wey curling down the valley .
`` What have you prayed for , Nigel ? ''
`` It is well that I did so , '' said Aylward , `` or by these ten finger-bones !
our journey would have begun and ended on the same day .
As I glanced round I saw a dozen of them at the least amongst the brushwood .
See now how the light glimmers upon their steel caps yonder in the bracken under the great beech-tree .
Nay , I pray you , my fair lord , do not ride forward .
What chance has a man in the open against all these who lie at their ease in the underwood ?
If you will not think of yourself , then consider your horse , which would have a cloth-yard shaft feathered in its hide ere it could reach the wood . ''
Nigel shook his head sadly .
`` It is sooth you say , archer , and indeed it is no new thing , for that good knight Richard of the Lion Heart met his end in such a lowly fashion , and so also did Harold the Saxon .
But this is a private matter , and I would not have you draw your bow against him .
Neither can I ride at him myself , for he is weak in body , though dangerous in spirit .
Therefore , we will go upon our way , since there is neither profit nor honor to be gained , nor any hope of advancement . ''
There were monks journeying from one cell to another , Benedictines with their black gowns looped up to show their white skirts , Carthusians in white , and pied Cistercians .
Friars also of the three wandering orders -- Dominicans in black , Carmelites in white and Franciscans in gray .
There was no love lost between the cloistered monks and the free friars , each looking on the other as a rival who took from him the oblations of the faithful ; so they passed on the high road as cat passes dog , with eyes askance and angry faces .
The stranger laughed good-humoredly .
`` You can call me Thomas Lackland , '' said he .
`` I should be Thomas Lack-brain if I were indeed to give my true name , since a good many robbers , some in black gowns and some in steel , would be glad to help me upwards in the way you speak of .
So good-day to you , Squire , and to you also , archer , and may you find your way back with whole bones from the wars ! ''
how often at the last instant the cup is dashed from the lips !
This joyful chance was destined to change suddenly to unexpected and grotesque disaster -- disaster so strange and so complete that through all his life Nigel flushed crimson when he thought of it .
He was busily stripping his hunting-costume , and with feverish haste he had doffed boots , hat , hose , doublet and cloak , so that nothing remained save a pink jupon and pair of silken drawers .
At the same time Aylward was hastily unbuckling the load with the intention of handing his master his armor piece by piece , when the Squire gave one last challenging peal from his silver trumpet into the very ear of the spare horse .
But soon they came upon a scene which drew Nigel 's thoughts away from his bitter trouble , for in front of them there rose the towers of a great building with a small gray sloping village around it , and they learned from a passing hind that this was the hamlet and Abbey of Battle .
Together they drew rein upon the low ridge and looked down into that valley of death from which even now the reek of blood seems to rise .
Down beside that sinister lake and amid those scattered bushes sprinkled over the naked flank of the long ridge was fought that long-drawn struggle betwixt two most noble foes with broad England as the prize of victory .
Here , up and down the low hill , hour by hour the grim struggle had waxed and waned , until the Saxon army had died where it stood , King , court , house-carl and fyrdsman , each in their ranks even as they had fought .
And now , after all the stress and toil , the tyranny , the savage revolt , the fierce suppression , God had made His purpose complete , for here were Nigel the Norman and Aylward the Saxon with good-fellowship in their hearts and a common respect in their minds , with the same banner and the same cause , riding forth to do battle for their old mother England .
For an hour or more Chandos paced upon the ramparts with his young Squire at his elbow and talked to him of his duties and of the secrets and craft of warfare , Nigel drinking in and storing in his memory every word from so revered a teacher .
Many a time in after life , in stress and in danger , he strengthened himself by the memory of that slow walk with the blue sea on one side and the fair town on the other , when the wise soldier and noble-hearted knight poured forth his precept and advice as the master workman to the apprentice .
`` And wherein lies our wisdom , honored sir ? ''
`` I also would fain be war-wise and learn to fight with my wits as well as with my sword . ''
`` To whom then is the victory ? ''
A shadow of anger passed over the soldier 's keen face .
`` It is Peter the Red Ferret once more ! ''
`` I knew him of old in France , where he has done us more harm than a company of men-at-arms .
He speaks English as he speaks French , and he is of such daring and cunning that nothing is secret from him .
In all France there is no more dangerous man , for though he is a gentleman of blood and coat-armor he takes the part of a spy , because it hath the more danger and therefore the more honor . ''
`` Is that not everything ? ''
`` Can you not see , oh foolish Master Wintersole , that the French suspect we are about to make some attempt and that they have sent Peter the Red Ferret , as they have sent him many times before , to get tidings of whither we are bound ?
Now that he knows that the stores are for Calais , then the French near Calais will take his warning , and so the King 's whole plan come to nothing . ''
Chandos had halted in front of his inn , and now he pointed down to the outer harbor , which lay two miles off across the green plain .
It was connected by a long winding canal with the inner dock at the base of the hill , upon which the town was built .
Between the two horns formed by the short curving piers a small schooner was running out to sea , dipping and rising before a sharp southerly breeze .
A moment later a short swarthy man , bull-necked and deep-chested , pushed through the people .
He was clad in rough russet wool with a scarlet cloth tied round his black curly head .
His sleeves were rolled up to his shoulders , and his brown arms , all stained with grease and tar , were like two thick gnarled branches from an oaken stump .
His savage brown face was fierce and frowning , and was split from chin to temple with the long white wale of an ill-healed wound .
The rough harbor-master changed his gruffness to smiles in an instant .
`` Nay , Sir John , what would you ?
I pray you to hold me excused if I was short of speech , but we port-wardens are sore plagued with foolish young lordlings , who get betwixt us and our work and blame us because we do not turn an ebb-tide into a flood , or a south wind into a north .
I pray you to tell me how I can serve you . ''
`` I pray you did any man join her at the very last ? ''
`` Then we must lay her aboard ! ''
`` Come , lads , here is my own Marie Rose ready to cast off .
Who 's for a trip with a fight at the end of it ? ''
There was a rush for the boat ; but the stout little seaman picked his men .
`` Go back , Jerry !
Your heart is good , but you are overfat for the work .
You , Luke , and you , Thomas , and the two Deedes , and William of Sandgate .
You will work the boat .
And now we need a few men of their hands .
Do you come , little sir ? ''
`` You have fairly won your place , archer , '' said he .
`` You are the very man for our work .
Where is Black Simon of Norwich ? ''
The master measured the distance with his keen steady gaze , and then looked up at the sinking sun .
`` We have still four hours of daylight , '' said he ; `` but if we do not lay her aboard ere darkness falls she will save herself , for the nights are as black as a wolf 's mouth , and if she alter her course I know not how we may follow her . ''
Cock Badding laughed loud and long .
`` Nay , take it not to heart , archer , '' he cried ; `` for better men than you or I have groaned upon this deck .
The Prince himself with ten of his chosen knights crossed with me once , and eleven sadder faces I never saw .
Yet within a month they had shown at Crecy that they were no weaklings , as you will do also , I dare swear , when the time comes .
Keep that thick head of thine down upon the planks , and all will be well anon .
But we raise her , we raise her with every blast of the wind ! ''
He had a crew of seven rough , hardy mariners , who had been at his back in many a skirmish .
They were armed with short swords , but Cock Badding carried a weapon peculiar to himself , a twenty-pound blacksmith's hammer , the memory of which , as `` Badding 's cracker , '' still lingers in the Cinque Ports .
Then there were the eager Nigel , the melancholy Aylward , Black Simon who was a tried swordsman , and three archers , Baddlesmere , Masters and Dicon of Rye , all veterans of the French War .
The numbers in the two vessels might be about equal ; but Badding as he glanced at the bold harsh faces which looked to him for orders had little fear for the result .
`` By Saint Paul !
master-shipman , '' he cried , `` we should never hold up our heads in honor if we did not go further into the matter !
Let us do some small deed this night upon the water , or let us never see land again , for indeed we could not wish fairer prospect of winning honorable advancement . ''
But Cock Badding shook his head .
`` I have never met the man who could lead where I would not follow , '' said he ; `` but by Saint Leonard !
this is a mad business , and I should be a fool if I were to risk my men and my ship .
Bethink you , little master , that the skiff can hold only five , though you load her to the water 's edge .
If there is a man yonder , there are fourteen , and you have to climb their side from the boat .
What chance would you have ?
Your boat stove and you in the water -- there is the end of it .
No man of mine goes on such a fool 's errand , and so I swear ! ''
`` Here is one that will go with you , '' said he , `` or he would never dare show his face to the girls of Tilford again .
Come , archers , let us leave these salt herrings in their pickle tub and try our luck out on the water . ''
`` Now , master , we are at your back , '' said they as they pulled and tightened their sword-belts .
`` You must needs take the space of a better man ; for what do you know of the handling of a boat ? ''
`` No more fool 's talk , I pray you , for the night will soon fall .
`` Only one of you can shoot at a time , for you have no footing , '' said Badding .
`` With one foot in the prow and one over the thwart you will get your stance .
Do what you may , and then we will close in upon them . ''
`` Close in , close in ! ''
roared Badding , tugging at his oar .
`` Saint George for England !
Saint Leonard for Winchelsea !
Nigel looked at him in amazement .
`` I sought you aboard the ship , Aylward , but I could not lay eyes on you , '' said he .
`` It was because I was in the water , fair sir , and by my hilt !
it suits my stomach better than being on it , '' he answered .
`` When you first set forth I swam behind you , for I saw that the Frenchman 's boat hung by a rope , and I thought that while you kept him in play I might gain it .
I had reached it when you were driven back , so I hid behind it in the water and said my prayers as I have not said them for many a day .
Then you came again , and no one had an eye for me , so I clambered into it , cut the rope , took the oars which I found there and brought her back for more men . ''
`` By Saint Paul !
you have acted very wisely and well , '' said Nigel , `` and I think that of all of us it is you who have won most honor this day .
But of all these men dead and alive I see none who resembles that Red Ferret whom my Lord Chandos has described and who has worked such despite upon us in the past : It would indeed be an evil chance if he has in spite of all our pains made his way to France in some other boat . ''
A sudden wave of terror passed over the English seamen .
One of them tried to pass and get behind the brazen man , but he was pinned against the side by a quick movement and his brains dashed out by a smashing blow from the heavy mace .
Wild panic seized the others , and they rushed back to the boat .
Aylward strung an arrow , but his bowstring was damp and the shaft rang loudly upon the shining breast-plate and glanced off into the sea .
Masters struck the brazen head with a sword , but the blade snapped without injuring the helmet , and an instant later the bowman was stretched senseless on the deck .
The seamen shrank from this terrible silent creature and huddled in the stern , all the fight gone out of them .
Once it seemed that all was over with the Squire , for in springing back from his enemy he tripped over one of the bodies which strewed the deck and fell flat upon his back , but with a swift wriggle he escaped the heavy blow which thundered down upon him , and springing to his feet he bit deeply into the Frenchman 's helmet with a sweeping cut in return .
Again the mace fell , and this time Nigel had not quite cleared himself .
His sword was beaten down and the blow fell partly upon his left shoulder .
He staggered , and once more the iron club whirled upward to dash him to the ground .
`` Give yourself up , fair sir ! ''
Stretched upon a couch in a low-roofed and ill-furnished chamber , which looks down from under the machicolated corner turret upon the inner court of the Castle of Calais , he lay half-unconscious and impotent , while great deeds were doing under his window .
Wounded in three places , and with his head splintered by the sharp pommel of the Ferret 's mace , he hovered betwixt life and death , his shattered body drawing him downward , his youthful spirit plucking him up .
`` There is little to tell , fair sir .
Had this Ferret not been his own squire and taken so long a time to don his harness it is likely that they would have had the better of us .
He did not reach the battle till his comrades were on their backs .
Him we took to the Marie Rose , because he was your man .
The others were of no worth , so we threw them into the sea . ''
But the words were cut short upon Nigel 's lips , and he lay back with amazed eyes staring from his pallid face .
The door of his little chamber had opened , and who was this , the tall stately man with the noble presence , the high forehead , the long handsome face , the dark , brooding eyes -- who but the noble Edward of England ?
The dark Plantagenet wrath gathered upon the King 's high brow and gloomed in his fierce deep-set eyes .
`` By God 's dignity !
no man has ever crossed it yet and lived unscathed .
How now , young sir , what mean such words , to which we are little wont ?
Have a care , for this is no light thing which you venture . ''
`` Sire , '' said Nigel , `` in all matters in which I am a free man I am ever your faithful liege , but some things there are which may not be done . ''
`` My liege , '' said Chandos gravely , `` I have served you for over a score of years , and have shed my blood through as many wounds in your cause , so that you should not take my words amiss .
But indeed I should feel myself to be no true man if I did not tell you that my Squire Nigel , though perchance he has spoken more bluntly than becomes him , is none the less right in this matter , and that you are wrong .
For bethink you , sire -- ''
cried the King , more furious than ever .
`` Like master , like man , and I might have known why it is that this saucy Squire dares to bandy words with his sovereign lord .
He does but give out what he hath taken in .
John , John , you grow overbold .
But this I tell you , and you also , young man , that as God is my help , ere the sun has set this night the Red Ferret will hang as a warning to all spies and traitors from the highest tower of Calais , that every ship upon the Narrow Seas , and every man for ten miles round may see him as he swings and know how heavy is the hand of the English King .
Do you bear it in mind , lest you also may feel its weight ! ''
With a glare like an angry lion he walked from the room , and the iron-clamped door clanged loudly behind him .
`` You have carried yourself right well , Nigel .
I could not wish for better .
All will be well . ''
The Frenchman 's face lengthened .
`` Where you order I must go , '' said he ; `` but I pray you that it is not to the Holy Land . ''
`` I know it well .
I helped to burn it down some years ago . ''
It was a long trumpet-shaped engine of leather and iron bolted into a rude wooden stand and fitted with wheels .
Beside it lay a heap of metal slugs and lumps of stone .
The end of the machine was raised and pointed over the battlement .
Behind it stood an iron box which Nigel opened .
It was filled with a black coarse powder , like gritty charcoal .
`` By Saint Paul ! ''
said he , passing his hands over the engine , `` I have heard men talk of these things , but never before have I seen one .
It is none other than one of those wondrous new-made bombards . ''
`` It is well , for work awaits us -- good work , pressing work , work of peril and of honor .
Your eyes shine and your face flushes , Nigel .
I live my own youth over again as I look at you .
Know then that though there is truce with the French here , there is not truce in Brittany where the houses of Blois and of Montfort still struggle for the dukedom .
Half Brittany fights for one , and half for the other .
The French have taken up the cause of Blois , and we of Montfort , and it is such a war that many a great leader , such as Sir Walter Manny , has first earned his name there .
Of late the war has gone against us , and the bloody hands of the Rohans , of Gaptooth Beaumanoir , of Oliver the Flesher and others have been heavy upon our people .
The last tidings have been of disaster , and the King 's soul is dark with wrath for that his friend and comrade Gilles de St. Pol has been done to death in the Castle of La Brohiniere .
He will send succors to the country , and we go at their head .
How like you that , Nigel ? ''
With satin and with samite , with velvet and with fur , the noble Chandos was dressed for the King 's feast , and Nigel too had donned his best silk jupon , faced with the five scarlet roses , that he might wait upon him .
In the great hall of Calais Castle the tables were set , a high table for the lords , a second one for the less distinguished knights , and a third at which the squires might feast when their masters were seated .
`` I have heard of him as a man of great valor , '' said Nigel , gazing at him with interest .
It was Nigel 's turn to dart away ; but ever in the intervals he returned to the corner whence he could look down the hall and listen to the words of the older Squire .
Delves was a short , thick-set man past middle age , weather-beaten and scarred , with a rough manner and bearing which showed that he was more at his ease in a tent than a hall .
But ten years of service had taught him much , and Nigel listened eagerly to his talk .
The table manners of our ancestors at this period would have furnished to the modern eye the strangest mixture of luxury and of barbarism .
Forks were still unknown , and the courtesy fingers , the index and the middle of the left hand , took their place .
To use any others was accounted the worst of manners .
A crowd of dogs lay among the rushes growling at each other and quarreling over the gnawed bones which were thrown to them by the feasters .
A slice of coarse bread served usually as a plate , but the King 's own high table was provided with silver platters , which were wiped by the Squire or page after each course .
On the other hand the table-linen was costly , and the courses , served with a pomp and dignity now unknown , comprised such a variety of dishes and such complex marvels of cookery as no modern banquet could show .
Besides all our domestic animals and every kind of game , such strange delicacies as hedgehogs , bustards , porpoises , squirrels , bitterns and cranes lent variety to the feast .
`` Nay , John , you shall come .
I can not find it in my heart to say you nay .
I will find you place in my own ship , that you may indeed be by my side . ''
It took them four days of hard work ere their preparations were complete , for many were the needs of a small force sailing to a strange country .
Three ships had been left to them , the cog Thomas of Romney , the Grace Dieu of Hythe , and the Basilisk of Southampton , into each of which one hundred men were stowed , besides the thirty seamen who formed the crew .
In the hold were forty horses , amongst them Pommers , much wearied by his long idleness , and homesick for the slopes of Surrey where his great limbs might find the work he craved .
Then the food and the water , the bow-staves and the sheaves of arrows , the horseshoes , the nails , the hammers , the knives , the axes , the ropes , the vats of hay , the green fodder and a score of other things were packed aboard .
Always by the side of the ships stood the stern young knight Sir Robert , checking , testing , watching and controlling , saying little , for he was a man of few words , but with his eyes , his hands , and if need be his heavy dog-whip , wherever they were wanted .
A slight breeze blew from the eastward , and the highended , round-bodied craft rolled slowly down the Channel .
The mist rose a little at times , so that they had sight of each other dipping and rising upon a sleek , oily sea , but again it would sink down , settling over the top , shrouding the great yard , and finally frothing over the deck until even the water alongside had vanished from their view and they were afloat on a little raft in an ocean of vapor .
A thin cold rain was falling , and the archers were crowded under the shelter of the overhanging poop and forecastle , where some spent the hours at dice , some in sleep , and many in trimming their arrows or polishing their weapons .
`` Canst not string it ? ''
he was saying to a young bowman .
`` Then surely the string is overshort or the stave overlong .
It could not by chance be the fault of thy own baby arms more fit to draw on thy hosen than to dress a warbow .
Thou lazy lurdan , thus is it strung ! ''
He seized the stave by the center in his right hand , leaned the end on the inside of his right foot , and then , pulling the upper nock down with the left hand , slid the eye of the string easily into place .
`` Now I pray thee to unstring it again , '' handing it to the bowman .
The youth with an effort did so , but he was too slow in disengaging his fingers , and the string sliding down with a snap from the upper nock caught and pinched them sorely against the stave .
A roar of laughter , like the clap of a wave , swept down the deck as the luckless bowman danced and wrung his hand .
`` It is in my mind , John of Tuxford , that you have looked in the face more pots of mead than Frenchmen , '' said the old bowyer .
`` I am swinking from dawn to night , while you are guzzling in an alestake .
How now , youngster ?
Put your bow in the tiller .
It draws at sixty pounds -- not a pennyweight too much for a man of your inches .
Lay more body to it , lad , and it will come to you .
If your bow be not stiff , how can you hope for a twenty-score flight .
Aye , plenty and of the best .
Here , peacock at a groat each .
Surely a dandy archer like you , Tom Beverley , with gold earrings in your ears , would have no feathering but peacocks ? ''
It chanced that the opinion of the bowyer on this and other points differed from that of Long Ned of Widdington , a surly straw-bearded Yorkshireman , who had listened with a sneering face to his counsel .
Now he broke in suddenly upon the bowyer 's talk .
`` You would do better to sell bows than to try to teach others how to use them , '' said he ; `` for indeed , Bartholomew , that head of thine has no more sense within it than it has hairs without .
If you had drawn string for as many months as I have years you would know that a straight-cut feather flies smoother than a swine-backed , and pity it is that these young bowmen have none to teach them better ! ''
A bugle call had been sounded every quarter of an hour so as to keep in touch with the other two vessels who were invisible in the fog .
Now the high clear note rang out once more , the call of a fierce sea-creature to its mates , but no answer came back from the thick wall which pent them in .
Again and again they called , and again and again with bated breath they waited for an answer .
`` Fellow , it was your place to hold them together . ''
`` Had it been fair , I , who am a soldier , could have kept them in company .
Since it was foul , we looked to you , who are called a mariner , to do so .
You have not done it .
You have lost two of my ships ere the venture is begun . ''
`` The Spaniards ! ''
cried a dozen bowmen and sailors .
`` I should have known it , '' said the shipman .
`` I call to mind on the Biscay Coast how they would clash their cymbals after the fashion of the heathen Moor with whom they fight ; but what would you have me do , fair sir ?
If the fog rises we are all dead men . ''
`` There were thirty ships at the least , '' said Knolles , with a moody brow .
`` If we have seen them I trow that they have also seen us .
They will lay us aboard . ''
`` Nay , fair sir , it is in my mind that our ship is lighter and faster than theirs .
If the fog hold another hour we should be through them . ''
The Basilisk had indeed been spied from the Spanish Admiral 's ship before the fog closed down .
With so light a breeze , and such a fog , he could not hope to find her under sail .
But by an evil chance not a bowshot from the great Spanish carack was a low galley , thin and swift , with oars which could speed her against wind or tide .
She also had seen the Basilisk and it was to her that the Spanish leader shouted his orders .
For a few minutes she hunted through the fog , and then sprang out of it like a lean and stealthy beast upon its prey .
It was the sight of the long dark shadow gliding after them which had brought that wild shout of alarm from the lips of the English knight .
In another instant the starboard oars of the galley had been shipped , the sides of the two vessels grated together , and a stream of swarthy , red-capped Spaniards were swarming up the sides of the Basilisk and dropped with yells of triumph upon her deck .
The King sat upon a keg in the fore part of his ship , with little John of Richmond , who was no more than a schoolboy , perched upon his knee .
Edward was clad in the black velvet jacket which was his favorite garb , and wore a small brown-beaver hat with a white plume at the side .
A rich cloak of fur turned up with miniver drooped from his shoulders .
Behind him were a score of his knights , brilliant in silks and sarcenets , some seated on an upturned boat and some swinging their legs from the bulwark .
But there came a sudden interruption to the song .
A sharp , harsh shout came down from the lookout stationed in the circular top at the end of the mast .
`` I spy a sail -- two sails ! ''
`` If I hold her straight , then one or other must sink , and it may be both , '' the seaman answered .
The bowmen along either side of the Philippa had stood motionless waiting for their orders , but now there was a sharp shout from their leader , and every string twanged together .
The air was full of their harping , together with the swish of the arrows , the long-drawn keening of the bowmen and the short deep bark of the under-officers .
`` Steady , steady !
Shoot wholly together ! ''
Their gruff shouts broke through the high shrill cry like the deep roar of a wave through the howl of the wind .
`` By Saint George !
you speak the truth , '' said the King , `` for she is ours when we have time to take her .
These also seem very worthy ships which are drawing up to us , and I pray you , master-shipman , that you will have a tilt with the nearest . ''
But now ship after ship of the English had come up , each throwing its iron over the nearest Spaniard and striving to board her high red sides .
Twenty ships were drifting in furious single combat after the manner of the Philippa , until the whole surface of the sea was covered with a succession of these desperate duels .
The dismasted carack , which the King 's ship had left behind it , had been carried by the Earl of Suffolk 's Christopher , and the water was dotted with the heads of her crew .
An English ship had been sunk by a huge stone discharged from an engine , and her men also were struggling in the waves , none having leisure to lend them a hand .
A second English ship was caught between two of the Spanish vessels and overwhelmed by a rush of boarders so that not a man of her was left alive .
On the other hand , Mowbray and Audley had each taken the caracks which were opposed to them , and the battle in the center , after swaying this way and that , was turning now in favor of the Islanders .
The Prince , clad in that dark armor which gave him his name , was directing the attack from the poop when the shipman rushed wildly up to him with fear on his face .
The Prince looked up , and as he did so the shaggy beard showed once more and two brawny arms swept downward .
A great slug , whizzing down , beat a gaping hole in the deck , and fell rending and riving into the hold below .
The master-mariner tore his grizzled hair .
HOW BLACK SIMON CLAIMED FORFEIT FROM THE KING OF SARK
`` Who then are these people , and how do they live upon so small and windswept an island ? ''
`` They do not live from the island , fair sir , but from what they can gather upon the sea around it .
They are broken folk from all countries , justice-fliers , prison-breakers , reavers , escaped bondsmen , murderers and staff-strikers who have made their way to this outland place and hold it against all comers .
There is one here who could tell you of them and of their ways , for he was long time prisoner amongst them . ''
The seaman pointed to Black Simon , the dark man from Norwich , who was leaning against the side lost in moody thought and staring with a brooding eye at the distant shore .
`` It is true , fair sir .
For eight months I have been servant to the man whom they call their King .
His name is La Muette , and he comes from Jersey nor is there under God 's sky a man whom I have more desire to see . ''
Black Simon gave a wry smile and pulled off his jerkin .
His lean sinewy back was waled and puckered with white scars .
`` He has left his sign of hand upon me , '' said he .
`` He swore that he would break me to his will , and thus he tried to do it .
But most I desire to see him because he hath lost a wager to me and I would fain be paid . ''
Sir Robert Knolles laughed .
`` This business tickleth my fancy , '' said he .
`` As to stopping at the island , this shipman tells me that we must needs wait a day and a night , for that we have strained our planks .
But if you should go ashore , how will you be sure that you will be free to depart , or that you will see this King of whom you speak ? ''
`` My friend , '' said Simon , `` will you come ashore to-night -- for I have need of your help ? ''
With the assured air of a man who knows exactly where he is and whither he is going , the man-at-arms began to clamber up a narrow fern-lined cleft among the rocks .
It was no easy ascent in the darkness , but Simon climbed on like an old dog hot upon a scent , and the panting Aylward struggled after as best he might .
At last they were at the summit and the archer threw himself down upon the grass .
`` Nay , Simon , I have not enough breath to blow out a candle , '' said he .
`` Stint your haste for a minute , since we have a long night before us .
Surely this man is a friend indeed , if you hasten so to see him . ''
`` Well , well your apples may be the worse for keeping , but so is old Marie , and we can cry quits on that .
Come round and drink a cup over the bargain . ''
`` Simon , '' said Aylward , `` the light is not overgood and the place is cramped for sword-play , but if you will step out into the open I will teach you whether my master is a true soldier or not . ''
`` I ask only one thing , and I have come hither that I may get it .
It is that you pay me forfeit for that you have lost your wager . ''
But Aylward was at the woman 's side .
`` Come with us , fair dame , '' said he .
`` Surely we can , at least , take you from this island , and no such change can be for the worse . ''
`` What was it then ?
A silver plate ? ''
Sir Robert Knolles had served in Brittany before , and he marshaled his men on the march with the skill and caution of the veteran soldier , the man who leaves as little as possible to chance , having too steadfast a mind to heed the fool who may think him overcautious .
He had recruited a number of bowmen and men-at-arms at Dinan ; so that his following was now close upon five hundred men .
In front under his own leadership were fifty mounted lancers , fully armed and ready for any sudden attack .
Behind them on foot came the archers , and a second body of mounted men closed up the rear .
Out upon either flank moved small bodies of cavalry , and a dozen scouts , spread fanwise , probed every gorge and dingle in front of the column .
So for three days he moved slowly down the Southern Road .
But Robert Knolles shook his head .
`` We know not what are in these woods , or behind these hills , '' said he , `` and when I know nothing it is my wont to prepare for the worst which may befall .
It is but prudence so to do . ''
`` Indeed I think that you can do no better , '' said Percy heartily , `` and I swear to you on jeopardy of my soul that I will stand by you in the matter !
I doubt not that when we come deep into their land they will draw together and do what they may to make head against us ; but up to now I swear by all the saints of Lindisfarne that I should have seen more war in a summer 's day in Liddesdale or at the Forest of Jedburgh than any that Brittany has shown us .
But see , yonder horsemen are riding in .
They are our own hobblers , are they not ?
And who are these who are lashed to their stirrups ? ''
The leader of the archers , old Wat of Carlisle , held up a sword , a girdle and a dagger .
`` If it please you , fair sir , '' said he , `` I saw the glint of these , and I thought them no fit tools for hands which were made for the spade and the plow .
But when we had ridden them down and taken them , there was the Bentley cross upon each , and we knew that they had belonged to yonder dead Englishman upon the road .
Surely then , these are two of the villains who have slain him , and it is right that we do justice upon them . ''
`` A three-quarter wind , bowyer ! ''
`` Aim a body 's breadth to the right ! ''
`` But not thy body 's breadth , bowyer , '' laughed another .
`` Else may you be overwide . ''
`` Steady , Ned , for the good name of the Dales , '' cried a Yorkshireman .
`` Loose easy and pluck not , or I am five crowns the poorer man . ''
`` I see well that you are indeed a master-bowman , '' said old Wat , `` and it is comfort to my soul to think that if I fall I leave such a man behind me to hold high the credit of our craft .
Now gather your shafts and on , for Sir Robert awaits us on the brow of the hill . ''
All day Knolles and his men marched through the same wild and deserted country , inhabited only by these furtive creatures , hares to the strong and wolves to the weak , who hovered in the shadows of the wood .
Ever and anon upon the tops of the hills they caught a glimpse of horsemen who watched them from a distance and vanished when approached .
Sometimes bells rang an alarm from villages amongst the hills , and twice they passed castles which drew up their drawbridges at their approach and lined their walls with hooting soldiers as they passed .
The Englishmen gathered a few oxen and sheep from the pastures of each , but Knolles had no mind to break his strength upon stone walls , and so he went upon his way .
`` It will be the better if you stretch his limbs , for he grows overheavy , '' said the knight .
`` Now mark me , Nigel !
Yonder betwixt the ash-tree and the red rock what do you see on the side of the far hill ? ''
Nigel had already sprung down and was tightening Pommers ' girth .
Next instant its hind legs were high in the air , and the rider had been shot from its back .
A howl of triumph rose from amidst the bushes , and a dozen wild figures armed with club and with spear , rushed upon the prostrate man .
`` Who are you ? ''
I call you to mind .
You are the young Englishman who chased me on the great yellow horse .
By our Lady of Rocamadour whose vernicle is round my neck !
I could not have believed that any horse could have kept at the heels of Charlemagne so long .
But I will wager you a hundred crowns , Englishman , that I lead you over a five-mile course . ''
`` How then would you have ordered things ? ''
asked Nigel , much taken with the frank and debonair manner of his captive .
`` Then have I only my underclothes . ''
`` One might perchance have a worse fate , '' said Nigel .
`` Is this fair dame your betrothed ? ''
`` She is my love , '' answered the Frenchman .
`` We are but waiting for the Count to be slain in the wars , and then we mean to marry .
And this lady of thine , Nigel ?
I would that I could see her . ''
`` And what will you do , Nigel ? ''
For an hour these two friends rode together , the Frenchman pouring forth the praises of his lady , whose glove he produced from one pocket , her garter from his vest , and her shoe from his saddle-bag .
She was blond , and when he heard that Mary was dark , he would fain stop then and there to fight the question of color .
He talked too of his great chateau at Lauta , by the head waters of the pleasant Garonne ; of the hundred horses in the stables , the seventy hounds in the kennels , the fifty hawks in the mews .
His English friend should come there when the wars were over , and what golden days would be theirs !
Nigel too , with his English coldness thawing before this young sunbeam of the South , found himself talking of the heather slopes of Surrey , of the forest of Woolmer , even of the sacred chambers of Cosford .
It was the long blast of a trumpet blown from somewhere on the farther side of a ridge toward which they were riding .
A second long-drawn note from a distance answered it .
`` Nay , '' said Nigel ; `` we have pipes with us and a naker or two , but I have heard no trumpet-call from our ranks .
It behooves us to take heed , for we know not what may be before us .
Ride this way , I pray you , that we may look over and yet be ourselves unseen . ''
`` Nay , I have not heard of him . ''
As he spoke , the hindmost one , a strongly built , broad-shouldered man , looked round and saw the gleaming figure above him upon the hill , with open helmet , and the five roses glowing upon his breast .
With a sweep of his hands he had thrust his guardians aside and for a moment was clear of the throng .
But Nigel had no plan in his head and only obeyed the fevered impulse to do something to ease his thoughts .
He paced his horse up and down , waving his spear , and shouting insults and challenges to the garrison .
Over the high wall a hundred jeering faces looked down upon him .
So rash and wild was his action that it seemed to those within to mean some trap , so the drawbridge was still held high and none ventured forth to seize him .
A few long-range arrows pattered on the rocks , and then with a deep booming sound a huge stone , hurled from a mangonel , sang over the head of the two Squires and crushed into splinters amongst the boulders behind them .
The Frenchman seized Nigel 's bridle and forced him farther from the gateway .
`` And when we have taken the castle -- what then ? ''
`` You are right , Thomas ! ''
`` Gather together twenty men-at-arms each with his shield to cover him .
Astley , do you place the bowmen so that no head may show at window or parapet .
Nigel , I pray you to order the countryfolk forward with their fardels of fagots .
Let the others bring up the lopped pine-tree which lies yonder behind the horse lines .
Ten men-at-arms can bear it on the right , and ten on the left , having shields over their heads .
The gate once down , let every man rush in .
And God help the better cause ! ''
Swiftly and yet quietly the dispositions were made , for these were old soldiers whose daily trade was war .
In little groups the archers formed in front of each slit or crevice in the walls , whilst others scanned the battlements with wary eyes , and sped an arrow at every face which gleamed for an instant above them .
The garrison shot forth a shower of crossbow bolts and an occasional stone from their engine , but so deadly was the hail which rained upon them that they had no time to dwell upon their aim , and their discharges were wild and harmless .
Under cover of the shafts of the bowmen a line of peasants ran unscathed to the edge of the ditch , each hurling in the bundle which he bore in his arms , and then hurrying back for another one .
In twenty minutes a broad pathway of fagots lay level with the ground upon one side and the gate upon the other .
With the loss of two peasants slain by bolts and one archer crushed by a stone , the ditch had been filled up .
All was ready for the battering-ram .
With a shout , twenty picked men rushed forward with the pine-tree under their arms , the heavy end turned toward the gate .
The arbalesters on the tower leaned over and shot into the midst of them , but could not stop their advance .
Two dropped , but the others raising their shields ran onward still shouting , crossed the bridge of fagots , and came with a thundering crash against the door .
It splintered from base to arch , but kept its place .
Scorched , wearied and bedraggled , the remains of the storming party clambered out of the ditch as best they could , clutching at the friendly hands held down to them , and so limped their way back amid the taunts and howls of their enemies .
A long pile of smoldering cinders was all that remained of their bridge , and on it lay Astley and six other red-hot men glowing in their armor .
But a thought had flashed through Nigel 's mind .
`` See , fair sir , '' said he .
`` The nails of yonder door are red-hot and the wood as white as ashes .
Surely we can break our way through it . ''
It was bitter to draw back ; but it was madness to remain .
Nigel looked round and saw that half his men were down .
At the same moment Raoul sank with a gasp at his feet , a bolt driven to its socket through the links of the camail which guarded his neck .
Some of the archers , seeing that certain death awaited them , were already running back to escape from the fatal passage .
`` By Saint Paul ! ''
`` Would you leave our wounded where this butcher may lay his hands upon them ?
Let the archers shoot inwards and hold them back from the slits .
Now let each man raise one of our comrades , lest we leave our honor in the gate of this castle . ''
With a mighty effort he had raised Raoul upon his shoulders and staggered with him to the edge of the ditch .
Several men were waiting below where the steep bank shield them from the arrows , and to them Nigel handed down his wounded friend , and each archer in turn did the same .
Again and again Nigel went back until no one lay in the tunnel save seven who had died there .
Thirteen wounded were laid in the shelter of the ditch , and there they must remain until night came to cover them .
Meanwhile the bowmen on the farther side protected them from attack , and also prevented the enemy from all attempts to build up the outer gate .
The gaping smoke-blackened arch was all that they could show for a loss of thirty men , but that at least Knolles was determined to keep .
`` Indeed Raoul , no man could have carried himself with more honor or won more worship than you have done this day .
I will do your behest when the time comes . ''
`` I am he .
`` I have searched through the camp for you , but when I saw the great horse tethered near these bushes , I thought you would be found hard by .
I would have a word with you . ''
`` In good sooth , it must indeed be so .
There are not two such ken-speckled men in the world .
But if he crossed from the castle to the fort , it was not above the ground , for our own people were between . ''
Nigel clapped his hands with joy .
`` 'Fore God ! ''
`` It is a most noble plan !
Simon , I see not how we can tell the course of this passage or where we should dig . ''
`` Have you a cord ?
Or your belts linked together may serve . ''
`` French , then , '' said Nigel .
`` How would you have entered ? ''
`` It is 'Benedicite ! '
`` Nay , fair sir , it is in my mind that we can do better , '' said Simon .
`` Let us take the priest with us , so that he who is within may know his voice . ''
The four Englishmen passed the flat silver case from hand to hand , each pressing his lips devoutly upon it .
Then they rose to their feet .
Nigel was the first to lower himself down the hole ; then Simon ; then the priest , who was instantly seized by the other two .
The men-at-arms followed them .
They had scarcely moved away from the hole when Nigel stopped .
`` Surely some one else came after us , '' said he .
A shout of laughter and the thud of a heavy blow followed the appeal .
A strange sight it was to see these twenty naked men crouching in a half-circle round the fire with their trembling hands extended to the blaze .
Soon their tongues at least were thawed , and they poured out the story of their troubles with many a prayer and ejaculation to the saints for their safe delivery .
No food had crossed their lips since they had been taken .
The Butcher had commanded them to join his garrison and to shoot upon their comrades from the wall .
When they refused he had set aside three of them for execution .
`` I will not take your surrender , you black villain , '' said Nigel .
`` Draw and defend yourself .
Simon , give him your sword . ''
Nigel shuddered and turned away his eyes as he saw the brazen figure roll out and stagger to his knees , only to be hurled once more into the heart of the blaze .
His prisoners screamed with joy and clapped their hands as they pushed him back with their feet until the armor was too hot for them to touch .
Then at last he lay still and glowed darkly red , whilst the naked men danced in a wild half-circle round the fire .
But now at last the supports had come .
Lights flashed and armor gleamed down the tunnel .
The cellar filled with armed men , while from above came the cries and turmoil of the feigned assault upon the gate .
Led by Knolles and Nigel , the storming party rushed upward and seized the courtyard .
The guard of the gate taken in the rear threw down their weapons and cried for mercy .
The gate was thrown open and the assailants rushed in , with hundreds of furious peasants at their heels .
Some of the robbers died in hot blood , many in cold ; but all died , for Knolles had vowed to give no quarter .
Day was just breaking when the last fugitive had been hunted out and slain .
From all sides came the yells and whoops of the soldiers with the rending and riving of doors as they burst into the store-rooms and treasure-chambers .
There was a joyous scramble amongst them , for the plunder of eleven years , gold and jewels , satins and velvets , rich plate and noble hangings were all to be had for the taking .
The rescued prisoners , their hunger appeased and their clothes restored , led the search for booty .
Nigel , leaning on his sword by the gateway , saw Aylward totter past , a huge bundle under each arm , another slung over his back and a smaller packet hanging from his mouth .
He dropped it for a moment as he passed his young master .
`` If we stand here now within this castle , it is to you that I owe it .
The King shall know of it , and Chandos also .
Can I do aught else , Nigel , to prove to you the high esteem in which I hold you ? ''
Of late , however , Bambro ' had been unable to undertake any enterprise , for his reinforcements had failed him , and amid his following he had but three English knights and seventy men .
The rest were a mixed crew of Bretons , Hainaulters and a few German mercenary soldiers , brave men individually , as those of that stock have ever been , but lacking interest in the cause , and bound together by no common tie of blood or tradition .
Beside him , a strange contrast , stood his Squire , Croquart , a German , whose name and fame as a man-at-arms were widespread , though like Robert Knolles himself he had begun as a humble page .
He was a very tall man , with an enormous spread of shoulders , and a pair of huge hands with which he could crack a horse-shoe .
He was slow and lethargic , save in moments of excitement , and his calm blond face , his dreamy blue eyes and his long fair hair gave him so gentle an appearance that none save those who had seen him in his berserk mood , raging , an iron giant , in the forefront of the battle , could ever guess how terrible a warrior he might be .
Little knight and huge squire stood together under the arch of the donjon and gave welcome to the newcomers , whilst a swarm of soldiers crowded round to embrace their comrades and to lead them off where they might feed and make merry together .
`` Too late ? '
`` What mean you , Richard ? ''
`` Nay , I saw him not ? ''
`` Are they armed ? ''
`` They are unarmed . ''
Places were set at the farther end of the table for these most unexpected guests .
Presently the door was swung open , and Croquart with all form and courtesy announced the two Bretons , who entered with the proud and lofty air of gallant warriors and high-bred gentlemen .
Beaumanoir was a tall dark man with raven hair and long swarthy beard .
He was strong and straight as a young oak , with fiery black eyes , and no flaw in his comely features save that his front teeth had been dashed from their sockets .
His Squire , William of Montaubon , was also tall , with a thin hatchet face , and two small gray eyes set very close upon either side of a long fierce nose .
In Beaumanoir 's expression one read only gallantry and frankness ; in Montaubon 's there was gallantry also , but it was mixed with the cruelty and cunning of the wolf .
They bowed as they entered , and the little English seneschal advanced with outstretched hand to meet them .
Beaumanoir ran his eye round and shook his head .
said he , `` there are but twenty of you here , and I have thirty at Josselin who are so eager to advance themselves that if I return without hope for all of them there will be sore hearts amongst them .
I pray you , Richard , since we have been at these pains to arrange matters , that you in turn will do what you may .
Can you not find ten more men ? ''
`` Of that there can be no doubt , for the castle is full of archers and men-at-arms who would gladly play a part in the matter . ''
`` By Saint Cadoc , William , I think that you are right , '' cried the Breton .
`` If we are to have such a fight as will remain in the memories of men , you will bring no archers and we no crossbows .
Let it be steel upon steel .
How say you then ? ''
`` Nay , a day later , '' cried the Breton Squire .
`` Bethink you , my lord , that the three lances of Radenac would take time to come over . ''
HOW THIRTY OF JOSSELIN ENCOUNTERED THIRTY OF PLOERMEL
`` Or cold forever .
Candle shall burn and bell toll at Alnwick Chapel if I leave this ground alive , but come what may , fair sirs , it should be a famous joust and one which will help us forward .
Surely each of us will have worshipfully won worship , if we chance to come through . ''
`` You say truth , Thomas , '' said Knolles , bracing his girdle .
`` For my own part I have no joy in such encounters when there is warfare to be carried out , for it standeth not aright that a man should think of his own pleasure and advancement rather than of the King 's cause and the weal of the army .
But in times of truce I can think of no better way in which a day may be profitably spent .
Why so silent , Nigel ? ''
They all turned , leaning upon their short spears , and watched the advance of the men of Josselin , as their troop wound its way out from the woodlands .
In front rode three heralds with tabards of the ermine of Brittany , blowing loudly upon silver trumpets .
Behind them a great man upon a white horse bore the banner of Josselin which carries nine golden torteaus upon a scarlet field .
Then came the champions riding two and two , fifteen knights and fifteen squires , each with his pennon displayed .
Behind them on a litter was borne an aged priest , the Bishop of Rennes , carrying in his hands the viaticum and the holy oils that he might give the last aid and comfort of the Church to those who were dying .
The procession was terminated by hundreds of men and women from Josselin , Guegon , and Helleon , and by the entire garrison of the fortress , who came , as the English had done , without their arms .
The head of this long column had reached the field before the rear were clear of the wood , but as they arrived the champions picketed their horses on the farther side , behind which their banner was planted and the people lined up until they had inclosed the whole lists with a dense wall of spectators .
`` By the three kings of Almain , '' growled Croquart , `` we will need to fight hard this day , for never have I seen so many good soldiers gathered together .
Yonder is Yves Cheruel , whom they call the man of iron , Caro de Bodegat also with whom I have had more than one bickering -- that is he with the three ermine circles on the scarlet shield .
There too is left-handed Alain de Karanais ; bear in mind that his stroke comes on the side where there is no shield . ''
With a salute he drew down his visor and returned to his own men , who were kneeling in a twinkling , many colored group whilst the old bishop gave them his blessing .
Then with a loud cry of `` Allez ! ''
the herald dropped his upraised hand , and the two lines of men shuffled as fast as their heavy armor would permit until they met with a sharp clang of metal in the middle of the field .
There was a sound as of sixty smiths working upon their anvils .
Then the babel of yells and shouts from the spectators , cheering on this party or that , rose and swelled until even the uproar of the combat was drowned in that mighty surge .
`` Nay , nay ! ''
cried Knolles , raising his visor and advancing .
`` This may not be .
You have been held to mercy when we might have slain you , and by the Virgin I will hold you dishonored , all three , if you stand not back . ''
For a time it seemed as if nothing would break it , but gap-toothed Beaumanoir was a general as well as a warrior .
Whilst his weary , bleeding , hard-breathing men still flung themselves upon the front of the line , he himself with Raguenel , Tentiniac , Alain de Karanais , and Dubois rushed round the flank and attacked the English with fury from behind .
There was a long and desperate melee until once more the heralds , seeing the combatants stand gasping and unable to strike a blow , rode in and called yet another interval of truce .
But now the English had learned from experience , and under the guidance of Croquart they fought no longer in a straight line , but in one so bent that at last it became a circle .
As the Bretons still pushed and staggered against it they thrust it back on every side , until they had turned it into the most dangerous formation of all , a solid block of men , their faces turned outward , their weapons bristling forth to meet every attack .
Thus the English stood , and no assault could move them .
They could lean against each other back to back while they waited and allowed their foemen to tire themselves out .
Again and again the gallant Bretons tried to make a way through .
Again and again they were beaten back by a shower of blows .
But all was vain !
Beaumanoir 's head reeled .
His senses were leaving him .
In another minute he and his men would have been stretched senseless before this terrible circle of steel , when suddenly the whole array fell in pieces before his eyes , his enemies Croquart , Knolles , Calverly , Belford , all were stretched upon the ground together , their weapons dashed from their hands and their bodies too exhausted to rise .
The surviving Bretons had but strength to fall upon them dagger in hands , and to wring from them their surrender with the sharp point stabbing through their visors .
Then victors and vanquished lay groaning and panting in one helpless and blood-smeared heap .
But over at Josselin , yellow gorse-blossoms in their helmets , the victors were borne in on the shoulders of a shouting mob , amid the fanfare of trumpets and the beating of drums .
Such was the combat of the Midway Oak , where brave men met brave men , and such honor was gained that from that day he who had fought in the Battle of the Thirty was ever given the highest place and the post of honor , nor was it easy for any man to pretend to have been there , for it has been said by that great chronicler who knew them all , that not one on either side failed to carry to his grave the marks of that stern encounter .
So he wrote from his sick-room in the Castle of Ploermel late in the summer , but yet another summer had come before his crushed head had mended and his wasted limbs had gained their strength once more .
With despair he heard of the breaking of the truce , and of the fight at Mauron in which Sir Robert Knolles and Sir Walter Bentley crushed the rising power of Brittany -- a fight in which many of the thirty champions of Josselin met their end .
Then , when with renewed strength and high hopes in his heart he went forth to search for the famous Croquart who proclaimed himself ever ready night or day to meet any man with any weapon , it was only to find that in trying the paces of his new horse the German had been cast into a ditch and had broken his neck .
In the same ditch perished Nigel 's last chance of soon accomplishing that deed which should free him from his vow .
Nigel looked , and was aware of a stunted peasant who bore upon his rounded back an enormous bundle very much larger than himself .
Behind him walked a burly broad-shouldered archer , whose stained jerkin and battered headpiece gave token of long and hard service .
His bow was slung over his shoulder , and his arms were round the waists of two buxom Frenchwomen , who tripped along beside him with much laughter and many saucy answers flung back over their shoulders to a score of admirers behind them .
It was like a whiff of the heather-perfumed breezes of Hankley to see his homely face once more .
Nigel laughed with sheer joy as he looked at him .
So Aylward , having given instructions to the bearer of his feather-bed , rode away in spite of shrill protests from his French companions , who speedily consoled themselves with those of his comrades who seemed to have most to give .
Nigel 's party was soon clear of the column of archers and riding hard in the direction of the Prince 's army .
They passed by a narrow and winding track , through the great wood of Nouaille , and found before them a marshy valley down which ran a sluggish stream .
Along its farther bank hundreds of horses were being watered , and beyond was a dense block of wagons .
Through these the comrades passed , and then topped a small mound from which the whole strange scene lay spread before them .
`` And how will such answers accord with your honor , seeing that we have trusted you since you came in the train of the Cardinal ? ''
`` My lord , it is true that I am in the train of the Cardinal , and yet I am liege man of King John and a knight of France , so I pray you to assuage your wrath against me . ''
`` I was about to ride forth myself to coast their army and observe their countenance , so come with me ere the night fall , and we shall see what we can of their order and dispositions . ''
Through these scattered knots of horsemen Chandos rode , and as many of them were old antagonists it was `` Ha , John ! ''
on the one side , and `` Ha , Raoul ! ''
`` Ha , Nicholas ! ''
`` Ha , Guichard ! ''
upon the other , as they brushed past them .
Only one cavalier greeted them amiss , a large , red-faced man , the Lord Clermont , who by some strange chance bore upon his surcoat a blue virgin standing amid golden sunbeams , which was the very device which Chandos had donned for the day .
The fiery Frenchman dashed across their path and drew his steed back on to its haunches .
`` If it were not for the truce , '' said Clermont , `` I would soon show you that you have no right to wear it . ''
`` Look for it then in the battle to-morrow , and I also will look for yours , '' Chandos answered .
`` There we can very honorably settle the matter . ''
The immediate front of the English line was shrouded with scattered trees and bushes which hid the enemy ; but when they had cleared these a fair view of the great French army lay before them .
In the center of the huge camp was a long and high pavilion of red silk , with the silver lilies of the King at one end of it , and the golden oriflamme , the battle-flag of old France , at the other .
Like the reeds of a pool from side to side of the broad array , and dwindling away as far as their eyes could see , were the banners and pennons of high barons and famous knights , but above them all flew the ducal standards which showed that the feudal muster of all the warlike provinces of France was in the field before them .
The morning of Sunday , the nineteenth of September , in the year of our Lord 1356 , was cold and fine .
A haze which rose from the marshy valley of Muisson covered both camps and set the starving Englishmen shivering , but it cleared slowly away as the sun rose .
In the red silken pavilion of the French King -- the same which had been viewed by Nigel and Chandos the evening before -- a solemn mass was held by the Bishop of Chalons , who prayed for those who were about to die , with little thought in his mind that his own last hour was so near at hand .
Then , when communion had been taken by the King and his four young sons the altar was cleared away , and a great red-covered table placed lengthwise down the tent , round which John might assemble his council and determine how best he should proceed .
With the silken roof , rich tapestries of Arras round the walls and Eastern rugs beneath the feet , his palace could furnish no fairer chamber .
A murmur of disapproval rose from the company , and the Lord Clermont , Marshal of the army , sprang to his feet , his face red with anger .
`` It had been better for your honor , Sir Eustace , had you held your peace , '' said the Duke of Orleans .
`` Shall we let them slip from our fingers when we have them here and are fourfold their number ?
I know not where we should dwell afterwards , for I am very sure that we should be ashamed to ride back to Paris , or to look our ladies in the eyes again . ''
The German Count struck the table with his mailed fist .
`` Do what you like ! ''
`` But this only I can promise you , that neither I nor any of my German riders will descend from our horses so long as they are able to carry us , for in our country it is only people of no consequence who fight upon their feet . ''
Chandos cast up his fierce nose like the eagle which smells slaughter afar .
`` Surely , sir , all is forming even as we had planned it . ''
From far away there came a thunderous shout .
Then another and yet another .
Behind them lines of haggard , wolfish men glared through the underwood , silent and watchful save that they burst into a fierce yelp of welcome when Chandos and Nigel galloped up , sprang from their horses and took their station beneath them .
All along the green fringe of bowmen might be seen the steel-clad figures of knights and squires who had pushed their way into the front line to share the fortune of the archers .
`` I call to mind that I once shot six ends with a Kentish woldsman at Ashford -- '' began the Bowyer .
`` Nay , nay , we have heard that story ! ''
said old Wat impatiently .
`` Shut thy clap , Bartholomew , for it is no time for redeless gossip !
Walk down the line , I pray you , and see if there be no frayed string , nor broken nock nor loosened whipping to be mended . ''
The stout bowyer passed down the fringe of bowmen , amidst a running fire of rough wit .
Here and there a bow was thrust out at him through the hedge for his professional advice .
The Prince had ridden up to the line of archers .
He was in dark armor , his visor open , and his handsome aquiline face all glowing with spirit and martial fire .
The bowmen yelled at him , and he waved his hands to them as a huntsman cheers his hounds .
`` Well , John , what think you now ? ''
`` What would my noble father not give to be by our side this day ?
Have you seen that they have left their horses ? ''
`` You speak wisely , John .
But these horsemen who form in front and ride slowly towards us , what make you of them ? ''
Then of a sudden the Prince raised his hand and gave a cry .
Chandos echoed it , it swelled down the line , and with one mighty chorus of twanging strings and hissing shafts the long-pent storm broke at last .
`` Nay , nay , stint thy talk , Bartholomew ! ''
`` Here is poor Ned with his head cloven , and it would be more fitting if you were saying aves for his soul , instead of all this bobance and boasting .
Now , now , Tom of Beverley ? ''
But the Prince 's courage flamed the higher as the shadow fell , while his dark eyes gleamed with a soldier 's pride as he glanced round him at his weary comrades , and then at the dense masses of the King 's battle which now , with a hundred trumpets blaring and a thousand pennons waving , rolled slowly over the plain .
`` Come what may , John , this has been a most noble meeting , '' said he .
`` They will not be ashamed of us in England .
Take heart , my friends , for if we conquer we shall carry the glory ever with us ; but if we be slain then we die most worshipfully and in high honor , as we have ever prayed that we might die , and we leave behind us our brothers and kinsmen who will assuredly avenge us .
It is but one more effort , and all will be well .
Warwick , Oxford , Salisbury , Suffolk , every man to the front !
My banner to the front also !
Your horses , fair sirs !
The archers are spent , and our own good lances must win the field this day .
Advance , Walter , and may God and Saint George be with England ! ''
`` I like it not , fair sir .
The weight is overgreat , '' he whispered to the Prince .
`` How would you order it , John ?
Speak what is in your mind . ''
`` Nay , John , I would keep you at my side .
But you speak well , Jean , and you shall do even as you have said .
Go ask the Earl of Oxford for a hundred men-at-arms and as many hobblers , that you may ride round the mound yonder , and so fall upon them unseen .
Let all that are left of the archers gather on each side , shoot away their arrows , and then fight as best they may .
Wait till they are past yonder thorn-bush and then , Walter , bear my banner straight against that of the King of France .
Fair sirs , may God and the thought of your ladies hold high your hearts ! ''
An instant later he was by Chandos ' side once more and they were bursting together through the last ranks of the gallant group who had fought so bravely to the end .
Behind them was one long swath of the dead and the wounded .
In front the whole wide plain was covered with the flying French and their pursuers .
`` Well for him that he has met his end , '' said the angry Prince .
`` Put him on his shield , Hubert , and let four archers bear him to the monastery .
Lay him at the feet of the Cardinal and say that by this sign I greet him .
Place my flag on yonder high bush , Walter , and let my tent be raised there , that my friends may know where to seek me . ''
A shout of joy rose from the warriors around him .
`` The King of France !
The King of France a prisoner ! ''
they cried in an ecstasy .
At all times there was growling and snapping betwixt the English and their allies of France .
The Prince saw how easily this might set a light to such a flame as could not readily be quenched .
It must be stamped out now ere it had time to mount .
The King looked slowly round .
`` There was a devil of a yellow horse , '' said he .
`` My poor palfrey went over like a skittle-pin before a ball .
Of the rider I know nothing save that he bore red roses on a silver shield .
by Saint Denis , there is the man himself , and there his thrice-accursed horse ! ''
`` And left him lying .
Then the surrender was not complete , and by the laws of war the ransom goes to Denis de Morbecque , if his story be true . ''
`` Then the ransom is yours , Denis .
But for my part I swear by my father's soul that I had rather have the honor this Squire has gathered than all the richest ransoms of France . ''
Two months have passed , and the long slopes of Hindhead are russet with the faded ferns -- the fuzzy brown pelt which wraps the chilling earth .
With whoop and scream the wild November wind sweeps over the great rolling downs , tossing the branches of the Cosford beeches , and rattling at the rude latticed windows .
The stout old knight of Duplin , grown even a little stouter , with whiter beard to fringe an ever redder face , sits as of yore at the head of his own board .
A well-heaped platter flanked by a foaming tankard stands before him .
At his right sits the Lady Mary , her dark , plain , queenly face marked deep with those years of weary waiting , but bearing the gentle grace and dignity which only sorrow and restraint can give .
On his left is Matthew , the old priest .
Long ago the golden-haired beauty had passed from Cosford to Fernhurst , where the young and beautiful Lady Edith Brocas is the belle of all Sussex , a sunbeam of smiles and merriment , save perhaps when her thoughts for an instant fly back to that dread night when she was plucked from under the very talons of the foul hawk of Shalford .
The old priest shook his head .
`` Nay , these charms are tricks of the Devil , '' said he .
`` Holy Church lends them no countenance , for they are neither good nor fair .
But how is it now with your tapestry , Lady Mary ?
When last I was beneath this roof you had half done in five fair colors the story of Theseus and Ariadne . ''
`` It is half done still , holy father . ''
`` There are horsemen on the road . ''
`` But you may bide the morning ? ''
`` It will suffice if I start at noon . ''
`` Look at Barton 's shoulders , Mr .
`` Ay , sir , you have it theer -- you have it theer ! ''
said the fat , red-faced publican , in a thick , suety voice .
`` It 's the same wi ' poops .
Get 'em clean-bred an ' fine , and they 'll yark the thick 'uns -- yark 'em out o' their skins . ''
The young Cantab put his fingers on the assistant 's upper arm .
Then with his other hand on his wrist he bent the forearm sharply , and felt the biceps , as round and hard as a cricket-ball , spring up under his fingers .
He 'll do yet ! ''
`` And well I knew you would , '' said Purvis , `` for it would be somethin ' new to find Isaac Fawcett as a spoil-sport .
Well , then , we make up the hundred for the stake among us , and the fight stands -- always supposin' the young man is willin ' . ''
`` I never heard of Ted Barton , beyond seeing the name on a medicine label , '' said the assistant .
For a moment the absurdity of the thing drove every other thought out of Montgomery 's head .
But then there came a sudden revulsion .
-- all he wanted to complete his education was lying there ready to his hand , if only that hand were strong enough to pick it up .
He had thought bitterly that morning that there was no market for his strength , but here was one where his muscle might earn more in an hour than his brains in a year .
But a chill of doubt came over him .
Dr. Oldacre , new come from church , with an ostentatious Prayer-book in his kid-gloved hand , broke in upon his meditation .
`` You do n't go to service , I observe , Mr. Montgomery , '' said he , coldly .
`` Heard of him !
Heard of him ! ''
the little man could hardly articulate in his astonishment .
`` Why , sir , he 's the first mon o ' the district , an ' his name 's as well known in the West Riding as the winner o ' t ' Derby .
But Lor ' , sir '' -- here he stopped and rummaged among a heap of papers .
`` They are makin ' a fuss about him on account o ' his fight wi ' Ted Barton , and so the _Croxley Herald_ has his life an ' record , an ' here it is , an' thou canst read it for thysel ' . ''
`` Yes , and it set badly .
They ca ' him owd K behind his bock , for thot is how his two legs look .
But his arms -- well , if they was both stropped to a bench , as the sayin ' is , I wonder where the champion of England would be then . ''
`` And you no longer drink your beer ? ''
They were sitting alone at lunch , and the assistant thought that it would be a good opportunity of asking leave for the day of the fight .
`` You will remember , Doctor Oldacre , that when I came to you it was understood that I should have a clear day every month .
I have never claimed one .
But now there are reasons why I wish to have a holiday upon Saturday . ''
Doctor Oldacre gave in with a very bad grace .
`` Yes , sir . ''
`` In the country ? ''
`` Well , there is no prettier country when once you are past the iron-works .
What could be more delightful than to lie upon the Fells , basking in the sunshine , with perhaps some instructive and elevating book as your companion ?
I should recommend a visit to the ruins of St. Bridget 's Church , a very interesting relic of the early Norman era .
By the way , there is one objection which I see to your going to Croxley on Saturday .
It is upon that date , as I am informed , that that ruffianly glove-fight takes place .
You may find yourself molested by the blackguards whom it will attract . ''
`` Happen he 's a trifle on the fine side , '' said the publican .
`` Runs a bit light at the loins , to my way of thinkin ' . ''
`` We 've no time to listen to gossip , my boy .
We know all about the Master . ''
`` But thou doant , sir .
Nobody knows but me and mother , and we thought as we 'd like thy mon to know , sir , for we want him to fair bray him . ''
`` Thank you , my boy .
This is information worth having about his sight , '' said Wilson .
`` How came you to know so much ?
Who are you ? ''
`` I 'm his son , sir . ''
It was a squally May day , with bright sun-bursts and driving showers .
Montgomery worked all morning in the surgery getting his medicine made up .
We 'll see you through among us .
I only wonder the doctor has not heard , for it 's all over the country that you are to fight the Croxley Champion .
We 've had Armitage up about it already .
He 's the Master 's backer , you know .
He was n't sure that you were eligible .
The Master said he wanted you whether you were eligible or not .
Armitage has money on , and would have made trouble if he could .
But I showed him that you came within the conditions of the challenge , and he agreed that it was all right .
They think they have a soft thing on . ''
Wilson 's carriage and pair were at the door , the horses with blue-and-white rosettes at their ears , which were the colours of the Wilson Coal-pits , well known on many a football field .
At the avenue gate a crowd of some hundred pit-men and their wives gave a cheer as the carriage passed .
To the assistant it all seemed dream-like and extraordinary -- the strangest experience of his life , but with a thrill of human action and interest in it which made it passionately absorbing .
He lay back in the open carriage and saw the fluttering handkerchiefs from the doors and windows of the miners ' cottages .
Wilson had pinned a blue-and-white rosette upon his coat , and every one knew him as their champion .
`` Good luck , sir !
good luck to thee ! ''
they shouted from the roadside .
He felt that it was like some unromantic knight riding down to sordid lists , but there was something of chivalry in it all the same .
He fought for others as well as for himself .
He might fail from want of skill or strength , but deep in his sombre soul he vowed that it should never be for want of heart .
And then , as they approached the monstrous , uncouth line of bottle-shaped buildings which marked the smelting-works of Croxley , their long , writhing snake of dust was headed off by another but longer one which wound across their path .
The main-road into which their own opened was filled by the rushing current of traps .
The Wilson contingent halted until the others should get past .
The iron-men cheered and groaned , according to their humour , as they whirled past their antagonist .
Rough chaff flew back and forwards like iron nuts and splinters of coal .
`` Brought him up , then ! ''
`` Got t ' hearse for to fetch him back ? ''
`` Where 's t ' owd K-legs ? ''
`` Mon , mon , have thy photograph took -- 'twill mind thee of what thou used to look ! ''
-- he's now't but a half-baked doctor ! ''
`` Happen he 'll doctor thy Croxley Champion afore he 's through wi't . ''
`` Glad to meet you , sir .
Happy to make your acquaintance .
I make bold to say , sir , that we of Croxley admire your courage , Mr. Montgomery , and that our only hope is a fair fight and no favour and the best man win .
That 's our sentiment at Croxley . ''
`` So am I . ''
The prize-fighter had come out from his curtain , a squat , formidable figure , monstrous in chest and arms , limping slightly on his distorted leg .
His skin had none of the freshness and clearness of Montgomery 's , but was dusky and mottled , with one huge mole amid the mat of tangled black hair which thatched his mighty breast .
His weight bore no relation to his strength , for those huge shoulders and great arms , with brown , sledge-hammer fists , would have fitted the heaviest man that ever threw his cap into a ring .
But his loins and legs were slight in proportion .
Montgomery , on the other hand , was as symmetrical as a Greek statue .
It would be an encounter between a man who was specially fitted for one sport , and one who was equally capable of any .
The two looked curiously at each other : a bulldog , and a high-bred , clean-limbed terrier , each full of spirit .
`` That 's the good feelin ' I like , '' wheezed the fat butcher .
`` Good lads , both of them !
-- hard meat an ' good bone .
There 's no ill-feelin ' . ''
`` If he downs me , Gawd bless him ! ''
`` An ' if we down him , Gawd help him ! ''
The lovers ' quarrel was interrupted by the entrance of a new comer , a gentleman with a fur-collared overcoat and a very shiny top-hat -- a top-hat of a degree of glossiness which is seldom seen five miles from Hyde Park .
This hat he wore at the extreme back of his head , so that the lower surface of the brim made a kind of frame for his high , bald forehead , his keen eyes , his rugged and yet kindly face .
He bustled in with the quiet air of possession with which the ring-master enters the circus .
`` What right have you to wear them ?
I belong to the club myself . ''
`` I 'll never fight again . ''
Stapleton , with his shiny hat cocked backwards , and his large , bulging forehead swelling from under it , looked round him from beneath his bushy brows .
He was in the centre of a savage and dangerous mob .
Then he drew his watch from his pocket and held it dial upwards in his palm .
They exploded into blasphemy .
The breath of angry men smoked into his placid face .
A gnarled , grimy fist vibrated at the end of his nose .
`` We tell thee we want noan o ' thee .
Get thou back where thou com'st from . ''
And then in a crescendo shriek , `` Gentlemen ! ''
`` But t ' Maister can stop and hit rarely .
Happen he 'll mak ' him joomp when he gets his nief upon him . ''
`` Gentlemen , I will _not_ have this noise ! ''
`` I have been accustomed to preside at a well-conducted club , and not at a bear-garden . ''
This little man , with the tilted hat and the bulging forehead , dominated the whole assembly .
He was like a headmaster among his boys .
He glared round him , and nobody cared to meet his eye .
Strangely automatic is the human brain .
Without volition , without effort , there shot into the memory of this bewildered , staggering , half-stupefied man the one thing which could have saved him -- that blind eye of which the Master 's son had spoken .
It was the same as the other to look at , but Montgomery remembered that he had said that it was the left .
He reeled to the left side , half felled by a drive which lit upon his shoulder .
The Master pivoted round upon his leg and was at him in an instant .
`` Hold your tongue ! ''
And then a hum of exultation ran through their ranks as they realized that their tougher , harder , stronger man held the vantage , after all .
Neither of the men showed much sign of punishment .
Small gloves crush and numb , but they do not cut .
One of the Master 's eyes was even more flush with his cheek than Nature had made it .
Montgomery had two or three livid marks upon his body , and his face was haggard , save for that pink spot which the brandy had brought into either cheek .
He rocked a little as he stood opposite his man , and his hands drooped as if he felt the gloves to be an unutterable weight .
It was evident that he was spent and desperately weary .
If he received one other blow it must surely be fatal to him .
If he brought one home , what power could there be behind it , and what chance was there of its harming the colossus in front of him ?
It was the crisis of the fight .
This round must decide it .
`` Mix it oop , lad ; mix it oop ! ''
Even the savage eyes of the referee were unable to restrain the excited crowd .
`` I would have been rare pleased to shake thee by the throttle , lad , a short while syne , '' said he .
`` But I bear no ill-feelin ' again ' thee .
It was a rare poonch that brought me down -- I have not had a better since my second fight wi ' Billy Edwards in '89 .
Happen thou might think o ' goin' further wi ' this business .
If thou dost , and want a trainer , there 's not much inside t ' ropes as I do n't know .
Or happen thou might like to try it wi ' me old style and bare knuckles .
Thou hast but to write to t' iron-works to find me . ''
`` Yes , sir , I have been exceedingly inconvenienced . ''
Here , for the first time , he looked hard at the assistant .
`` Good heavens , Mr. Montgomery , what have you been doing with your left eye ? ''
`` And you got mixed up with that brutal crowd ? ''
`` The Master of Croxley . ''
`` Mr. Montgomery , in such a practice as mine , intimately associated as it is with the highest and most progressive elements of our small community , it is impossible -- -- ''
`` Then this way , please .
This is Rutherford 's historic bar .
A glass of sherry , please , for this gentleman .
You are rather sensitive , are you not ? ''
`` Well , yes -- pretty bad . ''
The students were pouring down the sloping street which led to the infirmary -- each with his little sheaf of note-books in his hand .
There were pale , frightened lads , fresh from the high schools , and callous old chronics , whose generation had passed on and left them .
They swept in an unbroken , tumultuous stream from the university gate to the hospital .
The figures and gait of the men were young , but there was little youth in most of their faces .
Some looked as if they ate too little -- a few as if they drank too much .
Tall and short , tweed-coated and black , round-shouldered , bespectacled , and slim , they crowded with clatter of feet and rattle of sticks through the hospital gate .
Now and again they thickened into two lines , as the carriage of a surgeon of the staff rolled over the cobblestones between .
Only a single row of heads intervened between them and the operating table .
It was of unpainted deal , plain , strong , and scrupulously clean .
A sheet of brown water-proofing covered half of it , and beneath stood a large tin tray full of sawdust .
On the further side , in front of the window , there was a board which was strewed with glittering instruments -- forceps , tenacula , saws , canulas , and trocars .
A line of knives , with long , thin , delicate blades , lay at one side .
Two young men lounged in front of this , one threading needles , the other doing something to a brass coffee-pot-like thing which hissed out puffs of steam .
`` What 's the use .
They ca n't get past the committee even if they got a vote in the House .
I was talking to -- -- ''
`` Talking to McDonald -- but I 'll tell you about it presently . ''
He walked back to the patient , who was breathing in long , heavy gasps .
`` I propose , '' said he , passing his hand over the tumour in an almost caressing fashion , `` to make a free incision over the posterior border , and to take another forward at right angles to the lower end of it .
Might I trouble you for a medium knife , Mr .
`` What on earth did you faint about ? ''
`` Why , that cancer . ''
`` Well , it ai n't so hard to reckon , '' said a sharp-featured pale-faced woman with watery blue eyes .
`` He 's been at the battle o ' Waterloo , and has the pension and medal to prove it . ''
`` It were fifteen year after the beginnin ' of the century , '' cried a younger woman , who had stood leaning against the wall , with a smile of superior knowledge upon her face .
`` My Bill was a-saying so last Sabbath , when I spoke to him o ' old Daddy Brewster , here . ''
`` And suppose he spoke truth , Missus Simpson , 'ow long agone do that make it ? ''
`` It 's eighty-one now , '' said the original speaker , checking off the years upon her coarse red fingers , `` and that were fifteen .
Ten and ten , and ten , and ten , and ten -- why , it 's only sixty-and-six year , so he ai n't so old after all . ''
`` Listen to him now , '' she answered , with her hand half raised and her head turned slantwise towards the open door .
From the upper floor there came a shuffling , sliding sound with a sharp tapping of a stick .
`` There he go back and forrards , doing what he call his sentry go .
'Arf the night through he 's at that game , the silly old juggins .
At six o'clock this very mornin there he was beatin ' with a stick at my door .
'Turn out , guard ! '
he cried , and a lot more jargon that I could make nothing of .
Then what with his coughin ' and 'awkin ' and spittin ' , there ai n't no gettin ' a wink o ' sleep .
Hark to him now ! ''
`` Missus Simpson , Missus Simpson ! ''
cried a cracked and querulous voice from above .
`` Blessed if he ai n't like a baby cryin ' for its pap , '' said the young woman .
The whole company were about to shuffle off to the public house , when a young girl stepped across the road and touched the housekeeper timidly upon the arm .
`` I think that is No .
56 Arsenal View , '' she said .
`` Can you tell me if Mr. Brewster lives here ? ''
`` Lor , now , think o ' that !
You ai n't afeard o ' those newfangled things !
By Jimini , to think of you comin ' by railroad like that !
What 's the world a-comin ' to ! ''
`` Yes , uncle , and I 'm sure you must be proud of it . ''
`` Ah , it was a great day for me !
The Regent was there , and a fine body of a man too !
'The ridgment is proud of you , ' says he .
'And I 'm proud of the ridgment , ' say I .
'A damned good answer too ! '
says he to Lord Hill , and they both bu'st out a-laughin ' .
But what be you a-peepin ' out o ' the window for ? ''
`` Oh , uncle , here 's a regiment of soldiers coming down the street with the band playing in front of them . ''
`` A ridgment , eh ?
Where be my glasses ?
Lor , but I can hear the band , as plain as plain !
Here 's the pioneers an ' the drum-major !
What be their number , lass ? ''
His eyes were shining and his bony yellow fingers , like the claws of some fierce old bird , dug into her shoulder .
`` You must be careful , '' he said .
`` You must take no liberties . ''
The thin tide of life seemed to thrill rather than to throb under his finger .
`` Good-morning , miss , '' said he , raising one thick finger to his jaunty , yellow-banded cap .
`` I b'lieve there 's an old gentleman lives here of the name of Brewster , who was engaged in the battle o ' Waterloo ? ''
`` It 's my granduncle , sir , '' said Norah , casting down her eyes before the keen , critical gaze of the young soldier .
`` He is in the front parlour . ''
`` The non-commissioned mess would be proud and honoured to see you , sir , '' said Sergeant Macdonald ; `` and if you could step as far you'll always find a pipe o ' baccy and a glass o ' grog a-waitin ' you . ''
`` Do n't you fret yourself , sir , '' said the sergeant .
`` 'Ere 's a wooden pipe with an amber mouth , if you 'll do me the honour to accept it from me .
I 'd be real glad if you will take it . ''
`` Yes , sir .
I was on my way back from the butts when I looked in . ''
`` Ah , that he would , sir ! ''
cried the sergeant ; `` and God send us another like him .
But I 've wearied you enough for one sitting .
I 'll look in again , and I 'll bring a comrade or two with me , if I may , for there is n't one but would be proud to have speech with you . ''
`` Oh , yes , uncle , surely ! ''
An elderly , grey-whiskered gentleman had been walking down the street , glancing up at the numbers of the houses .
Now as his eyes fell upon the old man , he came straight for him .
`` I am that man , sir , though we called it the Third Guards in those days .
It was a fine ridgment , and they only need me to make up a full muster . ''
`` Let me see your teeth . ''
He glanced at them , and again made the gentle , clicking sound of sympathy and disapprobation .
The young baronet sank back in his chair , and his chin fell forwards upon his chest .
The doctor sprang to a side-table and poured out half a glass of liqueur brandy which he held to his patient 's lips .
A little fleck of colour came into his cheeks as he drank it down .
`` I see that you have heard of him , '' said the young baronet .
`` He died horribly , I have been told ; but not more horribly than he had lived .
My father was his only son .
He was a studious man , fond of books and canaries and the country ; but his innocent life did not save him . ''
`` You would have me simply write brutally and break the engagement at the last moment without a reason .
I tell you I could n't do it . ''
He wrote an abrupt note of a few lines .
Then with a sudden impulse he tore it to shreds and flung it into the fireplace .
`` Dear , dear , you should n't do that . ''
I never touch beer . ''
`` Oh , certainly ! ''
These eternal little sordid money troubles were more trying to the doctor than plain living or scanty food .
He took out his purse and slid the contents on to the table .
There were two half-crowns and some pennies .
In his drawer he had ten golden sovereigns .
But those were his rent .
If he once broke in upon them he was lost .
He would starve first .
`` Dear me ! ''
said he , with a smile , as at some strange , unheard-of incident .
`` I have run short of small change .
I am afraid I shall have to call upon the company , after all . ''
In an instant he was rubbing his hands again with his blandest professional smile .
These were patients , then , whom he had tried to hunt from his doorstep -- the very first patients , whom he had waited for so impatiently .
They did not look very promising .
The man , a tall , lank-haired gypsy , had gone back to the horse 's head .
There remained a small , hard-faced woman with a great bruise all round her eye .
She wore a yellow silk handkerchief round her head , and a baby , tucked in a red shawl , was pressed to her bosom .
She fumbled in her pocket , craning awkwardly to keep her grip upon the baby .
`` Here 's sevenpence , '' she said at last , holding out a little pile of copper coins .
`` I 'll give you that and a wicker footstool . ''
He went into the back room and lit the spirit-kettle to boil the water for his tea , laughing the while at the recollection of his recent interview .
If all patients were like this one it could easily be reckoned how many it would take to ruin him completely .
Putting aside the dirt upon his carpet and the loss of time , there were twopence gone upon the bandage , fourpence or more upon the medicine , to say nothing of phial , cork , label , and paper .
Then he had given her fivepence , so that his first patient had absorbed altogether not less than one sixth of his available capital .
If five more were to come he would be a broken man .
He sat down upon the portmanteau and shook with laughter at the thought , while he measured out his one spoonful and a half of tea at one shilling eightpence into the brown earthenware teapot .
Suddenly , however , the laugh faded from his face , and he cocked his ear towards the door , standing listening with a slanting head and a sidelong eye .
There had been a rasping of wheels against the curb , the sound of steps outside , and then a loud peal at the bell .
With his teaspoon in his hand he peeped round the corner and saw with amazement that a carriage and pair were waiting outside , and that a powdered footman was standing at the door .
The spoon tinkled down upon the floor , and he stood gazing in bewilderment .
Then , pulling himself together , he threw open the door .
The footman nodded and was off in an instant , while the coachman lashed his horses and the carriage flew down the street .
But he had one source of information .
At the corner of the street was a small shop where one of the oldest inhabitants dispensed newspapers and gossip .
He could get information there if anywhere .
He put on his well-brushed top hat , secreted instruments and bandages in all his pockets , and without waiting for his tea closed up his establishment and started off upon his adventure .
The stationer at the corner was a human directory to every one and everything in Sutton , so that he soon had all the information which he wanted .
Sir John Millbank was very well known in the town , it seemed .
He was a merchant prince , an exporter of pens , three times mayor , and reported to be fully worth two millions sterling .
And then another doubt assailed him , and he turned back into the shop .
Well , then , where 's Mason ? ''
`` I have not the pleasure of his acquaintance . ''
`` Would you , by Jove !
Do you think I 'll let my wife get worse while the doctor is coolly kicking his heels in the room below ?
No , sir , I am a plain man , and I tell you that you will either go up or go out . ''
The style of speech jarred upon the doctor 's sense of the fitness of things , but still when a man 's wife is ill much may be overlooked .
He contented himself by bowing somewhat stiffly .
`` I shall go up , if you insist upon it , '' said he .
`` Did you think that in a case of such importance I should call in a junior local practitioner !
This is Dr. Adam Wilkinson , lecturer on pulmonary diseases at Regent 's College , London , physician upon the staff of the St. Swithin 's Hospital , and author of a dozen works upon the subject .
He happened to be in Sutton upon a visit , and I thought I would utilise his presence to have a first-rate opinion upon Lady Millbank . ''
what d 'ye mean ? ''
`` I could not possibly take Dr. Mason 's place in the middle of a case like this .
It would be a most unprofessional act . ''
Johnson 's wife was a quiet little woman , with brown hair and gentle ways .
His affection for her was the one positive trait in his character .
Together they would lay out the shop window every Monday morning , the spotless shirts in their green cardboard boxes below , the neckties above hung in rows over the brass rails , the cheap studs glistening from the white cards at either side , while in the background were the rows of cloth caps and the bank of boxes in which the more valuable hats were screened from the sunlight .
She kept the books and sent out the bills .
No one but she knew the joys and sorrows which crept into his small life .
She had shared his exultations when the gentleman who was going to India had bought ten dozen shirts and an incredible number of collars , and she had been as stricken as he when , after the goods had gone , the bill was returned from the hotel address with the intimation that no such person had lodged there .
For five years they had worked , building up the business , thrown together all the more closely because their marriage had been a childless one .
Now , however , there were signs that a change was at hand , and that speedily .
She was unable to come downstairs , and her mother , Mrs. Peyton , came over from Camberwell to nurse her and to welcome her grandchild .
Fortunately he had not sent the cab away , and he was soon back at Bridport Place .
Miles had not returned yet , but they were expecting him every instant .
Johnson waited , drumming his fingers on his knees , in a high , dim lit room , the air of which was charged with a faint , sickly smell of ether .
The furniture was massive , and the books in the shelves were sombre , and a squat black clock ticked mournfully on the mantelpiece .
It told him that it was half-past seven , and that he had been gone an hour and a quarter .
Whatever would the women think of him !
Every time that a distant door slammed he sprang from his chair in a quiver of eagerness .
His ears strained to catch the deep notes of the doctor 's voice .
And then , suddenly , with a gush of joy he heard a quick step outside , and the sharp click of the key in the lock .
In an instant he was out in the hall , before the doctor 's foot was over the threshold .
`` I do n't -- -- ''
A sort of horror filled Robert Johnson as he gazed at this man who could think about his dinner at such a moment .
He had not imagination enough to realise that the experience which seemed so appallingly important to him , was the merest everyday matter of business to the medical man who could not have lived for a year had he not , amid the rush of work , remembered what was due to his own health .
To Johnson he seemed little better than a monster .
His thoughts were bitter as he sped back to his shop .
She 's got to be worse , poor dear , before she can be better .
`` There is no immediate cause for alarm , '' said Dr .
`` The case is not all that we could wish it .
Still we will hope for the best . ''
`` Well , there is always danger , of course .
It is not altogether a favourable case , but still it might be much worse .
I have given her a draught .
I saw as I passed that they have been doing a little building opposite to you .
It 's an improving quarter .
The rents go higher and higher .
You have a lease of your own little place , eh ? ''
`` Oh yes , she did very well .
He slanted his ear to the ceiling with a questioning face , and then darted swiftly from the room .
It was March and the evenings were chill , so Jane had lit the fire , but the wind drove the smoke downwards and the air was full of its acrid taint .
Johnson felt chilled to the bone , though rather by his apprehensions than by the weather .
He crouched over the fire with his thin white hands held out to the blaze .
At ten o'clock Jane brought in the joint of cold meat and laid his place for supper , but he could not bring himself to touch it .
He drank a glass of the beer , however , and felt the better for it .
The tension of his nerves seemed to have reacted upon his hearing , and he was able to follow the most trivial things in the room above .
Once , when the beer was still heartening him , he nerved himself to creep on tiptoe up the stair and to listen to what was going on .
The bedroom door was half an inch open , and through the slit he could catch a glimpse of the clean-shaven face of the doctor , looking wearier and more anxious than before .
Then he rushed downstairs like a lunatic , and running to the door he tried to distract his thoughts by watching what ; was going on in the street .
The shops were all shut , and some rollicking boon companions came shouting along from the public-house .
He stayed at the door until the stragglers had thinned down , and then came back to his seat by the fire .
In his dim brain he was asking himself questions which had never intruded themselves before .
Where was the justice of it ?
What had his sweet , innocent little wife done that she should be used so ?
Why was nature so cruel ?
He was frightened at his own thoughts , and yet wondered that they had never occurred to him before .
Go to my house first and ask for the green baize bag .
The assistant will give it to you .
Tell him I want the A. C. E. mixture .
Her heart is too weak for chloroform .
Then go for Pritchard and bring him back with you . ''
`` I ca n't stand shivering here all night , '' cried the voice .
`` Say who you are and what you want or I shut the tube . ''
`` Mind you take your cravat , John , '' and he impatiently growled something over his shoulder in reply .
`` We do n't want to break a record , '' said he , pulling up and panting after attempting to keep up with Johnson for five minutes .
`` I would go quicker if I could , my dear sir , and I quite sympathise with your anxiety , but really I ca n't manage it . ''
So Johnson , on fire with impatience , had to slow down until they reached the New North Road , when he ran ahead and had the door open for the doctor when he came .
He heard the two meet outside the bed-room , and caught scraps of their conversation .
`` Sorry to knock you up -- nasty case -- decent people . ''
Then it sank into a mumble and the door closed behind them .
`` So do I , '' said the senior man , and they laughed as they shook hands .
`` No , thanks .
I 'm expecting another case . ''
The firm step and the dragging one passed away to the right and the left .
Johnson turned from the door still with that turmoil of joy in his heart .
He seemed to be making a new start in life .
He felt that he was a stronger and a deeper man .
Perhaps all this suffering had an object then .
It might prove to be a blessing both to his wife and to him .
The very thought was one which he would have been incapable of conceiving twelve hours before .
He was full of new emotions .
If there had been a harrowing there had been a planting too .
But he felt a resentment to the little , red , blinking creature .
He could not forgive it yet for that long night of misery .
He caught sight of a white face in the bed and he ran towards it with such love and pity as his speech could find no words for .
It was on such another day that I first saw my old man .
He came to my bench just as I was leaving it .
My eye must have picked him out even in a crowded street , for he was a man of large frame and fine presence , with something of distinction in the set of his lip and the poise of his head .
He limped up the winding path leaning heavily upon his stick , as though those great shoulders had become too much at last for the failing limbs that bore them .
As he approached , my eyes caught Nature 's danger signal , that faint bluish tinge in nose and lip which tells of a labouring heart .
`` I was here when there was scarce light to see the path . ''
`` Ah , then you can not quite understand it .
My wife and I have been married for nearly fifty years , and we have never been parted , never at all , until now . ''
`` I have been so driven inwards during these few last days !
Ah , what a nightmare it has been !
Perhaps it may seem strange to you that an old fellow like me should feel like this . ''
`` No credit to me , sir !
There 's not a man on this planet but would feel the same if he had the good fortune to be married to such a woman .
Perhaps , because you see me like this , and hear me speak of our long life together , you conceive that she is old , too . ''
His pamphlet , On the Mesoblastic Origin of Excitomotor Nerve Roots , had won him his fellowship of the Royal Society ; and his researches , Upon the Nature of Bathybius , with some Remarks upon Lithococci , had been translated into at least three European languages .
He had been referred to by one of the greatest living authorities as being the very type and embodiment of all that was best in modern science .
No wonder , then , that when the commercial city of Birchespool decided to create a medical school , they were only too glad to confer the chair of physiology upon Mr. Ainslie Grey .
They valued him the more from the conviction that their class was only one step in his upward journey , and that the first vacancy would remove him to some more illustrious seat of learning .
`` No , Ada ; in many respects you approach the superior or male type . ''
The Professor bowed over his egg with the manner of one who utters a courtly compliment ; but the lady pouted , and gave an impatient little shrug of her shoulders .
His sister started , and made an effort to conceal her expression of annoyance .
She even stammered out some few words of congratulation , but a vacant look had come into her brother 's eyes , and he was evidently not listening to her .
`` On the contrary , my dear Ada , I believe in the differentiation of protoplasm . ''
His small eyes glittered with sly facetiousness as he shot a twinkle at his sister .
She sat very stiff , and traced patterns upon the cloth with the sugar-tongs .
Nature 's Chronicle was one of the many books in which Professor Ainslie Grey had enforced the negative doctrines of scientific agnosticism .
`` I would not hurry you unduly , '' he continued .
`` I know that it is a matter which can scarcely be decided off-hand .
In my own case , it cost me some thought before I ventured to make the suggestion .
I am not an emotional man , but I am conscious in your presence of the great evolutionary instinct which makes either sex the complement of the other . ''
`` I am forced to . ''
`` How inflexible you are ! ''
she exclaimed ; `` you would draw love down to the level of physics . ''
`` I have reason to believe , '' said the Professor , `` that my position here will prove to be only a stepping-stone to some wider scene of scientific activity .
Yet , even here , my chair brings me in some fifteen hundred pounds a year , which is supplemented by a few hundreds from my books .
I should therefore be in a position to provide you with those comforts to which you are accustomed .
So much for my pecuniary position .
As to my constitution , it has always been sound .
I have never suffered from any illness in my life , save fleeting attacks of cephalalgia , the result of too prolonged a stimulation of the centres of cerebration .
My father and mother had no sign of any morbid diathesis , but I will not conceal from you that my grandfather was afflicted with podagra . ''
`` It is gout , '' said the Professor .
`` Oh , is that all ?
It sounded much worse than that . ''
A struggle was evidently going on in her mind .
Her eyes were cast down , her little slipper tapped the lawn , and her fingers played nervously with her chatelain .
Suddenly , with a sharp , quick gesture which had in it something of ABANDON and recklessness , she held out her hand to her companion .
`` It is certainly very fine weather , '' the Professor answered .
`` Ah , Professor , I have always the same complaint against you .
A want of rapport with the deeper meanings of nature .
Shall I say a want of imagination .
You do not feel an emotional thrill at the singing of that thrush ? ''
`` But the heaviest thing is not always the strongest , '' said Mrs. O'James , laughing .
`` Is n't there a law of compensation in science ?
May we not hope to make up in quality for what we lack in quantity ? ''
`` You are very kind , Professor Grey -- you have always been very kind , '' said the other .
`` I approached Miss Grey upon the subject ; she did not say No . ''
`` On the comparative anatomy of the vermiform appendix , by James M'Murdo O'Brien , '' said the Professor , sonorously .
`` It is a glorious subject -- a subject which lies at the very root of evolutionary philosophy . ''
`` The vermiform appendix -- -- '' began the Professor .
`` You have a right to know everything -- you and Miss Grey .
It is not a matter on which I can well speak to her direct .
Poor Jinny was the best of women , but she was open to flattery , and liable to be misled by designing persons .
She was untrue to me , Grey .
It is a hard thing to say of the dead , but she was untrue to me .
She fled to Auckland with a man whom she had known before her marriage .
The brig which carried them foundered , and not a soul was saved . ''
`` You will lunch with us ? ''
A couple of days later the maid carried a card just after breakfast into the library where the Professor sat revising his morning lecture .
It announced the re-arrival of Dr. James M'Murdo O'Brien .
Their meeting was effusively genial on the part of the younger man , and coldly precise on that of his former teacher .
`` And your research on Vallisneria ? ''
The Professor shook his head .
She sank back among the cushions with the same white , cold , dead look upon her face .
The Professor stood with his back to the empty fireplace and glanced from the one to the other .
The Professor stood rigidly upon the hearthrug .
His long , thin fingers were intertwined , and his head sunk a little forward .
His two companions had eyes only for each other .
`` Because you are right , James .
I HAVE treated you cruelly -- shamefully .
But it is not as bad as you think . ''
`` I shall go with you , James , '' she said .
Under some foolish , aimless impulse , he took a few quick steps towards the door .
Then he turned , and throwing himself into his study-chair he plunged back into his work .
There was little scandal about this singular domestic incident .
The Professor had few personal friends , and seldom went into society .
His marriage had been so quiet that most of his colleagues had never ceased to regard him as a bachelor .
Mrs. Esdaile and a few others might talk , but their field for gossip was limited , for they could only guess vaguely at the cause of this sudden separation .
Douglas Stone in his prime was one of the most remarkable men in England .
Indeed , he could hardly be said to have ever reached his prime , for he was but nine-and-thirty at the time of this little incident .
Those who knew him best were aware that , famous as he was as a surgeon , he might have succeeded with even greater rapidity in any of a dozen lines of life .
He could have cut his way to fame as a soldier , struggled to it as an explorer , bullied for it in the courts , or built it out of stone and iron as an engineer .
He was born to be great , for he could plan what another man dare not do , and he could do what another man dare not plan .
In surgery none could follow him .
His nerve , his judgment , his intuition , were things apart .
Again and again his knife cut away death , but grazed the very springs of life in doing it , until his assistants were as white as the patient .
His energy , his audacity , his full-blooded self-confidence -- does not the memory of them still linger to the south of Marylebone Road and the north of Oxford Street ?
His vices were as magnificent as his virtues , and infinitely more picturesque .
Large as was his income , and it was the third largest of all professional men in London , it was far beneath the luxury of his living .
Deep in his complex nature lay a rich vein of sensualism , at the sport of which he placed all the prizes of his life .
The eye , the ear , the touch , the palate -- all were his masters .
The bouquet of old vintages , the scent of rare exotics , the curves and tints of the daintiest potteries of Europe -- it was to these that the quick-running stream of gold was transformed .
And then there came his sudden mad passion for Lady Sannox , when a single interview with two challenging glances and a whispered word set him ablaze .
She was the loveliest woman in London , and the only one to him .
He was one of the handsomest men in London , but not the only one to her .
She had a liking for new experiences , and was gracious to most men who wooed her .
It may have been cause or it may have been effect that Lord Sannox looked fifty , though he was but six-and-thirty .
A few moments later the butler swung open the door and ushered in a small and decrepit man , who walked with a bent back and with the forward push of the face and blink of the eyes which goes with extreme short sight .
His face was swarthy , and his hair and beard of the deepest black .
In one hand he held a turban of white muslin striped with red , in the other a small chamois leather bag .
`` I see , '' said Douglas Stone , rising .
`` And you wish me to dress the wound ? ''
`` No drug can cure , but the knife may . ''
`` Ah , that also is forbidden to us .
It is a spirit , and we make no use of such things . ''
You would allow your wife to go through an operation without an anaesthetic ? ''
The surgeon pressed the spring of his repeater and listened to the little tings which told him the hour .
It was a quarter past nine .
He calculated the distances , and the short time which it would take him to perform so trivial an operation .
He ought to reach Lady Sannox by ten o'clock .
Through the fogged windows he saw the blurred gas-lamps dancing past , with occasionally the broader glare of a shop front .
The rain was pelting and rattling upon the leathern top of the carriage and the wheels swashed as they rolled through puddle and mud .
Opposite to him the white headgear of his companion gleamed faintly through the obscurity .
The surgeon felt in his pockets and arranged his needles , his ligatures and his safety-pins , that no time might be wasted when they arrived .
He chafed with impatience and drummed his foot upon the floor .
But the cab slowed down at last and pulled up .
In an instant Douglas Stone was out , and the Smyrna merchant 's toe was at his very heel .
It was a mean-looking house in a narrow and sordid street .
The surgeon , who knew his London well , cast a swift glance into the shadows , but there was nothing distinctive -- no shop , no movement , nothing but a double line of dull , flat-faced houses , a double stretch of wet flagstones which gleamed in the lamplight , and a double rush of water in the gutters which swirled and gurgled towards the sewer gratings .
The door which faced them was blotched and discoloured , and a faint light in the fan pane above it served to show the dust and the grime which covered it .
Above , in one of the bedroom windows , there was a dull yellow glimmer .
The merchant knocked loudly , and , as he turned his dark face towards the light , Douglas Stone could see that it was contracted with anxiety .
A bolt was drawn , and an elderly woman with a taper stood in the doorway , shielding the thin flame with her gnarled hand .
The bedroom was on the second landing .
Douglas Stone followed the old nurse into it , with the merchant at his heels .
Here , at least , there was furniture and to spare .
The floor was littered and the corners piled with Turkish cabinets , inlaid tables , coats of chain mail , strange pipes , and grotesque weapons .
A single small lamp stood upon a bracket on the wall .
Douglas Stone took it down , and picking his way among the lumber , walked over to a couch in the corner , on which lay a woman dressed in the Turkish fashion , with yashmak and veil .
The lower part of the face was exposed , and the surgeon saw a jagged cut which zigzagged along the border of the under lip .
The husband wrung his hands in incontrollable agitation .
sir , sir ! ''
`` Do not trifle .
You do not know .
I know , and I give you my assurance that an operation is absolutely necessary .
Only the knife can save her . ''
`` I can understand that the mouth will not be a pretty one to kiss . ''
`` Yes , she has had a good dose . ''
The same thought had crossed the surgeon 's mind .
He grasped the wounded lip with his forceps , and with two swift cuts he took out a broad V-shaped piece .
The woman sprang up on the couch with a dreadful gurgling scream .
Her covering was torn from her face .
It was a face that he knew .
In spite of that protruding upper lip and that slobber of blood , it was a face that he knew .
She kept on putting her hand up to the gap and screaming .
Douglas Stone sat down at the foot of the couch with his knife and his forceps .
The room was whirling round , and he had felt something go like a ripping seam behind his ear .
A bystander would have said that his face was the more ghastly of the two .
As in a dream , or as if he had been looking at something at the play , he was conscious that the Turk 's hair and beard lay upon the table , and that Lord Sannox was leaning against the wall with his hand to his side , laughing silently .
The screams had died away now , and the dreadful head had dropped back again upon the pillow , but Douglas Stone still sat motionless , and Lord Sannox still chuckled quietly to himself .
`` I had long intended to make a little example , '' said Lord Sannox , suavely .
`` Your note of Wednesday miscarried , and I have it here in my pocket-book .
I took some pains in carrying out my idea .
The wound , by the way , was from nothing more dangerous than my signet ring . ''
`` You see you have kept your appointment after all , '' said Lord Sannox .
`` You sent for me , Charles ? ''
`` Whose carriage was that which drove away just now ? ''
`` Tut , tut ! ''
cried the Minister impatiently , slapping on the plush arm of his chair .
`` This is too much .
I tell you , Clara , I give you my word , that all my official duties , all the affairs of this great empire , do not give me the trouble that Ida does . ''
`` The more reason that she should not make a mesalliance . ''
`` Now , Charlie , you must not excite yourself over public matters .
Be very good and cool and reasonable , like a darling .
I am sure that I may trust you . ''
`` So I saw , '' said the invalid , smiling up at his chief .
`` Well , well , we must let them see that the country is not entirely ruled from Printing House Square yet .
We must keep our own course without faltering . ''
`` Pure formalities , nothing more .
By-the-way , the Macedonian prisoners are all right . ''
`` We adjourned all other business until we should have you with us next week .
The question of a dissolution begins to press .
The reports from the provinces are excellent . ''
`` It had better be filled at once .
The longer delay the more applicants . ''
`` May I have one word ? ''
`` And Lord Arthur has it . ''
`` He will be happy . ''
A great deal may be done in a week .
I shall order your trousseau to-day . ''
`` But , between ourselves , he married a diplomatist too .
If he can manage the British Empire , I think that I can manage him , Ida .
How long have you been engaged , child ? ''
`` I have no doubt of it . ''
`` Having deliberately formed the opinion that Tangier is the best place for our young patient , I do not think that I shall readily change my conviction . ''
But her mother 's expression was rather that of the general who looked upon the first smoke of the guns than of one who had won the victory .
`` Oh , yes ; he will come too , if he is well enough .
We must wait until Sir William goes , and , meanwhile , I shall write to Lord Arthur . ''
this pestilent toe ! ''
`` Sir William won't hear of my moving yet .
I do think he is the most completely obstinate and pig-headed man that I have ever met .
I tell him that he has mistaken his profession , and that I could find him a post at Constantinople .
We need a mule out there . ''
`` Poor Sir William ! ''
`` But how has he roused your wrath ? ''
`` He is so persistent-so dogmatic . ''
`` He said something to that effect before he went up to you . ''
`` He examined her lungs , Charles .
He did not say much , but his expression was very grave . ''
`` I have not disregarded it , '' said he .
`` There is your sister ? ''
`` She is going to Florida . ''
`` She is nursing her father .
It is out of the question . ''
`` You have written to the Archbishop . ''
The three men are all of that staid middle age which begins early and lasts late in the profession .
They are none of them famous , yet each is of good repute , and a fair type of his particular branch .
The portly man with the authoritative manner and the white , vitriol splash upon his cheek is Charley Manson , chief of the Wormley Asylum , and author of the brilliant monograph -- Obscure Nervous Lesions in the Unmarried .
He always wears his collar high like that , since the half-successful attempt of a student of Revelations to cut his throat with a splinter of glass .
The second , with the ruddy face and the merry brown eyes , is a general practitioner , a man of vast experience , who , with his three assistants and his five horses , takes twenty-five hundred a year in half-crown visits and shilling consultations out of the poorest quarter of a great city .
That cheery face of Theodore Foster is seen at the side of a hundred sick-beds a day , and if he has one-third more names on his visiting list than in his cash book he always promises himself that he will get level some day when a millionaire with a chronic complaint -- the ideal combination -- shall seek his services .
The third , sitting on the right with his dress shoes shining on the top of the fender , is Hargrave , the rising surgeon .
His face has none of the broad humanity of Theodore Foster 's , the eye is stern and critical , the mouth straight and severe , but there is strength and decision in every line of it , and it is nerve rather than sympathy which the patient demands when he is bad enough to come to Hargrave 's door .
He calls himself a jawman `` a mere jawman '' as he modestly puts it , but in point of fact he is too young and too poor to confine himself to a specialty , and there is nothing surgical which Hargrave has not the skill and the audacity to do .
`` Do n't you find it a very wearing branch of the profession ? ''
asks Foster after a pause .
`` Well , you hear men talk about it as though it were , but I tell you it 's much nearer tragedy .
Take some poor , raw , young fellow who has just put up his plate in a strange town .
He has found it a trial all his life , perhaps , to talk to a woman about lawn tennis and church services .
When a young man IS shy he is shyer than any girl .
Then down comes an anxious mother and consults him upon the most intimate family matters .
'I shall never go to that doctor again , ' says she afterwards .
'His manner is so stiff and unsympathetic . '
Why , the poor lad was struck dumb and paralysed .
I have known general practitioners who were so shy that they could not bring themselves to ask the way in the street .
Fancy what sensitive men like that must endure before they get broken in to medical practice .
And then they know that nothing is so catching as shyness , and that if they do not keep a face of stone , their patient will be covered with confusion .
And so they keep their face of stone , and earn the reputation perhaps of having a heart to correspond .
I suppose nothing would shake YOUR nerve , Manson . ''
`` When a man is up to his neck in practice , my boy , he has no time to gratify his private curiosity .
Things shoot across him and he gets a glimpse of them , only to recall them , perhaps , at some quiet moment like this .
But I 've always felt , Manson , that your line had as much of the terrible in it as any other . ''
`` The British public will have to know what G. P. is , '' says the alienist gravely .
`` It 's increasing by leaps and bounds , and it has the distinction of being absolutely incurable .
General paralysis is its full title , and I tell you it promises to be a perfect scourge .
Here's a fairly typical case now which I saw last Monday week .
A young farmer , a splendid fellow , surprised his fellows by taking a very rosy view of things at a time when the whole country-side was grumbling .
He was going to give up wheat , give up arable land , too , if it did n't pay , plant two thousand acres of rhododendrons and get a monopoly of the supply for Covent Garden -- there was no end to his schemes , all sane enough but just a bit inflated .
I called at the farm , not to see him , but on an altogether different matter .
Something about the man 's way of talking struck me and I watched him narrowly .
His lip had a trick of quivering , his words slurred themselves together , and so did his handwriting when he had occasion to draw up a small agreement .
A closer inspection showed me that one of his pupils was ever so little larger than the other .
As I left the house his wife came after me .
'Is n't it splendid to see Job looking so well , doctor , ' said she ; 'he's that full of energy he can hardly keep himself quiet . '
I did not say anything , for I had not the heart , but I knew that the fellow was as much condemned to death as though he were lying in the cell at Newgate .
It was a characteristic case of incipient G. P . ''
Three little chuckles come from the front of the fire .
`` And one at last died , '' says the outsider .
The three medical men laugh as they walk towards their overcoats .
It was ten o'clock on a bright spring night , and Abercrombie Smith lay back in his arm-chair , his feet upon the fender , and his briar-root pipe between his lips .
In a similar chair , and equally at his ease , there lounged on the other side of the fireplace his old school friend Jephro Hastie .
Both men were in flannels , for they had spent their evening upon the river , but apart from their dress no one could look at their hard-cut , alert faces without seeing that they were open-air men -- men whose minds and tastes turned naturally to all that was manly and robust .
Hastie , indeed , was stroke of his college boat , and Smith was an even better oar , but a coming examination had already cast its shadow over him and held him to his work , save for the few hours a week which health demanded .
A litter of medical books upon the table , with scattered bones , models and anatomical plates , pointed to the extent as well as the nature of his studies , while a couple of single-sticks and a set of boxing-gloves above the mantelpiece hinted at the means by which , with Hastie 's help , he might take his exercise in its most compressed and least distant form .
They knew each other very well -- so well that they could sit now in that soothing silence which is the very highest development of companionship .
Hastie nodded , and they relapsed into a contented silence .
`` Only a faint , I think , '' said the medical student .
`` Just give me a hand with him .
You take his feet .
Now on to the sofa .
Can you kick all those little wooden devils off ?
What a litter it is !
Now he will be all right if we undo his collar and give him some water .
What has he been up to at all ? ''
`` Nothing at all .
Not a word . ''
Smith stepped over to the table and looked down with a professional eye at the black and twisted form in front of him .
The features , though horribly discoloured , were perfect , and two little nut-like eyes still lurked in the depths of the black , hollow sockets .
The blotched skin was drawn tightly from bone to bone , and a tangled wrap of black coarse hair fell over the ears .
Two thin teeth , like those of a rat , overlay the shrivelled lower lip .
In its crouching position , with bent joints and craned head , there was a suggestion of energy about the horrid thing which made Smith 's gorge rise .
The gaunt ribs , with their parchment-like covering , were exposed , and the sunken , leaden-hued abdomen , with the long slit where the embalmer had left his mark ; but the lower limbs were wrapt round with coarse yellow bandages .
A number of little clove-like pieces of myrrh and of cassia were sprinkled over the body , and lay scattered on the inside of the case .
`` I do n't know his name , '' said Bellingham , passing his hand over the shrivelled head .
`` You see the outer sarcophagus with the inscriptions is missing .
Lot 249 is all the title he has now .
You see it printed on his case .
That was his number in the auction at which I picked him up . ''
`` Perhaps these very hands helped to build the stones into the pyramids , '' suggested Monkhouse Lee , looking down with disgust in his eyes at the crooked , unclean talons .
`` Ah , so you did .
It is the name of the embalmer , I take it .
A very conscientious worker he must have been .
I wonder how many modern works will survive four thousand years ? ''
`` Oh , I am not nervous as a rule ; and I have unwrapped mummies before . ''
Clever as he undoubtedly was , however , the medical student seemed to detect a dash of insanity in the man .
He broke out at times into a high , inflated style of talk which was in contrast with the simplicity of his life .
`` I do n't know what business it is of yours , Styles . ''
`` Well , I takes an interest , Mr. Smith .
It may be forward of me , but I ca n't help it .
I feel sometimes as if I was mother and father to my young gentlemen .
It all falls on me when things go wrong and the relations come .
But Mr. Bellingham , sir .
I want to know what it is that walks about his room sometimes when he 's out and when the door's locked on the outside . ''
`` I want to prevent old Styles from letting him out .
He 's of some value , you know , and it would be awkward to lose him . ''
`` Still at it ! ''
said he , plumping down into his wonted arm-chair .
`` What a chap you are to stew !
I believe an earthquake might come and knock Oxford into a cocked hat , and you would sit perfectly placid with your books among the rains .
However , I wo n't bore you long .
Three whiffs of baccy , and I am off . ''
`` Well , no ; I do n't think that is quite the idea , either .
I am inclined to think that if any showman has lost a great ape lately , and the brute is in these parts , a jury would find a true bill against it .
Norton passes that way every night , you know , about the same hour .
There 's a tree that hangs low over the path -- the big elm from Rainy 's garden .
Norton thinks the thing dropped on him out of the tree .
Anyhow , he was nearly strangled by two arms , which , he says , were as strong and as thin as steel bands .
He saw nothing ; only those beastly arms that tightened and tightened on him .
He yelled his head nearly off , and a couple of chaps came running , and the thing went over the wall like a cat .
He never got a fair sight of it the whole time .
It gave Norton a shake up , I can tell you .
I tell him it has been as good as a change at the sea-side for him . ''
Norton says not ; but we do n't mind what he says .
The garrotter had long nails , and was pretty smart at swinging himself over walls .
By-the-way , your beautiful neighbour would be pleased if he heard about it .
He had a grudge against Norton , and he 's not a man , from what I know of him , to forget his little debts .
But hallo , old chap , what have you got in your noddle ? ''
For ten days the medical student confined himself so closely to his studies that he neither saw nor heard anything of either of the men beneath him .
At the hours when Bellingham had been accustomed to visit him , he took care to sport his oak , and though he more than once heard a knocking at his outer door , he resolutely refused to answer it .
One afternoon , however , he was descending the stairs when , just as he was passing it , Bellingham 's door flew open , and young Monkhouse Lee came out with his eyes sparkling and a dark flush of anger upon his olive cheeks .
Close at his heels followed Bellingham , his fat , unhealthy face all quivering with malignant passion .
`` Well , anyhow , '' said Smith , rising , `` it is not likely that I should allow myself to be frightened out of rooms which suit me very nicely .
It would be a little too feeble for me to move out all my goods and chattels because you say that Bellingham might in some unexplained way do me an injury .
I think that I 'll just take my chance , and stay where I am , and as I see that it 's nearly five o'clock , I must ask you to excuse me . ''
The spiral stair was as black as pitch , and Smith was slowly making his way down its irregular steps , when he was suddenly conscious that something had passed him in the darkness .
There was a faint sound , a whiff of air , a light brushing past his elbow , but so slight that he could scarcely be certain of it .
He stopped and listened , but the wind was rustling among the ivy outside , and he could hear nothing else .
`` For God 's sake come at once !
Young Lee is drowned !
Here 's Harrington of King 's with the news .
The doctor is out .
You 'll do , but come along at once .
There may be life in him . ''
`` What 's up ? ''
`` I 've been in the water .
Ah , yes ; I remember . ''
`` I was thrown in .
I was standing by the bank , and something from behind picked me up like a feather and hurled me in .
I heard nothing , and I saw nothing .
But I know what it was , for all that . ''
`` I do n't know what the deuce you fellows are talking about , '' said Hastie , `` but I think , if I were you , Harrington , I should get Lee to bed at once .
It will be time enough to discuss the why and the wherefore when he is a little stronger .
I think , Smith , you and I can leave him alone now .
I am walking back to college ; if you are coming in that direction , we can have a chat . ''
You just remember what I say , for you 'll find that I 'll be better than my word . ''
Bellingham 's door was shut as he passed , but glancing back when he was some distance from the turret , he saw his neighbour 's head at the window outlined against the lamp-light , his face pressed apparently against the glass as he gazed out into the darkness .
It was a blessing to be away from all contact with him , but if for a few hours , and Smith stepped out briskly , and breathed the soft spring air into his lungs .
The half-moon lay in the west between two Gothic pinnacles , and threw upon the silvered street a dark tracery from the stone-work above .
There was a brisk breeze , and light , fleecy clouds drifted swiftly across the sky .
Old 's was on the very border of the town , and in five minutes Smith found himself beyond the houses and between the hedges of a May-scented Oxfordshire lane .
`` You need it , '' he said , as his visitor drank off what he poured out for him .
`` Why , man , you are as white as a cheese . ''
Smith laid down his glass , rose up , and took a deep breath .
`` I am my own man again now , '' said he .
`` I was never so unmanned before .
But , with your leave , Peterson , I will sleep here to-night , for I don't think I could face that road again except by daylight .
It 's weak , I know , but I ca n't help it . ''
`` Come up with me to the window that overlooks the door .
I want you to see what I have seen . ''
`` And again , in the instance of your finding the mummy case empty , and then a few moments later with an occupant , you know that it was lamplight , that the lamp was half turned down , and that you had no special reason to look hard at the case .
It is quite possible that you may have overlooked the creature in the first instance . ''
`` And then Lee may have fallen into the river , and Norton been garrotted .
It is certainly a formidable indictment that you have against Bellingham ; but if you were to place it before a police magistrate , he would simply laugh in your face . ''
`` Certainly , my boy . ''
`` And bring a heavy stick with you . ''
`` Oh , is that it ? ''
said Bellingham with a sneer .
`` You would murder me ? ''
`` I will do no such thing . ''
Smith took up the pistol and he looked towards Bellingham with an inexorable face .
As the second-hand stole round , he raised his hand , and the finger twitched upon the trigger .
In frantic haste he caught up the knife and hacked at the figure of the mummy , ever glancing round to see the eye and the weapon of his terrible visitor bent upon him .
The creature crackled and snapped under every stab of the keen blade .
A thick yellow dust rose up from it .
Spices and dried essences rained down upon the floor .
Suddenly , with a rending crack , its backbone snapped asunder , and it fell , a brown heap of sprawling limbs , upon the floor .
`` Now into the fire ! ''
`` Now the roll of papyrus which you had on the table that night .
It is in that drawer , I think . ''
`` But look here , Smith , you ca n't really mean it .
I 'll share the knowledge with you .
I 'll teach you all that is in it .
Or , stay , let me only copy it before you burn it ! ''
Warner had been wanted by the law , and by nobody else , for many years .
Desperado , murderer , train robber and road agent , he was a man beyond the pale of human pity .
He had deserved a dozen deaths , and the Los Amigos folk grudged him so gaudy a one as that .
He seemed to feel himself to be unworthy of it , for he made two frenzied attempts at escape .
He was a powerful , muscular man , with a lion head , tangled black locks , and a sweeping beard which covered his broad chest .
When he was tried , there was no finer head in all the crowded court .
It's no new thing to find the best face looking from the dock .
But his good looks could not balance his bad deeds .
His advocate did all he knew , but the cards lay against him , and Duncan Warner was handed over to the mercy of the big Los Amigos dynamos .
`` We 'll take our chances , '' said the chairman .
`` I think , gentlemen , that this discussion has been carried on quite long enough , '' said the chairman , rising again .
`` The point , I take it , has already been decided by the majority of the committee , and Duncan Warner shall be electrocuted on Tuesday by the full strength of the Los Amigos dynamos .
Is it not so ? ''
He had bounded in his chair as the frightful shock crashed through his system .
But he was not dead .
On the contrary , his eyes gleamed far more brightly than they had done before .
There was only one change , but it was a singular one .
The black had passed from his hair and beard as the shadow passes from a landscape .
They were both as white as snow .
And yet there was no other sign of decay .
His skin was smooth and plump and lustrous as a child 's .
`` Never better in my life , '' said Duncan Warner cheerily .
`` Duncan Warner , '' said he , slowly , `` you are here to play your part , and I am here to play mine .
Your game is to live if you can , and my game is to carry out the sentence of the law .
You 've beat us on electricity .
I 'll give you one there .
And you 've beat us on hanging , for you seem to thrive on it .
But it 's my turn to beat you now , for my duty has to be done . ''
Peter Stulpnagel took a step forward .
`` Well , well , he shall do no more mischief in Los Amigos , anyhow , '' said the Marshal , with decision .
`` He shall go into the new gaol .
The prison will wear him out . ''
And this joy it was which led him to take a step which was quite at variance with his usual habits .
It is the custom for a new-comer among medical men to call first upon the older , and the etiquette upon the subject is strict .
Dr. Ripley was pedantically exact on such points , and yet he deliberately drove over next day and called upon Dr. Verrinder Smith .
Such a waiving of ceremony was , he felt , a gracious act upon his part , and a fit prelude to the intimate relations which he hoped to establish with his neighbour .
Dr. Ripley was so surprised that he dropped his hat and forgot to pick it up again .
`` You are not among our champions , then ? ''
Dr. Ripley felt irritated by the quiet manner in which the lady cross-questioned him .
It was an exceedingly rude speech , and he was ashamed of it the instant after he had made it .
The lady , however , simply raised her eyebrows and smiled .
He bowed again , and took a step towards the door .
But it was not long before he learned that even her competition was a thing to be feared .
The novelty of her presence had brought a few curious invalids into her consulting rooms , and , once there , they had been so impressed by the firmness of her manner and by the singular , new-fashioned instruments with which she tapped , and peered , and sounded , that it formed the core of their conversation for weeks afterwards .
And soon there were tangible proofs of her powers upon the country side .
Farmer Eyton , whose callous ulcer had been quietly spreading over his shin for years back under a gentle regime of zinc ointment , was painted round with blistering fluid , and found , after three blasphemous nights , that his sore was stimulated into healing .
Mrs. Crowder , who had always regarded the birthmark upon her second daughter Eliza as a sign of the indignation of the Creator at a third helping of raspberry tart which she had partaken of during a critical period , learned that , with the help of two galvanic needles , the mischief was not irreparable .
In a month Dr. Verrinder Smith was known , and in two she was famous .
`` You think there is nothing to be said on the other side ? ''
For , indeed , he was already far past the stage when he would acknowledge her as the equal of any other woman .
Already he could not disguise from himself that she had become the one woman .
Her dainty skill , her gentle touch , her sweet presence , the community of their tastes , had all united to hopelessly upset his previous opinions .
It was a dark day for him now when his convalescence allowed her to miss a visit , and darker still that other one which he saw approaching when all occasion for her visits would be at an end .
It came round at last , however , and he felt that his whole life 's fortune would hang upon the issue of that final interview .
He was a direct man by nature , so he laid his hand upon hers as it felt for his pulse , and he asked her if she would be his wife .
`` He settled himself at my desk and he wrote half a dozen letters .
It is not a breach of confidence to say that they were not addressed to his professional brothers .
Walker was a single man , which means that he was not restricted to a single woman .
When he had finished , he walked out of that little room of mine , leaving every hope and ambition of his life behind him .
And he might have had another year of ignorance and peace if it had not been for the chance illustration in his lecture .
`` It took five years to kill him , and he stood it well .
If he had ever been a little irregular he atoned for it in that long martyrdom .
He kept an admirable record of his own symptoms , and worked out the eye changes more fully than has ever been done .
When the ptosis got very bad he would hold his eyelid up with one hand while he wrote .
Then , when he could not co-ordinate his muscles to write , he dictated to his nurse .
So died , in the odour of science , James Walker , aet .
`` It was like this .
Walker had a fad about the portio dura -- the motor to the face , you know -- and he thought paralysis of it came from a disturbance of the blood supply .
Something else which counterbalanced that disturbance might , he thought , set it right again .
We had a very obstinate case of Bell 's paralysis in the wards , and had tried it with every conceivable thing , blistering , tonics , nerve-stretching , galvanism , needles , but all without result .
Walker got it into his head that removal of the ear would increase the blood supply to the part , and he very soon gained the consent of the patient to the operation .
`` The first patient is a thing which one remembers all one 's life .
Mine was commonplace , and the details are of no interest .
I had a curious visitor , however , during the first few months after my plate went up .
It was an elderly woman , richly dressed , with a wickerwork picnic basket in her hand .
This she opened with the tears streaming down her face , and out there waddled the fattest , ugliest , and mangiest little pug dog that I have ever seen .
'I wish you to put him painlessly out of the world , doctor , ' she cried .
'Quick , quick , or my resolution may give way . '
She flung herself down , with hysterical sobs , upon the sofa .
The less experienced a doctor is , the higher are his notions of professional dignity , as I need not remind you , my young friend , so I was about to refuse the commission with indignation , when I bethought me that , quite apart from medicine , we were gentleman and lady , and that she had asked me to do something for her which was evidently of the greatest possible importance in her eyes .
I led off the poor little doggie , therefore , and with the help of a saucerful of milk and a few drops of prussic acid his exit was as speedy and painless as could be desired .
'Is it over ? '
she cried as I entered .
It was really tragic to see how all the love which should have gone to husband and children had , in default of them , been centred upon this uncouth little animal .
She left , quite broken down , in her carriage , and it was only after her departure that I saw an envelope sealed with a large red seal , and lying upon the blotting pad of my desk .
Outside , in pencil , was written : 'I have no doubt that you would willingly have done this without a fee , but I insist upon your acceptance of the enclosed . '
I opened it with some vague notions of an eccentric millionaire and a fifty-pound note , but all I found was a postal order for four and sixpence .
The whole incident struck me as so whimsical that I laughed until I was tired .
You 'll find there 's so much tragedy in a doctor's life , my boy , that he would not be able to stand it if it were not for the strain of comedy which comes every now and then to leaven it .
asked Mr. Sherlock Holmes , gazing fixedly at my boots .
I was reclining in a cane-backed chair at the moment , and my protruded feet had attracted his ever-active attention .
`` English , '' I answered in some surprise .
`` I got them at Latimer 's , in Oxford Street . ''
Holmes smiled with an expression of weary patience .
`` The bath ! ''
he said ; `` the bath !
Why the relaxing and expensive Turkish rather than the invigorating home-made article ? ''
`` Because for the last few days I have been feeling rheumatic and old .
A Turkish bath is what we call an alterative in medicine -- a fresh starting-point , a cleanser of the system .
`` By the way , Holmes , '' I added , `` I have no doubt the connection between my boots and a Turkish bath is a perfectly self-evident one to a logical mind , and yet I should be obliged to you if you would indicate it . ''
`` The train of reasoning is not very obscure , Watson , '' said Holmes with a mischievous twinkle .
`` It belongs to the same elementary class of deduction which I should illustrate if I were to ask you who shared your cab in your drive this morning . ''
`` I do n't admit that a fresh illustration is an explanation , '' said I with some asperity .
`` Bravo , Watson !
A very dignified and logical remonstrance .
Let me see , what were the points ?
Take the last one first -- the cab .
You observe that you have some splashes on the left sleeve and shoulder of your coat .
Had you sat in the centre of a hansom you would probably have had no splashes , and if you had they would certainly have been symmetrical .
Therefore it is clear that you sat at the side .
Therefore it is equally clear that you had a companion . ''
`` That is very evident . ''
`` Absurdly commonplace , is it not ? ''
`` But the boots and the bath ? ''
You are in the habit of doing up your boots in a certain way .
I see them on this occasion fastened with an elaborate double bow , which is not your usual method of tying them .
You have , therefore , had them off .
Who has tied them ?
A bootmaker -- or the boy at the bath .
It is unlikely that it is the bootmaker , since your boots are nearly new .
Well , what remains ?
Absurd , is it not ?
But , for all that , the Turkish bath has served a purpose . ''
`` What is that ? ''
`` You say that you have had it because you need a change .
Let me suggest that you take one .
How would Lausanne do , my dear Watson -- first-class tickets and all expenses paid on a princely scale ? ''
Holmes leaned back in his armchair and took his notebook from his pocket .
`` One of the most dangerous classes in the world , '' said he , `` is the drifting and friendless woman .
She is the most harmless and often the most useful of mortals , but she is the inevitable inciter of crime in others .
She has sufficient means to take her from country to country and from hotel to hotel .
She is lost , as often as not , in a maze of obscure pensions and boardinghouses .
She is a stray chicken in a world of foxes .
When she is gobbled up she is hardly missed .
I much fear that some evil has come to the Lady Frances Carfax . ''
I was relieved at this sudden descent from the general to the particular .
Holmes consulted his notes .
`` Lady Frances , '' he continued , `` is the sole survivor of the direct family of the late Earl of Rufton .
The estates went , as you may remember , in the male line .
She was left with limited means , but with some very remarkable old Spanish jewellery of silver and curiously cut diamonds to which she was fondly attached -- too attached , for she refused to leave them with her banker and always carried them about with her .
A rather pathetic figure , the Lady Frances , a beautiful woman , still in fresh middle age , and yet , by a strange change , the last derelict of what only twenty years ago was a goodly fleet . ''
`` What has happened to her , then ? ''
`` Ah , what has happened to the Lady Frances ?
Is she alive or dead ?
There is our problem .
She is a lady of precise habits , and for four years it has been her invariable custom to write every second week to Miss Dobney , her old governess , who has long retired and lives in Camberwell .
It is this Miss Dobney who has consulted me .
Nearly five weeks have passed without a word .
The last letter was from the Hotel National at Lausanne .
Lady Frances seems to have left there and given no address .
The family are anxious , and as they are exceedingly wealthy no sum will be spared if we can clear the matter up . ''
`` Is Miss Dobney the only source of information ?
Surely she had other correspondents ? ''
`` There is one correspondent who is a sure draw , Watson .
That is the bank .
Single ladies must live , and their passbooks are compressed diaries .
She banks at Silvester 's .
I have glanced over her account .
The last check but one paid her bill at Lausanne , but it was a large one and probably left her with cash in hand .
Only one check has been drawn since . ''
`` To whom , and where ? ''
`` To Miss Marie Devine .
There is nothing to show where the check was drawn .
It was cashed at the Credit Lyonnais at Montpellier less than three weeks ago .
The sum was fifty pounds . ''
`` And who is Miss Marie Devine ? ''
`` That also I have been able to discover .
Miss Marie Devine was the maid of Lady Frances Carfax .
Why she should have paid her this check we have not yet determined .
I have no doubt , however , that your researches will soon clear the matter up . ''
`` MY researches ! ''
`` Hence the health-giving expedition to Lausanne .
You know that I can not possibly leave London while old Abrahams is in such mortal terror of his life .
Besides , on general principles it is best that I should not leave the country .
Scotland Yard feels lonely without me , and it causes an unhealthy excitement among the criminal classes .
Go , then , my dear Watson , and if my humble counsel can ever be valued at so extravagant a rate as two pence a word , it waits your disposal night and day at the end of the Continental wire . ''
Two days later found me at the Hotel National at Lausanne , where I received every courtesy at the hands of M. Moser , the well-known manager .
Lady Frances , as he informed me , had stayed there for several weeks .
She had been much liked by all who met her .
Her age was not more than forty .
She was still handsome and bore every sign of having in her youth been a very lovely woman .
M. Moser knew nothing of any valuable jewellery , but it had been remarked by the servants that the heavy trunk in the lady 's bedroom was always scrupulously locked .
Marie Devine , the maid , was as popular as her mistress .
She was actually engaged to one of the head waiters in the hotel , and there was no difficulty in getting her address .
It was 11 Rue de Trajan , Montpellier .
All this I jotted down and felt that Holmes himself could not have been more adroit in collecting his facts .
Only one corner still remained in the shadow .
No light which I possessed could clear up the cause for the lady 's sudden departure .
She was very happy at Lausanne .
There was every reason to believe that she intended to remain for the season in her luxurious rooms overlooking the lake .
And yet she had left at a single day 's notice , which involved her in the useless payment of a week 's rent .
Only Jules Vibart , the lover of the maid , had any suggestion to offer .
He connected the sudden departure with the visit to the hotel a day or two before of a tall , dark , bearded man .
`` Un sauvage -- un veritable sauvage ! ''
The man had rooms somewhere in the town .
He had been seen talking earnestly to Madame on the promenade by the lake .
Then he had called .
She had refused to see him .
He was English , but of his name there was no record .
Madame had left the place immediately afterwards .
Jules Vibart , and , what was of more importance , Jules Vibart 's sweetheart , thought that this call and the departure were cause and effect .
Only one thing Jules would not discuss .
That was the reason why Marie had left her mistress .
Of that he could or would say nothing .
If I wished to know , I must go to Montpellier and ask her .
So ended the first chapter of my inquiry .
The second was devoted to the place which Lady Frances Carfax had sought when she left Lausanne .
Concerning this there had been some secrecy , which confirmed the idea that she had gone with the intention of throwing someone off her track .
Otherwise why should not her luggage have been openly labelled for Baden ?
Both she and it reached the Rhenish spa by some circuitous route .
This much I gathered from the manager of Cook 's local office .
So to Baden I went , after dispatching to Holmes an account of all my proceedings and receiving in reply a telegram of half-humorous commendation .
At Baden the track was not difficult to follow .
Lady Frances had stayed at the Englischer Hof for a fortnight .
While there she had made the acquaintance of a Dr. Shlessinger and his wife , a missionary from South America .
Like most lonely ladies , Lady Frances found her comfort and occupation in religion .
Dr. Shlessinger 's remarkable personality , his whole hearted devotion , and the fact that he was recovering from a disease contracted in the exercise of his apostolic duties affected her deeply .
She had helped Mrs. Shlessinger in the nursing of the convalescent saint .
He spent his day , as the manager described it to me , upon a lounge-chair on the veranda , with an attendant lady upon either side of him .
He was preparing a map of the Holy Land , with special reference to the kingdom of the Midianites , upon which he was writing a monograph .
Finally , having improved much in health , he and his wife had returned to London , and Lady Frances had started thither in their company .
This was just three weeks before , and the manager had heard nothing since .
As to the maid , Marie , she had gone off some days beforehand in floods of tears , after informing the other maids that she was leaving service forever .
Dr. Shlessinger had paid the bill of the whole party before his departure .
`` Did he give a name ? ''
`` None ; but he was an Englishman , though of an unusual type . ''
`` A savage ? ''
said I , linking my facts after the fashion of my illustrious friend .
`` You are an Englishman , '' I said .
`` May I ask what your name is ? ''
`` What have you done with her ?
Why have you pursued her ?
I insist upon an answer ! ''
`` Well , Watson , '' said he , `` a very pretty hash you have made of it !
I rather think you had better come back with me to London by the night express . ''
A card had come up on a salver , and it was followed by the same bearded ruffian who had attacked me in the street .
He started when he saw me .
`` This is my old friend and associate , Dr. Watson , who is helping us in this affair . ''
`` We have him !
We have him ! ''
`` Come , now , give us the order of events , '' said he .
he asked in that vibrant voice which told of the fiery soul behind the cold gray face .
`` She was talking to the woman behind the counter .
I entered as well .
'It is late , ' I heard her say , or words to that effect .
The woman was excusing herself .
'It should be there before now , ' she answered .
'It took longer , being out of the ordinary . '
They both stopped and looked at me , so I asked some questions and then left the shop . ''
He had rung loudly at the door of a great dark house in the centre of Poultney Square .
It was opened immediately , and the figure of a tall woman was outlined against the dim-lit hall .
`` I 'd be very glad if you could tell me where that lady may be , '' Peters answered coolly .
`` I 've a bill against her for nearly a hundred pounds , and nothing to show for it but a couple of trumpery pendants that the dealer would hardly look at .
She attached herself to Mrs. Peters and me at Baden -- it is a fact that I was using another name at the time -- and she stuck on to us until we came to London .
I paid her bill and her ticket .
Once in London , she gave us the slip , and , as I say , left these out-of-date jewels to pay her bills .
You find her , Mr. Holmes , and I 'm your debtor . ''
`` So you might describe me , '' said Holmes cheerfully .
`` My companion is also a dangerous ruffian .
And together we are going through your house . ''
Our opponent opened the door .
`` Thank God ! ''
`` It 's someone else . ''
`` Who is the dead woman ? ''
`` This is my name and address .
This is my friend , Dr .
`` Exactly , Sergeant , you could not do otherwise . ''
The doctor was our next goal .
He had been called in , had found the woman dying of pure senility , had actually seen her pass away , and had signed the certificate in due form .
`` I assure you that everything was perfectly normal and there was no room for foul play in the matter , '' said he .
Nothing in the house had struck him as suspicious save that for people of their class it was remarkable that they should have no servant .
So far and no further went the doctor .
`` You need not trouble your mind , Captain Scarrow , '' said the agent .
`` Sir Charles is in weak health just now , only clear of a quartan ague , and it is likely he will keep his cabin most of the voyage .
Dr. Larousse said that he would have sunk had the hanging of Sharkey not put fresh life into him .
He has a great spirit in him , though , and you must not blame him if he is somewhat short in his speech . ''
`` The early morning tide , then . ''
`` You have my things ? ''
`` There is a keg of Trinidad . ''
There was a fresh westerly wind , so by the time the sun was fairly through the morning haze , the ship was hull down from the islands .
The decrepit Governor still limped the deck , with one guiding hand upon the quarter-rail .
`` Yes ; I have had a pyrexy , which has reduced me much . ''
`` Ah , the rascal !
There was no budging him , for he has a snug business amongst the merchants .
`` And what figure did Sharkey cut in the dock ? ''
The two sailors sprang from their seats , but the big American castaway had put his huge back against the cabin door , and he held a pistol in each of his hands .
The passenger had also laid a pistol upon the scattered cards in front of him , and he burst into his high , neighing laugh .
`` And the other boats scuttled ? ''
`` They are dead men ! ''
`` A shout all together , boys , to warn them of their danger . ''
For this purpose he lightened his vessel , thrust her into some narrow inlet where she would be left high and dry at low water , fastened blocks and tackles to her masts to pull her over on to her bilge , and then scraped her thoroughly from rudder-post to cutwater .
So secure did the captains feel , that it was not uncommon for them , at such times , to leave their ships under a sufficient guard and to start off in the long-boat , either upon a sporting expedition or , more frequently , upon a visit to some outlying town , where they turned the heads of the women by their swaggering gallantry , or broached pipes of wine in the market square , with a threat to pistol all who would not drink with them .
The Governor cocked his Episcopalian nose at him .
The Governor was keenly interested , for there was a grim and practical air about the man 's freckled face which showed that he was in earnest .
After all , he was a seaman and a fighter , and , if it were true that he was eager to atone for his past , no better man could be chosen for the business .
`` What was your plan ? ''
`` Yes ; but it may be that you have never heard that Mr. Codrington has a sister ship , the _White Rose_ , which lies even now in the harbour , and which is so like the pirate , that , if it were not for a white paint line , none could tell them apart . ''
and what of that ? ''
asked the Governor keenly , with the air of one who is just on the edge of an idea .
`` By the help of it this man shall be delivered into our hands . ''
Her crew were volunteers , many of them being men who had sailed with Stephen Craddock before -- the mate , Joshua Hird , an old slaver , had been his accomplice in many voyages , and came now at the bidding of his chief .
That night they spent under the trees , and pushed on again with the earliest light .
About noon they came to the huts of bark , which , the Carib told them , were the camp of the hunters , but they were silent and deserted .
No doubt their occupants were away at the hunt and would return in the evening , so Craddock and his men lay in ambush in the brushwood around them .
But no one came , and another night was spent in the forest .
Nothing more could be done , and it seemed to Craddock that after the two days ' absence it was time that he returned to his ship once more .
And it was all different from the cabin which he had left .
The floor was different , the ceiling was different , the furniture was different .
His had been plain and austere .
This was sumptuous and yet dirty , hung with rare velvet curtains splashed with wine-stains , and panelled with costly woods which were pocked with pistol-marks .
On the table was a great chart of the Caribbean Sea , and beside it , with compasses in his hand , sat a clean-shaven , pale-faced man with a fur cap and a claret-coloured coat of damask .
Craddock turned white under his freckles as he looked upon the long , thin , high-nostrilled nose and the red-rimmed eyes which were turned upon him with the fixed , humorous gaze of the master player who has left his opponent without a move .
`` In the bay , too . ''
`` With an eight-knot wind . ''
And then suddenly there was a burst of hearty cheering from the deck , and then the crash of a gun above his head , and then the answering booming of guns from far over the water .
Craddock sat up and strained his ears .
Was the ship in action ?
Only the one gun had been fired , and though many had answered there were none of the crashings which told of a shot coming home .
`` Got your hammer , carpenter ? ''
asked one , whom Craddock recognised as the big quartermaster .
`` Knock off his leg shackles , then .
Better leave the bracelets -- he 's safer with them on . ''
Had the ship been taken , then ?
But that was impossible , for there were the pirates clustering in swarms along the port bulwarks , and waving their hats joyously in the air .
Most prominent of all was the renegade mate , standing on the foc'sle head , and gesticulating wildly .
Craddock looked over the side to see what they were cheering at , and then in a flash he saw how critical was the moment .
He was a famous shot , and his iron nerves never failed him in an emergency .
The dark head appearing on the crest of a roller , and then swooping down on the other side , was already half-way to the sloop .
Sharkey dwelt long upon his aim before he fired .
With the crack of the gun the swimmer reared himself up in the water , waved his hands in a gesture of warning , and roared out in a voice which rang over the bay .
Then , as the sloop swung round her head-sails , and the pirate fired an impotent broadside , Stephen Craddock , smiling grimly in his death agony , sank slowly down to that golden couch which glimmered far beneath him .
Some hugged the shore , ready to make for the nearest port , while others struck far out beyond the known lines of commerce , but none were so stout-hearted that they did not breathe more freely when their passengers and cargoes were safe under the guns of some mothering fort .
Hour by hour as he waited without avail , Sharkey 's savage temper had risen , for his arrogant spirit chafed against any contradiction , even from Fate itself .
To his quartermaster , Ned Galloway , he had said that night , with his odious neighing laugh , that the crew of the next captured vessel should answer to him for having kept him waiting so long .
But at the sight of her bulging , portless sides and merchant rig a shout of exultation broke from amongst them , and in an instant they had swung round their fore-yard , and darting alongside they had grappled with her and flung a spray of shrieking , cursing ruffians upon her deck .
When all the plunder was gathered , the passengers and crew were dragged to the waist , and under the cold smile of Sharkey each in turn was thrown over the side -- Sweetlocks standing by the rail and hamstringing them with his cutlass as they passed over , lest some strong swimmer should rise in judgment against them .
A portly , grey-haired woman , the wife of one of the planters , was among the captives , but she also was thrust screaming and clutching over the side .
`` One skipper should show courtesy to another , '' said he , `` and sink me if Captain Sharkey would be behind in good manners !
I have held you to the last , as you see , where a brave man should be ; so now , my bully , you have seen the end of them , and may step over with an easy mind . ''
`` Where is she , then ?
And why was she not with the others ? ''
`` I will tell you why she was not with the others .
She is the only daughter of the Count and Countess Ramirez , who are amongst those whom you have murdered .
Her name is Inez Ramirez , and she is of the best blood of Spain , her father being Governor of Chagre , to which he was now bound .
It chanced that she was found to have formed an attachment , as maids will , to one far beneath her in rank aboard this ship ; so her parents , being people of great power , whose word is not to be gainsaid , constrained me to confine her close in a special cabin aft of my own .
Here she was held straitly , all food being carried to her , and she allowed to see no one .
This I tell you as a last gift , though why I should make it to you I do not know , for indeed you are a most bloody rascal , and it comforts me in dying to think that you will surely be gallow's-meat in this world , and hell's-meat in the next . ''
this is a lass of spirit , '' cried Sharkey ; passing his arm round her .
`` She was born to be a Rover 's bride .
Come , my bird , and drink to our better friendship . ''
That morning a second council of the Rovers was held at the base of the mainmast , and a deputation chosen to see the captain .
They were approaching the after-cabins when Sharkey came forth , the old devil in his eyes , and his bandolier with a pair of pistols over his shoulder .
`` Send her off with her mate ! ''
cried another , and the Rovers roared their approval .
Driven forth at the end of pikes , the girl was pushed towards the boat .
With all the spirit of Spain in her rotting body she flashed triumphant glances on her captors .
Lepero , Lepero ! ''
she cried in exultation , as they thrust her over into the boat .
26 , 1721._ -- This day , the junk having become unfit for food , and five of the crew down with scurvy , I ordered that we send two boats ashore at the nor'-western point of Hispaniola , to seek for fresh fruit , and perchance shoot some of the wild oxen with which the island abounds .
But there came a day when the fleets of the Buccaneers no longer mustered at the Tortugas , and the solitary and outlawed pirate took their place .
Yet even with him the tradition of restraint and of discipline still lingered ; and among the early pirates , the Avorys , the Englands , and the Robertses , there remained some respect for human sentiment .
They were more dangerous to the merchant than to the seaman .
But Copley Banks came often on board the _Happy Delivery_ , and joined Sharkey in many of his morose debauches , so that at last any lingering misgivings of the latter were set at rest .
He knew nothing of the evil that he had done to his new boon companion , for of his many victims how could he remember the woman and the two boys whom he had slain with such levity so long ago !
When , therefore , he received a challenge to himself and to his quartermaster for a carouse upon the last evening of their stay at the Caicos Bank , he saw no reason to refuse .
The Captain 's cabin of the _Ruffling Harry_ was in a deck-house upon the poop , and a sternchaser gun was mounted at the back of it .
Round shot were racked round the wall , and three great hogsheads of powder made a stand for dishes and for bottles .
In this grim room the five pirates sang and roared and drank , while the silent steward still filled up their glasses , and passed the box and the candle round for their tobacco-pipes .
Hour after hour the talk became fouler , the voices hoarser , the curses and shoutings more incoherent , until three of the five had closed their blood-shot eyes , and dropped their swimming heads upon the table .
The two boon companions sat listening in silence .
Then Copley Banks glanced at the steward , and the man took a coil of rope from the shot-rack behind him .
`` Captain Sharkey , '' said Copley Banks , `` do you remember the _Duchess of Cornwall_ , hailing from London , which you took and sank three years ago off the Statira Shoal ? ''
Sharkey stared across at his companion , and saw that the smouldering fire which lurked always in his eyes had burned up into a lurid flame .
He read their menace , and he clapped his hands to his empty belt .
Then he turned to seize a weapon , but the bight of a rope was cast round him , and in an instant his arms were bound to his side .
He fought like a wild cat and screamed for help .
Here 's damned villainy !
Help , Ned , help ! ''
Sharkey could hear the hoarse voices of his rovers singing their chanty over the water .
Then Copley Banks , his heart singing within him touched his companion upon the shoulder , and they plunged together into the lonely jungle of the Caicos .
It was in the days when France 's power was already broken upon the seas , and when more of her three-deckers lay rotting in the Medway than were to be found in Brest harbour .
But her frigates and corvettes still scoured the ocean , closely followed ever by those of her rival .
At the uttermost ends of the earth these dainty vessels , with sweet names of girls or of flowers , mangled and shattered each other for the honour of the four yards of bunting which flapped from the end of their gaffs .
`` Yes , sir . ''
`` It was a mutiny , sir . ''
The brig yawed as they spoke , and as she came round a spurt of smoke whiffed out from her quarter .
It was a pure piece of bravado , for the gun could scarce carry half-way .
Then with a jaunty swing the little ship came into the wind again , and shot round a fresh curve in the winding channel .
`` Is it the Jolly Rodger , sir ? ''
The huge loom of the Frenchman was seen bursting through the smoke .
Thick clusters of boarders hung upon her sides and shrouds .
A final broadside leapt from her ports , and the mainmast of the _Leda_ , snapping short off a few feet above the deck , spun into the air and crashed down upon the port guns , killing ten men and putting the whole battery out of action .
An instant later the two ships scraped together , and the starboard bower anchor of the _Gloire_ caught the mizzen-chains of the _Leda_ upon the port side .
With a yell the black swarm of boarders steadied themselves for a spring .
And it was true .
The Frenchman had ceased to fire , and was intent only upon clapping on every sail that he could carry .
But that shouting hundred could not claim it all as their own .
As the smoke cleared it was not difficult to see the reason .
The ships had gained the mouth of the estuary during the fight , and there , about four miles out to sea , was the _Leda's_ consort bearing down under full sail to the sound of the guns .
Captain de Milon had done his part for one day , and presently the _Gloire_ was drawing off swiftly to the north , while the _Dido_ was bowling along at her skirts , rattling away with her bow-chasers , until a headland hid them both from view .
The solitary man who drove this curious car was broad and burly .
He sat hunched up over his steering-wheel , with the brim of a Tyrolean hat drawn down over his eyes .
The red end of a cigarette smouldered under the black shadow thrown by the headgear .
A dark ulster of some frieze-like material was turned up in the collar until it covered his ears .
His neck was pushed forward from his rounded shoulders , and he seemed , as the car now slid noiselessly down the long sloping road , with the clutch disengaged and the engine running free , to be peering ahead of him through the darkness in search of some eagerly-expected object .
`` Get down ! ''
said his assailant , curtly .
`` Your watch , '' said the man behind the Mauser pistol .
`` Purse , '' said the man .
There was something very compelling in his voice and methods .
The purse was handed over .
Do n't move ! ''
The highwayman passed his victim and threw open the bonnet of the Wolseley .
His hand , with a pair of steel pliers , was thrust deep into the works .
There was the snap of a parting wire .
`` My cards are in my purse .
When he had placed a safe distance between himself and his victim , the adventurer eased up , took his booty from his pocket , replaced the watch , opened the purse , and counted out the money .
Seven shillings constituted the miserable spoil .
The poor result of his efforts seemed to amuse rather than annoy him , for he chuckled as he held the two half-crowns and the florin in the glare of his lantern .
Then suddenly his manner changed .
He thrust the thin purse back into his pocket , released his brake , and shot onwards with the same tense bearing with which he had started upon his adventure .
The lights of another car were coming down the road .
`` Except just Billy 's necklace ! ''
cried Hilda , and snatched at a little rope of pearls .
The robber bowed , and released his hold of it .
`` It may be a tragedy , '' said the robber .
`` Out of my way , sir !
Out of my way this instant ! ''
cried a rasping voice .
`` Drive over him , Hearn !
Get down and pull him off the seat .
The fellow's drunk -- he 's drunk , I say ! ''
Up to this point the proceedings of the modern highwayman might have passed as gentle .
Now they turned in an instant to savagery .
The chauffeur , a burly , capable fellow , incited by that raucous voice behind him , sprang from the car and seized the advancing robber by the throat .
The latter hit out with the butt-end of his pistol , and the man dropped groaning on the road .
Stepping over his prostrate body the adventurer pulled open the door , seized the stout occupant savagely by the ear , and dragged him bellowing on the highway .
Then , very deliberately , he struck him twice across the face with his open hand .
The blows rang out like pistol-shots in the silence of the night .
The fat traveller turned a ghastly colour and fell back half senseless against the side of the limousine .
The robber dragged open his coat , wrenched away the heavy gold watch-chain with all that it held , plucked out the great diamond pin that sparkled in the black satin tie , dragged off four rings -- not one of which could have cost less than three figures -- and finally tore from his inner pocket a bulky leather notebook .
All this property he transferred to his own black overcoat , and added to it the man 's pearl cuff-links , and even the golden stud which held his collar .
Having made sure that there was nothing else to take , the robber flashed his lantern upon the prostrate chauffeur , and satisfied himself that he was stunned and not dead .
Then , returning to the master , he proceeded very deliberately to tear all his clothes from his body with a ferocious energy which set his victim whimpering and writhing in imminent expectation of murder .
Suddenly his thoughts were brought back to the present .
From behind the laurels of the curving drive there came a low , clanking sound , which swelled into the clatter and jingle of an ancient car .
Then from round the corner there swung an old-fashioned Wolseley , with a fresh-complexioned , yellow-moustached young man at the wheel .
Sir Henry sprang to his feet at the sight , and then sat down once more .
He rose again as a minute later the footman announced Mr. Ronald Barker .
It was an early visit , but Barker was Sir Henry 's intimate friend .
As each was a fine shot , horseman , and billiard-player , there was much in common between the two men , and the younger ( and poorer ) was in the habit of spending at least two evenings a week at Walcot Old Place .
Therefore , Sir Henry advanced cordially with outstretched hand to welcome him .
`` Well , what 's the matter ? ''
`` Yes , '' said Ronald Barker , with emphasis .
The magistrate was a man of iron nerve .
He showed neither surprise nor resentment .
Not a muscle twitched upon his calm , set face .
`` No , it wo n't do , Sir Henry -- it wo n't do !
Even your voice , though you sunk it a few notes , was familiar enough to me .
But hang it , man !
What did you do it _for_ ?
That 's what gets over me .
That you should stick up me , one of your closest friends , a man that worked himself to the bone when you stood for the division -- and all for the sake of a Brummagem watch and a few shillings -- is simply incredible . ''
`` See here , Hailworthy , '' said he , opening his hand and showing a small , jagged triangle of black cloth .
`` Do you see that ?
It was on the ground near the car of the young women .
You must have ripped it off as you jumped out from your seat .
Now send for that heavy black driving-coat of yours .
If you do n't ring the bell I 'll ring it myself , and we shall have it in .
I 'm going to see this thing through , and do n't you make any mistake about that . ''
`` You wo n't make matters any better by threatening me , Hailworthy .
I am going to do my duty , and you wo n't bluff me out of it . ''
`` That 's all very well .
But what about me ?
What about the girls ? ''
`` You 're a good chap , Barker , '' said the magistrate .
`` No , I wo n't do it again .
Who 's the fellow who talks of 'one crowded hour of glorious life ' ?
it 's too fascinating .
I had the time of my life !
No , I 'll never touch it again , for it might get a grip of me . ''
`` I 'm rather late this morning , '' said he , `` and they are awaiting for me to try some petty larcenies on the county bench . ''
`` What do you make of her , Allardyce ? ''
She was a brig , but her mainmast had been snapped short off some ten feet above the deck , and no effort seemed to have been made to cut away the wreckage , which floated , sails and yards , like the broken wing of a wounded gull , upon the water beside her .
The foremast was still standing , but the fore-topsail was flying loose , and the head-sails were streaming out in long white pennons in front of her .
Never have I seen a vessel which appeared to have gone through rougher handling .
`` I 'm trying to make out .
It 's got all twisted and tangled with the halyards .
Yes , I 've got it now , clear enough .
It 's the Brazilian flag , but it 's wrong side up . ''
`` There may be salvage , '' muttered the second mate .
Our first thought was to provide for our own safety in case -- as seemed very probable -- the vessel should settle down beneath our feet .
With this object two of our men held on to the painter of the boat , and fended her off from the vessel 's side , so that she might be ready in case we had to make a hurried retreat .
The carpenter was sent to find out how much water there was , and whether it was still gaining , while the other seaman , Allardyce , and myself , made a rapid inspection of the vessel and her cargo .
But it was not to the box that my eyes or my thoughts were turned as I entered the store-room .
On the floor , lying across the litter of bunting , there was stretched a small , dark man with a short , curling beard .
He lay as far as it was possible from the box , with his feet towards it and his head away .
A crimson patch was printed upon the white canvas on which his head was resting , and little red ribbons wreathed themselves round his swarthy neck and trailed away on to the floor , but there was no sign of a wound that I could see , and his face was as placid as that of a sleeping child .
`` Is that foul play or accident , Captain Barclay ? ''
asked my second mate , demurely .
It was a large , open knife with a stiff spring blade which he had picked up from the floor .
The steel was shining and bright , so that we could not associate it with the crime , and yet the dead man had apparently held it in his hand when he was struck down , for it still lay within his grasp .
`` I do n't think that , '' said I .
`` As far as I can see they are not very different from any other South American curios . ''
`` Wait a bit , '' said I , for already , with eyes which gleamed with curiosity and with avarice , he was stooping over the lid .
`` I do n't see that there is any hurry over this matter .
You 've read that card which warns us not to open it .
It may mean anything or it may mean nothing , but somehow I feel inclined to obey it .
After all , whatever is in it will keep , and if it is valuable it will be worth as much if it is opened in the owner 's offices as in the cabin of the _Mary Sinclair_ . ''
The first officer seemed bitterly disappointed at my decision .
`` Surely , sir , you are not superstitious about it , '' said he , with a slight sneer upon his thin lips .
`` If it gets out of our own hands , and we do n't see for ourselves what is inside it , we may be done out of our rights ; besides -- -- ''
`` Just as you like , '' said he ; but for the rest of the evening , although we spoke upon many subjects , I noticed that his eyes were continually coming round , with the same expression of curiosity and greed , to the old striped box .
And now I come to that portion of my story which fills me even now with a shuddering horror when I think of it .
The main cabin had the rooms of the officers round it , but mine was the farthest away from it at the end of the little passage which led to the companion .
No regular watch was kept by me , except in cases of emergency , and the three mates divided the watches among them .
Armstrong had the middle watch , which ends at four in the morning , and he was relieved by Allardyce .
For my part I have always been one of the soundest of sleepers , and it is rare for anything less than a hand upon my shoulder to arouse me .
`` Allardyce , '' I whispered , `` what _could_ have happened to him ? ''
`` We can talk here , sir , and we do n't know who may be listening to us in there .
What do you suppose is in that box , Captain Barclay ? ''
`` Well , I can only find one theory which will fit all the facts .
Look at the size of the box .
Look at all the carving and metal-work which may conceal any number of holes .
Look at the weight of it ; it took four men to carry it .
On the top of that , remember that two men have tried to open it , and both have come to their end through it .
Now , sir , what can it mean except one thing ? ''
`` You mean there is a man in it ? ''
`` But his food and drink ? ''
`` There 's no doubt about it , '' said Allardyce , picking up the screwdriver and setting his jaw like a man who needs to brace his courage .
`` I'll drive the lock back if you will both stand by .
If he rises let him have it on the head with your hammer , carpenter !
Shoot at once , sir , if he raises his hand .
He leant forward to grasp it , and from that moment I have never doubted as to the reality of inspiration , for on the instant I caught him by the collar and pulled him straight again .
It may have been some story of the Middle Ages which had come back to my mind , or it may have been that my eye had caught some red which was not that of rust upon the upper part of the lock , but to him and to me it will always seem an inspiration , so prompt and sudden was my action .
[ Footnote 1 : A whale is measured among whalers not by the length of its body , but by the length of its whalebone . ]
A man 's outer case generally gives some indication of the soul within .
The Captain is tall and well-formed , with dark , handsome face , and a curious way of twitching his limbs , which may arise from nervousness , or be simply an outcome of his excessive energy .
His jaw and whole cast of countenance is manly and resolute , but the eyes are the distinctive feature of his face .
They are of the very darkest hazel , bright and eager , with a singular mixture of recklessness in their expression , and of something else which I have sometimes thought was more allied with horror than any other emotion .
Generally the former predominated , but on occasions , and more particularly when he was thoughtfully inclined , the look of fear would spread and deepen until it imparted a new character to his whole countenance .
It is at these times that he is most subject to tempestuous fits of anger , and he seems to be aware of it , for I have known him lock himself up so that no one might approach him until his dark hour was passed .
He sleeps badly , and I have heard him shouting during the night , but his cabin is some little distance from mine , and I could never distinguish the words which he said .
_September 12th._ -- Calm , clear day , and still lying in the same position .
What wind there is comes from the south-east , but it is very slight .
Captain is in a better humour , and apologised to me at breakfast for his rudeness .
He still looks somewhat distrait , however , and retains that wild look in his eyes which in a Highlander would mean that he was `` fey '' -- at least so our chief engineer remarked to me , and he has some reputation among the Celtic portion of our crew as a seer and expounder of omens .
`` I was on the bridge , '' he said , `` about four bells in the middle watch , just when the night was at its darkest .
There was a bit of a moon , but the clouds were blowing across it so that you could n't see far from the ship .
John M'Leod , the harpooner , came aft from the fo'c'sle-head and reported a strange noise on the starboard bow .
I went forrard and we both heard it , sometimes like a bairn crying and sometimes like a wench in pain .
I 've been seventeen years to the country and I never heard seal , old or young , make a sound like that .
As we were standing there on the fo'c'sle-head the moon came out from behind a cloud , and we both saw a sort of white figure moving across the ice field in the same direction that we had heard the cries .
We lost sight of it for a while , but it came back on the port bow , and we could just make it out like a shadow on the ice .
I sent a hand aft for the rifles , and M'Leod and I went down on to the pack , thinking that maybe it might be a bear .
When we got on the ice I lost sight of M'Leod , but I pushed on in the direction where I could still hear the cries .
I followed them for a mile or maybe more , and then running round a hummock I came right on to the top of it standing and waiting for me seemingly .
I do n't know what it was .
It was n't a bear , anyway .
It was tall and white and straight , and if it was n't a man nor a woman , I 'll stake my davy it was something worse .
I made for the ship as hard as I could run , and precious glad I was to find myself aboard .
I signed articles to do my duty by the ship , and on the ship I 'll stay , but you do n't catch me on the ice again after sundown . ''
`` You do n't think I am , do you Doc ? ''
he asked , as I was putting the bottle back into the after-locker .
`` Tell me now , as man to man , do you think that I am mad ? ''
`` Sometimes , '' I answered .
What would be the first symptoms ? ''
The thermometer is at nineteen Fahrenheit to-day .
There is but little wind , and what there is comes from an unfavourable quarter .
Captain is in an excellent humour ; I think he imagines he has seen some other omen or vision , poor fellow , during the night , for he came into my room early in the morning , and stooping down over my bunk , whispered , `` It was n't a delusion , Doc ; it 's all right ! ''
After breakfast he asked me to find out how much food was left , which the second mate and I proceeded to do .
It is even less than we had expected .
Forward they have half a tank full of biscuits , three barrels of salt meat , and a very limited supply of coffee beans and sugar .
In the after-hold and lockers there are a good many luxuries , such as tinned salmon , soups , haricot mutton , etc.
, but they will go a very short way among a crew of fifty men .
There are two barrels of flour in the store-room , and an unlimited supply of tobacco .
Altogether there is about enough to keep the men on half rations for eighteen or twenty days -- certainly not more .
When we reported the state of things to the Captain , he ordered all hands to be piped , and addressed them from the quarter-deck .
I never saw him to better advantage .
With his tall , well-knit figure , and dark animated face , he seemed a man born to command , and he discussed the situation in a cool sailor-like way which showed that while appreciating the danger he had an eye for every loophole of escape .
12 P.M. -- I have been a good deal startled , though I feel steadier now , thanks to a stiff glass of brandy .
I am hardly myself yet , however , as this handwriting will testify .
The fact is , that I have gone through a very strange experience , and am beginning to doubt whether I was justified in branding every one on board as madmen because they professed to have seen things which did not seem reasonable to my understanding .
I am a fool to let such a trifle unnerve me ; and yet , coming as it does after all these alarms , it has an additional significance , for I can not doubt either Mr. Manson 's story or that of the mate , now that I have experienced that which I used formerly to scoff at .
_September 18th._ -- Passed a restless and uneasy night , still haunted by that strange sound .
The Captain does not look as if he had had much repose either , for his face is haggard and his eyes blood-shot .
I have not told him of my adventure of last night , nor shall I .
He is already restless and excited , standing up , sitting down , and apparently utterly unable to keep still .
_September 20th , evening._ -- I crossed the ice this morning with a party of men exploring the southern part of the floe , while Mr. Milne went off in a northerly direction .
We pushed on for ten or twelve miles without seeing a trace of any living thing except a single bird , which fluttered a great way over our heads , and which by its flight I should judge to have been a falcon .
The southern extremity of the ice field tapered away into a long narrow spit which projected out into the sea .
When we came to the base of this promontory , the men halted , but I begged them to continue to the extreme end of it , that we might have the satisfaction of knowing that no possible chance had been neglected .
I shall not continue my journal .
Our road to home lies plain and clear before us , and the great ice field will soon be but a remembrance of the past .
It will be some time before I get over the shock produced by recent events .
When I began this record of our voyage I little thought of how I should be compelled to finish it .
I am writing these final words in the lonely cabin , still starting at times and fancying I hear the quick nervous step of the dead man upon the deck above me .
I entered his cabin to-night , as was my duty , to make a list of his effects in order that they might be entered in the official log .
All was as it had been upon my previous visit , save that the picture which I have described as having hung at the end of his bed had been cut out of its frame , as with a knife , and was gone .
With this last link in a strange chain of evidence I close my diary of the voyage of the _Polestar_ .
Note by Dr. John M'Alister Ray , senior.
-- I have read over the strange events connected with the death of the Captain of the _Polestar_ , as narrated in the journal of my son .
That everything occurred exactly as he describes it I have the fullest confidence , and , indeed , the most positive certainty , for I know him to be a strong-nerved and unimaginative man , with the strictest regard for veracity .
Still , the story is , on the face of it , so vague and so improbable , that I was long opposed to its publication .
Within the last few days , however , I have had independent testimony upon the subject which throws a new light upon it .
I had run down to Edinburgh to attend a meeting of the British Medical Association , when I chanced to come across Dr. P. -- -- , an old college chum of mine , now practising at Saltash , in Devonshire .
Upon my telling him of this experience of my son 's , he declared to me that he was familiar with the man , and proceeded , to my no small surprise , to give me a description of him , which tallied remarkably well with that given in the journal , except that he depicted him as a younger man .
According to his account , he had been engaged to a young lady of singular beauty residing upon the Cornish coast .
During his absence at sea his betrothed had died under circumstances of peculiar horror .
It was no easy matter to bring the _Gamecock_ up to the island , for the river had swept down so much silt that the banks extended for many miles out into the Atlantic .
The coast was hardly to be seen when the first white curl of the breakers warned us of our danger , and from there onwards we made our way very carefully under mainsail and jib , keeping the broken water well to the left , as is indicated on the chart .
More than once her bottom touched the sand ( we were drawing something under six feet at the time ) , but we had always way enough and luck enough to carry us through .
Finally , the water shoaled , very rapidly , but they had sent a canoe from the factory , and the Krooboy pilot brought us within two hundred yards of the island .
Here we dropped our anchor , for the gestures of the negro indicated that we could not hope to get any farther .
The blue of the sea had changed to the brown of the river , and , even under the shelter of the island , the current was singing and swirling round our bows .
The stream appeared to be in spate , for it was over the roots of the palm trees , and everywhere upon its muddy , greasy surface we could see logs of wood and debris of all sorts which had been carried down by the flood .
The place which the Doctor indicated was a sloping brown beach , freely littered with the flotsam of the stream .
At each end was a curved point , like a little natural breakwater , so that a small shallow bay was left between .
This was full of floating vegetation , with a single huge splintered tree lying stranded in the middle of it , the current rippling against its high black side .
`` These are all from up country , '' said the Doctor .
`` They get caught in our little bay , and then when some extra freshet comes they are washed out again and carried out to sea . ''
`` What is the tree ? ''
`` There 's the dinner gong , '' said the Doctor .
`` If this matter interests you I 'll tell you about it afterwards . ''
`` Oh , they used the huts until quite recently .
We 've put them on the hulk until they recover their confidence a little .
They were all half mad with fright , so we let them go , and nobody sleeps on the island except Walker and myself . ''
`` Well , that brings us back to the same story .
I suppose Walker has no objection to your hearing all about it .
I do n't know why we should make any secret about it , though it is certainly a pretty bad business . ''
`` Anyting else I do , Massa Walker ? ''
`` No , I think that is all right , Moussa , '' my host answered .
`` I am not feeling very well to-night , though , and I should much prefer if you would stay on the island . ''
It was evident that Walker had been struck by one of those sudden and violent attacks of remittent fever which are the curse of the West Coast .
His sallow cheeks were flushed and his eyes shining with fever , and suddenly as he sat there he began to croon out a song in the high-pitched voice of delirium .
`` Come , come , we must get you to bed , old chap , '' said the Doctor , and with my aid he led his friend into his bedroom .
There we undressed him and presently , after taking a strong sedative , he settled down into a deep slumber .
`` When I said sleep I meant watch , for there will be no sleep for me .
We 've had such a scare here that no native will stay after sundown , and I mean to find out to-night what the cause of it all may be .
It has always been the custom for a native watchman to sleep in the cooperage , to prevent the barrel hoops being stolen .
Well , six days ago the fellow who slept there disappeared , and we have never seen a trace of him since .
It was certainly singular , for no canoe had been taken , and these waters are too full of crocodiles for any man to swim to shore .
What became of the fellow , or how he could have left the island is a complete mystery .
Walker and I were merely surprised , but the blacks were badly scared and queer Voodoo tales began to get about amongst them .
But the real stampede broke out three nights ago , when the new watchman in the cooperage also disappeared . ''
`` What became of him ? ''
The man was gone and that was all .
Last time it was old Ali , who has been wharf-tender here since the place was started .
He was always as steady as a rock , and nothing but foul play would take him from his work . ''
`` Well , '' said I , `` I really do n't think that this is a one-man job .
Your friend is full of laudanum , and come what might he can be of no assistance to you .
You must let me stay and put in a night with you at the cooperage . ''
`` Did you see anything , Meldrum ? ''
`` Well , I had a vague sense of movement outside that window . ''
He caught up his gun and approached it .
`` No , there 's nothing to be seen , and yet I could have sworn that something passed slowly across it . ''
`` There 's the spirit lamp , '' said Severall .
`` If you would just put a light to it , I will see how Walker feels this morning . ''
He left me , but was back in an instant with a dreadful face .
I followed him without a word , and the first thing that I saw as I entered the bedroom was Walker himself lying huddled on his bed in the grey flannel sleeping suit in which I had helped to dress him on the night before .
`` Not dead , surely ! ''
The Doctor was terribly agitated .
His hands were shaking like leaves in the wind .
`` Good God ! ''
`` What can have done this ? ''
`` Feel here , '' he whispered .
I placed my hand at the same spot .
There was no resistance .
The body was absolutely soft and limp .
It was like pressing a sawdust doll .
A huge black trunk was coming down the river , its broad glistening back just lapped by the water .
And in front of it -- about three feet in front -- arching upwards like the figure-head of a ship , there hung a dreadful face , swaying slowly from side to side .
It was flattened , malignant , as large as a small beer-barrel , of a faded fungoid colour , but the neck which supported it was mottled with a dull yellow and black As it flew past the _Gamecock_ in the swirl of the waters I saw two immense coils roll up out of some great hollow in the tree , and the villainous head rose suddenly to the height of eight or ten feet , looking with dull , skin-covered eyes at the yacht .
An instant later the tree had shot past us and was plunging with its horrible passenger towards the Atlantic .
`` The middle of the sixties was a stirring time out in Japan .
That was just after the Simonosaki bombardment , and before the Daimio affair .
There was a Tory party and there was a Liberal party among the natives , and the question that they were wrangling over was whether the throats of the foreigners should be cut or not .
I tell you all , politics have been tame to me since then .
If you lived in a treaty port , you were bound to wake up and take an interest in them .
And to make it better , the outsider had no way of knowing how the game was going .
If the opposition won it would not be a newspaper paragraph that would tell him of it , but a good old Tory in a suit of chain mail , with a sword in each hand , would drop in and let him know all about it in a single upper cut .
`` It was gambling that set Jelland wrong .
He was a little dark-eyed fellow with black curly hair -- more than three-quarters Celt , I should imagine .
Every night in the week you would see him in the same place , on the left-hand side of the croupier at Matheson 's _rouge et noir_ table .
For a long time he won , and lived in better style than his employer .
And then came a turn of luck , and he began to lose so that at the end of a single week his partner and he were stone broke , without a dollar to their names .
`` Jelland scribbled a cheque and threw it on the black .
The card was the king of hearts , and the croupier raked in the little bit of paper .
Jelland grew angry , and McEvoy white .
Another and a heavier cheque was written and thrown on the table .
The card was the nine of diamonds .
McEvoy leaned his head upon his hands and looked as if he would faint .
growled Jelland , 'I wo n't be beat , ' and he threw on a cheque that covered the other two .
The card was the deuce of hearts .
A few minutes later they were walking down the Bund , with the cool night-air playing upon their fevered faces .
`` 'Tut , man , we must take things as they come .
You stick to me , and I'll stick to you , and we 'll pull through together .
You shall sign the cheques to-morrow night , and we shall see if your luck is better than mine . '
`` McEvoy returned to his rooms that night in an agony of shame and remorse .
When he was with Jelland he borrowed strength from him ; but alone he recognised the full danger of his position , and the vision of his old white-capped mother in England , who had been so proud when he had received his appointment , rose up before him to fill him with loathing and madness .
He was still tossing upon his sleepless couch when his Japanese servant entered the bedroom .
For an instant McEvoy thought that the long-expected outbreak had come , and plunged for his revolver .
Then , with his heart in his mouth , he listened to the message which the servant had brought .
gasped McEvoy ; 'to-day is Friday . '
The matter seemed hopeless if they had got two days ' start .
But there was still the shadow of a chance .
He rushed to the beach and swept the ocean with his glasses .
`` Jelland and McEvoy , waiting wearily for the breeze which never came , saw the dark speck which sprang out from the shadow of the land and grew larger with every swish of the oars .
As she drew nearer , they could see also that she was packed with men , and the gleam of weapons told what manner of men they were .
Jelland stood leaning against the tiller , and he looked at the threatening sky , the limp sails , and the approaching boat .
`` We have ourselves , '' says the anonymous writer in the _Gazette_ , `` been over the derelict _Marie Celeste_ , and have closely questioned the officers of the _Dei Gratia_ on every point which might throw light on the affair .
They are of opinion that she had been abandoned several days , or perhaps weeks , before being picked up .
The official log , which was found in the cabin , states that the vessel sailed from Boston to Lisbon , starting upon October 16 .
It is , however , most imperfectly kept , and affords little information .
There is no reference to rough weather , and , indeed , the state of the vessel 's paint and rigging excludes the idea that she was abandoned for any such reason .
She is perfectly watertight .
No signs of a struggle or of violence are to be detected , and there is absolutely nothing to account for the disappearance of the crew .
There are several indications that a lady was present on board , a sewing-machine being found in the cabin and some articles of female attire .
These probably belonged to the captain 's wife , who is mentioned in the log as having accompanied her husband .
As an instance of the mildness of the weather , it may be remarked that a bobbin of silk was found standing upon the sewing-machine , though the least roll of the vessel would have precipitated it to the floor .
The boats were intact and slung upon the davits ; and the cargo , consisting of tallow and American clocks , was untouched .
An old-fashioned sword of curious workmanship was discovered among some lumber in the forecastle , and this weapon is said to exhibit a longitudinal striation on the steel , as if it had been recently wiped .
It has been placed in the hands of the police , and submitted to Dr. Monaghan , the analyst , for inspection .
The result of his examination has not yet been published .
We may remark , in conclusion , that Captain Dalton , of the _Dei Gratia_ , an able and intelligent seaman , is of opinion that the _Marie Celeste_ may have been abandoned a considerable distance from the spot at which she was picked up , since a powerful current runs up in that latitude from the African coast .
He confesses his inability , however , to advance any hypothesis which can reconcile all the facts of the case .
In the utter absence of a clue or grain of evidence , it is to be feared that the fate of the crew of the _Marie Celeste_ will be added to those numerous mysteries of the deep which will never be solved until the great day when the sea shall give up its dead .
If crime has been committed , as is much to be suspected , there is little hope of bringing the perpetrators to justice . ''
As my wound had nearly healed by this time , I took my leave of Mr. Murray shortly afterwards .
The Union armies were everywhere victorious and converging on Richmond , so that my assistance seemed unnecessary , and I returned to Brooklyn .
There I resumed my practice , and married the second daughter of Josiah Vanburger , the well-known wood engraver .
In the course of a few years I built up a good connection and acquired considerable reputation in the treatment of pulmonary complaints .
I still kept the old black stone in my pocket , and frequently told the story of the dramatic way in which I had become possessed of it .
I also kept my resolution of showing it to Professor Shroeder , who was much interested both by the anecdote and the specimen .
He pronounced it to be a piece of meteoric stone , and drew my attention to the fact that its resemblance to an ear was not accidental , but that it was most carefully worked into that shape .
A dozen little anatomical points showed that the worker had been as accurate as he was skilful .
`` I should not wonder , '' said the Professor , `` if it were broken off from some larger statue , though how such hard material could be so perfectly worked is more than I can understand .
If there is a statue to correspond I should like to see it ! ''
So I thought at the time , but I have changed my opinion since .
_October 18th._ -- The gloomy prognostications of last night were not fulfilled , as the wind died away again , and we are lying now in a long greasy swell , ruffled here and there by a fleeting catspaw which is insufficient to fill the sails .
The air is colder than it was yesterday , and I have put on one of the thick woollen jerseys which my wife knitted for me .
Harton came into my cabin in the morning , and we had a cigar together .
He says that he remembers having seen Goring in Cleveland , Ohio , in '69 .
He was , it appears , a mystery then as now , wandering about without any visible employment , and extremely reticent on his own affairs .
The man interests me as a psychological study .
At breakfast this morning I suddenly had that vague feeling of uneasiness which comes over some people when closely stared at , and , looking quickly up , I met his eyes bent upon me with an intensity which amounted to ferocity , though their expression instantly softened as he made some conventional remark upon the weather .
Curiously enough , Harton says that he had a very similar experience yesterday upon deck .
I observe that Goring frequently talks to the coloured seamen as he strolls about -- a trait which I rather admire , as it is common to find half-breeds ignore their dark strain and treat their black kinsfolk with greater intolerance than a white man would do .
His little page is devoted to him , apparently , which speaks well for his treatment of him .
Altogether , the man is a curious mixture of incongruous qualities , and unless I am deceived in him will give me food for observation during the voyage .
_October 23rd._ -- Woke with a vague feeling of heaviness and misfortune , but it was not until a few moments ' reflection that I was able to recall our loss of the night before .
When I came on deck I saw the poor skipper standing gazing back at the waste of waters behind us which contains everything dear to him upon earth .
I attempted to speak to him , but he turned brusquely away , and began pacing the deck with his head sunk upon his breast .
Even now , when the truth is so clear , he can not pass a boat or an unbent sail without peering under it .
He looks ten years older than he did yesterday morning .
Harton is terribly cut up , for he was fond of little Doddy , and Goring seems sorry too .
At least he has shut himself up in his cabin all day , and when I got a casual glance at him his head was resting on his two hands as if in a melancholy reverie .
I fear we are about as dismal a crew as ever sailed .
How shocked my wife will be to hear of our disaster !
The swell has gone down now , and we are doing about eight knots with all sail set and a nice little breeze .
Hyson is practically in command of the ship , as Tibbs , though he does his best to bear up and keep a brave front , is incapable of applying himself to serious work .
_October 25th._ -- Made a good run all day .
Feel listless and depressed .
_October 26th._ -- Goring , Harton , and I had a chat together on deck in the morning .
Harton tried to draw Goring out as to his profession , and his object in going to Europe , but the quadroon parried all his questions and gave us no information .
Indeed , he seemed to be slightly offended by Harton 's pertinacity , and went down into his cabin .
I wonder why we should both take such an interest in this man !
I suppose it is his striking appearance , coupled with his apparent wealth , which piques our curiosity .
Harton has a theory that he is really a detective , that he is after some criminal who has got away to Portugal , and that he chooses this peculiar way of travelling that he may arrive unnoticed and pounce upon his quarry unawares .
I think the supposition is rather a farfetched one , but Harton bases it upon a book which Goring left on deck , and which he picked up and glanced over .
It was a sort of scrap-book , it seems , and contained a large number of newspaper cuttings .
All these cuttings related to murders which had been committed at various times in the States during the last twenty years or so .
The curious thing which Harton observed about them , however , was that they were invariably murders the authors of which had never been brought to justice .
They varied in every detail , he says , as to the manner of execution and the social status of the victim , but they uniformly wound up with the same formula that the murderer was still at large , though , of course , the police had every reason to expect his speedy capture .
Certainly the incident seems to support Harton 's theory , though it may be a mere whim of Goring 's , or , as I suggested to Harton , he may be collecting materials for a book which shall outvie De Quincey .
In any case it is no business of ours .
_November 10th._ -- It is getting warmer and warmer .
Some land birds came and perched in the rigging to-day , though we are still a considerable way from our destination .
The heat is so great that we are too lazy to do anything but lounge about the decks and smoke .
Goring came over to me to-day and asked me some more questions about my stone ; but I answered him rather shortly , for I have not quite forgiven him yet for the cool way in which he attempted to deprive me of it .
`` You will bear me witness , '' he said in his softest accents , `` that I am no party to sparing your life .
If it rested with me you would die as these other men are about to do .
I have no personal grudge against either you or them , but I have devoted my life to the destruction of the white race , and you are the first that has ever been in my power and has escaped me .
You may thank that stone of yours for your life .
These poor fellows reverence it , and indeed if it really be what they think it is they have cause .
Should it prove when we get ashore that they are mistaken , and this its shape and material is a mere chance , nothing can save your life .
In the meantime we wish to treat you well , so if there are any of your possessions which you would like to take with you , you are at liberty to get them . ''
As he finished he gave a sign , and a couple of the negroes unbound me , though without removing the gag .
I was led down into the cabin , where I put a few valuables into my pockets , together with a pocket-compass and my journal of the voyage .
They then pushed me over the side into a small canoe , which was lying beside the large one , and my guards followed me , and shoving off began paddling for the shore .
We had got about a hundred yards or so from the ship when our steersman held up his hand , and the paddlers paused for a moment and listened .
Then on the silence of the night I heard a sort of dull , moaning sound , followed by a succession of splashes in the water .
That is all I know of the fate of my poor shipmates .
Almost immediately afterwards the large canoe followed us , and the deserted ship was left drifting about -- a dreary spectre-like hulk .
Nothing was taken from her by the savages .
The whole fiendish transaction was carried through as decorously and temperately as though it were a religious rite .
The grey-haired negro who held my relic mounted upon a small stool , and stretching up his arm fitted Martha 's black stone on to the jagged surface on the side of the statue 's head .
There could not be a doubt that the one had been broken off from the other .
The parts dovetailed together so accurately that when the old man removed his hand the ear stuck in its place for a few seconds before dropping into his open palm .
The group round me prostrated themselves upon the ground at the sight with a cry of reverence , while the crowd outside , to whom the result was communicated , set up a wild whooping and cheering .
`` As to the voyage itself , your intelligence will have told you by this time that , thanks to my manipulation , both compasses and chronometers were entirely untrustworthy .
I alone worked out the course with correct instruments of my own , while the steering was done by my black friends under my guidance .
I pushed Tibb 's wife overboard .
You look surprised and shrink away .
Surely you had guessed that by this time .
I would have shot you that day through the partition , but unfortunately you were not there .
I tried again afterwards , but you were awake .
I think the idea of suicide was carried out rather neatly .
Of course when once we got on the coast the rest was simple .
I had bargained that all on board should die ; but that stone of yours upset my plans .
I also bargained that there should be no plunder .
No one can say we are pirates .
We have acted from principle , not from any sordid motive . ''
There is no need for me to dwell upon my solitary voyage .
I steered as well as I could for the Canaries , but was picked up upon the fifth day by the British and African Steam Navigation Company 's boat _Monrovia_ .
Let me take this opportunity of tendering my sincerest thanks to Captain Stornoway and his officers for the great kindness which they showed me from that time till they landed me in Liverpool , where I was enabled to take one of the Guion boats to New York .
`` Then stand by to let her go . ''
I was aroused from this by a whisper behind me .
`` Here 's a quiet place , '' said the voice .
`` Sit down , and we can talk it over in safety . ''
`` It would n't have done to have missed the ship . ''
`` Such delicate things need delicate treatment .
Put in some of the needful , Muller . ''
`` Well , it would come to the same , whoever let it off , '' said Muller .
`` No , '' said Muller .
`` I hear it is your own design , every bit of it , isn't it ? ''
His companion assented , and the two went arm-in-arm along the deck and disappeared down the hatchway , bearing the mysterious little box away with them .
The last words I heard were a muttered injunction from Flannigan to carry it carefully , and avoid knocking it against the bulwarks .
he said , in his kindly way , `` what 's put you about , Hammond ?
You look as white as a sheet .
_Mal de mer_ , eh ? ''
`` Never mind , '' said his comrade , as he gathered up his winnings ; `` a few dollars one way or the other wo n't go very far after to-night 's work . ''
`` Can you tell me , sir , '' he said , `` when this ship will be heard of again ? ''
`` No , nor that either . ''
`` Come on deck ! ''
growled his comrade ; `` you have drunk too much of that confounded brandy-and-water .
It has loosened your tongue .
and taking him by the arm he half led him , half forced him out of the smoking-room , and we heard them stumbling up the companion together , and on to the deck .
`` Nonsense , Dick !
you saw how the other tried to stop his tongue . ''
Quick as was the glance which passed between Flannigan and his confederate , I was able to intercept it .
There was an evil smile upon the former 's thin lips .
`` May I ask , Captain , '' I said , bending forward and speaking very distinctly , `` what you think of Fenian manifestos ? ''
`` All goods sent aboard the ship are strictly examined , '' said Captain Dowie .
`` At any rate their empty vapourings have led to nothing as yet , '' said the Captain .
`` After all , '' I thought , as I gazed into the blue depths beneath me , `` if the worst comes to the worst , it is better to die here than to linger in agony upon a sickbed on land . ''
A man 's life seems a very paltry thing amid the great forces of Nature .
All my philosophy could not prevent my shuddering , however , when I turned my head and saw two shadowy figures at the other side of the deck , which I had no difficulty in recognising .
They seemed to be conversing earnestly , but I had no opportunity of overhearing what was said ; so I contented myself with pacing up and down , and keeping a vigilant watch upon their movements .
`` Nonsense , man ! ''
said Dick ; `` I ca n't conceive what has put this extraordinary idea into your head .
I have been talking to one of your supposed assassins , and he seems a pleasant fellow enough ; quite a sporting character , I should think , from the way he speaks . ''
`` Well , if you really think so , '' said Dick , half awed for the moment by the earnestness of my manner , `` it is your duty to let the Captain know of your suspicions . ''
`` You are right , '' I said ; `` I will .
My absurd timidity has prevented my doing so sooner .
I believe our lives can only be saved by laying the whole matter before him . ''
`` Yes , at ten sharp .
We have eight minutes yet . ''
There was a pause .
Then the voice began again --
`` That 's true .
There will be some excitement among those we have left behind , wo n't there ? ''
It was the little square box .
I knew by the sound that they had placed it near the davit , and almost exactly under my head .
`` He 's mad ! ''
`` Time 's up .
Let it off , Muller . ''
`` By every right , human and divine . ''
Little more need be said .
It is not a subject on which I care to dwell .
The whole thing is too utterly disgusting and absurd .
Perhaps the best thing I can do is to retire gracefully from the scene , and let the sporting correspondent of the _New York Herald_ fill my unworthy place .
Here is an extract clipped from its columns shortly after our departure from America :
THE LAST OF THE LEGIONS _And Other Tales of Long Ago_
THE NEW REVELATION THE VITAL MESSAGE THE COMING OF THE FAIRIES THE CASE FOR SPIRIT PHOTOGRAPHY THE WANDERINGS OF A SPIRITUALIST OUR AMERICAN ADVENTURE
THE BRITISH CAMPAIGN IN FRANCE AND FLANDERS -- Six Vols .
`` Sparking plugs , eh ? ''
`` Altamont has a nice taste in wines , and he took a fancy to my Tokay .
He is a touchy fellow and needs humouring in small things .
I have to study him , I assure you . ''
They had strolled out on to the terrace again , and along it to the further end where at a touch from the Baron 's chauffeur the great car shivered and chuckled .
`` Those are the lights of Harwich , I suppose , '' said the secretary , pulling on his dust coat .
`` How still and peaceful it all seems .
There may be other lights within the week , and the English coast a less tranquil place !
The heavens , too , may not be quite so peaceful if all that the good Zepplin promises us comes true .
By the way , who is that ? ''
`` She might almost personify Britannia , '' said he , `` with her complete self-absorption and general air of comfortable somnolence .
Well , au revoir , Von Bork ! ''
With a final wave of his hand he sprang into the car , and a moment later the two golden cones from the headlights shot through the darkness .
The secretary lay back in the cushions of the luxurious limousine , with his thoughts so full of the impending European tragedy that he hardly observed that as his car swung round the village street it nearly passed over a little Ford coming in the opposite direction .
`` But the lock ? ''
The American 's face showed his surprise and admiration .
`` It was James 's own fault .
You know that yourself .
He was too self-willed for the job . ''
Von Bork was a strong , self-contained man , but it was easy to see that the news had shaken him .
`` Well , you nearly had a worse one , for I believe they are not far off me . ''
`` How dare you speak in such a way ! ''
`` Do you dare to suggest that I have given away my own agents ! ''
Von Bork had mastered his anger .
`` What about the dough ? ''
The gunner turned damned nasty at the last , and I had to square him with an extra hundred dollars or it would have been nitsky for you and me .
'Nothin ' doin ' ! '
says he , and he meant it , too , but the last hundred did it .
It 's cost me two hundred pound from first to last , so it is n't likely I 'd give it up without gettin ' my wad . ''
Have your way . ''
He sat down at the table and scribbled a check , which he tore from the book , but he refrained from handing it to his companion .
`` After all , since we are to be on such terms , Mr. Altamont , '' said he , `` I do n't see why I should trust you any more than you trust me .
Do you understand ? ''
he added , looking back over his shoulder at the American .
`` There 's the check upon the table .
I claim the right to examine that parcel before you pick the money up . ''
The American passed it over without a word .
Von Bork undid a winding of string and two wrappers of paper .
Then he sat gazing for a moment in silent amazement at a small blue book which lay before him .
Across the cover was printed in golden letters Practical Handbook of Bee Culture .
Only for one instant did the master spy glare at this strangely irrelevant inscription .
The next he was gripped at the back of his neck by a grasp of iron , and a chloroformed sponge was held in front of his writhing face .
`` I am glad of that , Mr. Holmes .
According to his lights he has been a kind master .
He wanted me to go with his wife to Germany yesterday , but that would hardly have suited your plans , would it , sir ? ''
`` These are the sacrifices one makes for one 's country , Watson , '' said Holmes , pulling at his little tuft .
`` To-morrow it will be but a dreadful memory .
With my hair cut and a few other superficial changes I shall no doubt reappear at Claridge 's to-morrow as I was before this American stunt -- I beg your pardon , Watson , my well of English seems to be permanently defiled -- before this American job came my way . ''
The last remark was addressed to Von Bork himself , who after much gasping and blinking had lain quietly listening to Holmes 's statement .
He broke out now into a furious stream of German invective , his face convulsed with passion .
Holmes continued his swift investigation of documents while his prisoner cursed and swore .
`` I shall get level with you , Altamont , '' he said , speaking with slow deliberation .
`` If it takes me all my life I shall get level with you ! ''
`` Well , you realize your position , you and your accomplice here .
If I were to shout for help as we pass through the village -- ''
It had been my habit to pull out of an evening in the laird 's skiff and to catch a few whiting which might serve for our supper .
On this well-remembered occasion my sister came with me , sitting with her book in the stern-sheets of the boat , while I hung my lines over the bows .
`` Good evening , Mr. McNeil , '' said I , stepping forward and addressing the Wigtown factor , with whom I had some slight acquaintance .
Whilst I was talking , I was conscious that the new tenant of Cloomber Hall was peering at me very closely through the darkness .
As I concluded , he stretched out a long , tremulous arm , and turned the gig-lamp in such a way as to throw a flood of light upon my face .
`` A Scotchman , eh ? ''
said he , with a sigh of relief .
`` It 's all one nowadays .
You must excuse me , Mr. -- Mr. West .
I 'm nervous , infernally nervous .
Come along , McNeil , we must be back in Wigtown in less than an hour .
Good-night , gentlemen , good-night ! ''
`` What do you think of our new neighbour , Jamieson ? ''
I asked , after a long silence .
There was , as may well be imagined , much stir amongst our small community at the news that the Hall was to be inhabited once more , and considerable speculation as to the new tenants , and their object in choosing this particular part of the country for their residence .
`` It may be that he is devoted to study , '' suggested my father , as we discussed the question round the breakfast table .
`` Perhaps he has chosen this secluded spot to finish some magnum opus upon which he is engaged .
If that is the case I should be happy to let him have the run of my library . ''
`` I do wonder whether he has a wife and a family , '' said my sister .
`` Poor souls , how lonely they will be !
Why , excepting ourselves , there is not a family that they could speak to for seven miles and more . ''
`` No , '' said my father , wagging his white head with a keen appreciation of his own humour .
`` It does n't include that under the heading of 'daring actions ' -- though it very well might , my dear , it very well might . ''
`` That would , of course , account for it , '' he remarked .
`` My dear , '' to his wife , `` allow me to introduce Mr. Fothergill West to you .
This is my son and my daughter .
We have come here in search of rest , Mr. West -- complete rest . ''
`` I should certainly think him eccentric , '' said I .
When this was finished and topped with spikes , Cloomber Park became impregnable to any one but an exceptionally daring climber .
It was as if the old soldier had been so imbued with military ideas that , like my Uncle Toby , he could not refrain even in times of peace from standing upon the defensive .
On the whole , I was inclined to believe that the true solution of the enigma lay in his own allusion to the love of quiet , and that they had taken shelter here with an almost morbid craving for solitude and repose .
We very soon had an instance of the great lengths to which this desire for isolation would carry them .
`` Pray do not give yourself one moment 's uneasiness upon the subject , '' said I earnestly , for I was grieved at her evident distress .
`` I am sure that your father has some reason unknown to us for taking this step . ''
`` I 'll tell you a secret , '' said my companion .
`` This is the first time that I have been outside the grounds since we have been down here . ''
Look at this ! ''
He pulled off his hat , and I saw that his black hair was all decked and dashed with streaks of grey .
`` Do you imagine that this came from pleasure ? ''
he asked , with a bitter laugh .
`` If you can manage to slip down to Branksome at times , '' I said , `` perhaps you could bring Miss Heatherstone with you .
I know that my father and my sister would be delighted to see her , and a change , if only for an hour or two , might do her good . ''
We had reached the head of the winding lane which branches off from the high road and leads to the laird 's house , so my companion pulled up .
I trust that my readers will not set me down as an inquisitive busybody when I say that as the days and weeks went by I found my attention and my thoughts more and more attracted to General Heatherstone and the mystery which surrounded him .
`` Not quite so bad as that , '' she said , smiling .
`` But do come out , Jack .
I should very much like you to see it . ''
`` I feel so frightened .
Oh , John , John , take me home , I feel so frightened ! ''
Mordaunt had taken advantage of my invitation to come down to the laird 's house , and on several occasions he brought with him his beautiful sister .
The four of us would wander over the moors together , or perhaps if the day were fine set sail upon our little skiff and stand off into the Irish Sea .
As to our good father , he was ever ready to greet us with many small jests and tags of Oriental poems appropriate to the occasion , for we had no secrets from him , and he already looked upon us all as his children .
Far away in the north-west the sun glinted upon the high peak of Mount Throston .
From where we stood we could see the smoke of the steamers as they ploughed along the busy water-way which leads to Belfast .
`` But why does he do it , Gabriel ? ''
`` My dear girl , '' said I , `` the days of family apparitions and that kind of thing are gone .
Nobody is haunted nowadays , so we can put that supposition out of the question .
Having done so , what remains ?
There is absolutely no other theory which could even be suggested .
Believe me , the whole mystery is that the heat of India has been too much for your poor father 's brain . ''
`` You-you -- '' he spluttered , with his hand twitching at his throat , as though his fury were choking him .
`` You have dared to intrude upon my privacy !
Do you think I built this fence that all the vermin in the country might congregate round it ?
Oh , you have been very near your death , my fine fellow !
You will never be nearer until your time comes .
Look at this ! ''
he pulled a squat , thick pistol out of his bosom .
`` If you had passed through that gap and set foot on my land I 'd have let daylight into you .
I 'll have no vagabonds here .
I know how to treat gentry of that sort , whether their faces are black or white . ''
Instead of blazing into a fury , as I had expected , the general gave a long whistle of astonishment , and then leant up against the railings , laughing softly to himself .
On the one hand he was likely , by keeping a closer watch over his daughter , to prevent us from communicating as freely as we had done hitherto .
Against this there was the advantage of having obtained an implied consent to the renewal of my suit at some future date .
On the whole , I came to the conclusion as I walked thoughtfully home that I had improved my position by the incident .
Here and there between the few chinks left in the barrier I could catch glimpses of the Hall , and once I saw a rough-looking , middle-aged man standing at a window on the lower floor , whom I supposed to be Israel Stakes , the coachman .
There was no sign , however , of Gabriel or of Mordaunt , and their absence alarmed me .
I was convinced that , unless they were under some restraint , they would have managed to communicate with my sister or myself .
My fears became more and more acute as day followed day without our seeing or hearing anything of them .
Noticing the great height of the fellow and that he still held his weapon , I kept well to the other side of the road , for I knew that destitution makes men desperate and that the chain that glittered on my waistcoat might be too great a temptation to him upon this lonely highway .
I was confirmed in my fears when I saw him step out into the centre of the road and bar my progress .
`` I should have thought thirty-eight pound ten a year would have been a nice help to you in your old age , '' I remarked .
`` They are fool folk and they have fool tastes , '' said he , drawing a black pipe from his pocket and stuffing it with tobacco .
`` I know what good living is , and , by cripes !
while I have a shilling in my pocket I like to spend it as a shilling should be spent .
I 've fought for my country and my country has done darned little for me .
I 'll go to the Rooshians , so help me !
I could show them how to cross the Himalayas so that it would puzzle either Afghans or British to stop 'em .
What 's that secret worth in St. Petersburg , eh , mister ? ''
This familiar address had the effect of reassuring the general , for he came right for us , though I could tell by his heightened colour that his temper was at boiling point .
`` I have not brought him with me , sir , '' I answered , feeling rather disgusted at being made responsible for the presence of the disreputable-looking vagabond beside me .
`` I found him on the road here , and he desired to be directed to you , so I showed him the way .
I know nothing of him myself . ''
`` Then you 'll give me a little just to help me on my way , sir , '' said the cringing mendicant .
`` You wo n't see an old comrade go to the bad for the sake of a few rupees ?
I was with Sale 's brigade in the Passes , sir , and I was at the second taking of Cabul . ''
Their effect upon the general was extraordinary .
He fairly staggered back from the gateway , and his yellow countenance blanched to a livid , mottled grey .
For a moment he was too overcome to speak .
At last he gasped out :
The general , whose face still bore evidences of his agitation , undid the bolts with nervous , trembling fingers .
The recognition of Corporal Rufus Smith had , I fancied , been a relief to him , and yet he plainly showed by his manner that he regarded his presence as by no means an unmixed blessing .
`` Why , everything .
I want a roof to cover me , and clothes to wear , and food to eat , and , above all , brandy to drink . ''
`` I can take you on as gardener and get rid of the fellow I have got .
As to brandy , you shall have an allowance and no more .
We are not deep drinkers at the Hall . ''
`` Oh , '' said the general carelessly , but with an evident expression of relief , `` I thought perhaps he might have said something of old times .
Well , I must go and look after him , or the servants will be frightened , for he is n't a beauty to look at .
`` Never been oot o ' Scotland ? ''
`` Na , '' says I .
`` It seems tae me , '' says he , turnin ' tae the factor , `` that this is the vera man I want .
Servants is spoilt noo-a-days , '' says he , `` by ower muckle eddication .
I hae nae doobt , Stakes , that ye will suit me well enough .
Ye 'll hae three pund a month and a ' foond , but I shall resairve the right o ' givin ' ye twenty-four hoors ' notice at any time .
How will that suit ye ? ''
And the words were true enough , for auld Fairmer Scott only gave me a pund a month and parritch twice a day .
Weel , weeks passed into months and a ' things grew waur instead o' better in the Hall .
The general he got mair nairvous , and his leddy mair melancholy every day , and yet there wasna any quarrel or bickering between them , for when they 've been togither in the breakfast room I used often tae gang round and prune the rose-tree alongside o' the window , so that I couldna help hearin ' a great pairt o ' their conversation , though sair against the grain .
When the young folk were wi ' them they would speak little , but when they had gone they would aye talk as if some waefu ' trial ere aboot to fa' upon them , though I could never gather from their words what it was that they were afeared o ' .
`` Aye , could I , '' I answered blithely , `` as well as ony lad on the Border . ''
I 'm no ' a curious or a pryin ' mun by nature , but I was sair puzzled in my ain mind tae tell why it was that the general walked aboot at nicht and what kept him frae his sleep .
When the nicht cam roond I tauld the women-folk that I was bad wi ' the jawache , and would gang airly tae my room .
I kenned fine when ance I got there that there was na chance o ' ony ane disturbin ' me , so I waited a wee while , and then when a ' was quiet , I slippit aff my boots and ran doon the ither stair until I cam tae the heap o ' auld clothes , and there I lay doon wi ' ane e'e peepin ' through a kink and a ' the rest covered up wi ' a great , ragged cairpet .
He got up frae his bed , and I could make oot a rustling noise , as though he were dressin ' himsel ' , and presently his footfa ' as he began tae walk up and doon in his room .
it didna tak lang for me tae drap doon amang the cairpets again and cover mysel ' ower .
There I lay tremblin ' in every limb , and sayin' as mony prayers as I could mind , wi ' my e'e still peepin ' through the keek-hole , and ' fixed upon the door o ' the general 's room .
I heard the rattle o ' the handle presently , and the door swung slowly open .
There was a licht burnin ' in the room beyond , an ' I could just catch a glimpse o ' what seemed tae me like a row o ' swords stuck alang the side o ' the wa ' , when the general stepped oot and shut the door behind him .
He was dressed in a dressin ' goon , wi ' a red smokin'-cap on his heid , and a pair o ' slippers wi ' the heels cut off and the taes turned up .
For a moment it cam into my held that maybe he was walkin ' in his sleep , but as he cam towards me I could see the glint o ' the licht in his e'en , and his face was a ' twistin ' , like a man that 's in sair distress o' mind .
On my conscience , it gies me the shakes noo when I think o ' his tall figure and his yelley face comin ' sae solemn and silent doon the lang , lone passage .
The general tuk nae heed o't , but walked on and was soon oot o ' sicht , and I didna lose a minute in creepin ' oot frae my hidin ' place and scamperin ' awa ' back tae my room , and if a ' the bogies in the Red Sea were trapesin ' up and doon the hale nicht through , I wud never put my heid oot again tae hae a glimpse o ' them .
Maister Fothergill West says I maunna express an opeenion as tae what cam aboot afterwards , but maun confine mysel ' tae what I saw mysel ' .
Nae doubt he has his reasons for this -- and far be it frae me tae hint that they are no ' guid anes -- but I maun say this , that what happened didna surprise me .
It was just as I expeckit , and so I said tae Maister Donald McSnaw .
All round the walls and in the corners were arranged a very choice and varied collection of arms , principally swords , some of which were of the straight pattern in common use in the British Army , while among the others were scimitars , tulwars , cuchurries , and a score of other specimens of Oriental workmanship .
Many of these were richly mounted , with inlaid sheaths and hilts sparkling with precious stones , so that there was a piquant contrast between the simplicity of the apartment and the wealth which glittered on the walls .
`` There is no danger , '' I remarked .
`` With a little quinine and arsenic we shall very soon overcome the attack and restore his health . ''
`` It 's all right , doctor , '' the general said with a ghastly smile .
`` It's only my private gong .
Perhaps you had better step downstairs and write my prescription in the dining-room . ''
He was evidently anxious to get rid of me , so I was forced to take my departure , though I would gladly have stayed a little longer , in the hope of learning something as to the origin of the mysterious sound .
OF THE LETTER WHICH CAME FROM THE HALL
Our anxiety , however , was considerably mitigated by the receipt , a couple of days after my last talk with the general , of a note from Mordaunt Heatherstone .
This was brought us by a little , ragged urchin , the son of one of the fishermen , who informed us that it had been handed to him at the avenue gate by an old woman -- who , I expect , must have been the Cloomber cook .
Those few intervening days , however , would , we feared , be dreary , long ones .
And so they would have been , had it not been for a new and most unexpected incident , which diverted our minds from our own troubles and gave them something fresh with which to occupy themselves .
The sun blazed down with a degree of heat which was remarkable so late in the season , and a shimmering haze lay upon the upland moors and concealed the Irish mountains on the other side of the Channel .
The sea itself rose and fell in a long , heavy , oily roll , sweeping slowly landward , and breaking sullenly with a dull , monotonous booming upon the rock-girt shore .
To the inexperienced all seemed calm and peaceful , but to those who are accustomed to read Nature 's warnings there was a dark menace in air and sky and sea .
`` The abridged edition in the Imperial Library of Pekin , '' said my father , rubbing his hands together , `` consists of 325 volumes of an average weight of five pounds .
Then the preface , which must embrace some account of the Rig-veda , the Sama-veda , the Yagur-veda , and the Atharva-veda , with the Brahmanas , could hardly be completed in less than ten volumes .
Now , if we apportion one volume to each year , there is every prospect of the family coming to an end of its task about the date 2250 , the twelfth generation completing the work , while the thirteenth might occupy itself upon the index . ''
I may have slept a couple of hours when I was awakened by some one tugging furiously at my shoulder .
Sitting up in bed , I saw by the dim light that my father was standing half-clad by my bedside , and that it was his grasp which I felt on my night-shirt .
With a rending , riving sound the ship split in two where the terrible , serrated back of the Hansel reef was sawing into her keel .
The after-part , with the broken mizzen and the three Orientals , sank backwards into deep water and vanished , while the fore-half oscillated helplessly about , retaining its precarious balance upon the rocks .
`` If it had n't been for you , sir , and your brave fellows , '' he said , smiling across at me , `` we should be ten fathoms deep by this time .
As to the _Belinda_ , she was a leaky old tub and well insured , so neither the owners nor I are likely to break our hearts over her . ''
`` Why , in my opinion , '' the mate answered , `` them three swabs have no more difficulty in raising a gale o ' wind than I should have in swallowing this here grog .
They had reasons o ' their own for coming to this God-forsaken -- saving your presence , sirs -- this God-forsaken bay , and they took a short cut to it by arranging to be blown ashore there .
That 's my idea o ' the matter , though what three Buddhist priests could find to do in the Bay of Kirkmaiden is clean past my comprehension . ''
The first pale light of dawn was just appearing in the east when we made our way for the second time to the scene of the shipwreck .
The gale had blown itself out , but the sea was still very high , and all inside the breakers was a seething , gleaming line of foam , as though the fierce old ocean were gnashing its white fangs at the victims who had escaped from its clutches .
It was hard to believe that the gentle breeze which whispered so softly among the ivy-leaves around my window was caused by the same element which had shaken the very house a few short hours before .
It was as if Nature had repented of her momentary passion and was endeavouring to make amends to an injured world by its warmth and its sunshine .
A chorus of birds in the garden below filled the whole air with their wonder and congratulations .
`` If you want to bury them , '' he said , `` you had best look sharp , or they may clear out of the country .
You remember what I said last night ?
Just look at the top of that 'ere hillock , and tell me whether I was in the right or not ? ''
The stranger 's broad , unruffled brow , his clear , searching gaze , firm-set yet sensitive mouth , and clean-cut , resolute expression , all combined to form the most imposing and noble presence which I had ever known .
I could not have imagined that such imperturbable calm and at the same time such a consciousness of latent strength could have been expressed by any human face .
`` My father is , indeed , a well-known Sanscrit scholar , '' I answered in astonishment .
`` Your father is hardly so profound as Sir William Jones , or so universal as the Baron Von Hammer-Purgstall , but he combines many of the virtues of each .
You may tell him , however , from me that he is mistaken in the analogy which he has traced between the Samoyede and Tamulic word roots . ''
`` My friends and I are very much obliged to you , '' he said , `` but we have our own reasons for remaining where we are .
The hut which we occupy is deserted and partly ruined , but we Easterns have trained ourselves to do without most of those things which are looked upon as necessaries in Europe , believing firmly in that wise axiom that a man is rich , not in proportion to what he has , but in proportion to what he can dispense with .
A good fisherman supplies us with bread and with herbs , we have clean , dry straw for our couches ; what could man wish for more ? ''
`` Do n't you think , Jack . ''
she said , in her low , sweet voice , `` that we are forgetting our friends over at Cloomber ?
Has n't all this excitement driven their fears and their danger out of our heads ? ''
The remark made me thoughtful .
I made the promise to allay my sister 's apprehensions , but in the bright sunlight of morning it appeared less than absurd to imagine that our poor vegetarian castaways could have any sinister intentions , or that their advent could have any effect upon the tenant of Cloomber .
`` I have been anxious about you all , '' I said , `` for it is some little time since I have seen or heard from any of you .
How have you all been keeping ? ''
`` The corporal and I are a little disturbed in our minds just now , '' the general explained , `` but I have no doubt that all will come right .
After all , there is nothing higher than Providence , and we are all in His hands .
And how have you been , eh ? ''
I could see through the crack that Corporal Rufus Smith 's face had turned to a sickly yellow shade , and that he was wiping the perspiration from his brow .
`` No , no , that would never do , '' he answered , shaking his head .
`` You will learn about the wretched business soon enough .
Mordaunt knows where to lay his hand upon the papers bearing on the matter .
You can consult him about it to-morrow . ''
It was evident now that my sister 's suspicions were correct , and that there was some very intimate connection between the presence of the three Orientals and the mysterious peril which hung over the towers of Cloomber .
It was difficult for me to associate the noble-faced Ram Singh 's gentle , refined manner and words of wisdom with any deed of violence , yet now that I thought of it I could see that a terrible capacity for wrath lay behind his shaggy brows and dark , piercing eyes .
I felt that of all men whom I had ever met he was the one whose displeasure I should least care to face .
But how could two men so widely dissociated as the foul-mouthed old corporal of artillery and the distinguished Anglo-Indian general have each earned the ill-will of these strange castaways ?
And if the danger were a positive physical one , why should he not consent to my proposal to have the three men placed under custody -- though I confess it would have gone much against my grain to act in so inhospitable a manner upon such vague and shadowy grounds .
It was all a puzzle -- an absolutely insoluble puzzle .
The old man had been of late so abstracted from the daily affairs of the world , and so absorbed in his own special studies , that it was difficult to engage his attention upon any ordinary , mundane topic .
Curious to know what it was that had drawn him so far out of himself , I opened the gate softly , and walking quietly round the laurel bushes , found him sitting , to my astonishment , with none other than the very man who was occupying my thoughts , Ram Singh , the Buddhist .
I made no answer to this observation , and we trudged along for a time in silence , keeping well down to the water 's edge , where the sands afforded a good foothold .
The place to which he led me was a small fisher cottage which had been deserted some years before by its tenant , but still stood gaunt and bare , with the thatch partly blown away and the windows and doors in sad disrepair .
This dwelling , which the poorest Scotch beggar would have shrunk from , was the one which these singular men had preferred to the proffered hospitality of the laird 's house .
A small garden , now a mass of tangled brambles , stood round it , and through this my acquaintance picked his way to the ruined door .
He glanced into the house and then waved his hand for me to follow him .
`` You have now an opportunity , '' he said , in a subdued , reverential voice , `` of seeing a spectacle which few Europeans have had the privilege of beholding .
Inside that cottage you will find two Yogis -- men who are only one remove from the highest plane of adeptship .
They are both wrapped in an ecstatic trance , otherwise I should not venture to obtrude your presence upon them .
Their astral bodies have departed from them , to be present at the feast of lamps in the holy Lamasery of Rudok in Tibet .
Tread lightly lest by stimulating their corporeal functions you recall them before their devotions are completed . ''
They were so still and silent that they might have been two bronze statues but for the slow and measured rhythm of their breathing .
Their faces , however , had a peculiar , ashen-grey colour , very different from the healthy brown of my companion 's , and I observed , on , stooping my head , that only the whites of their eyes were visible , the balls being turned upwards beneath the lids .
`` But if you can transmit your spirits so readily , '' I observed , `` why should they be accompanied by any body at all ? ''
`` Have you ever heard , '' I asked , `` that these higher priests of whom you speak have powers which are unknown to us ? ''
At first we had made some pretence -- she of knitting and I of reading -- but we soon abandoned the useless deception , and sat uneasily waiting , starting and glancing at each other with questioning eyes whenever the faggot crackled in the fire or a rat scampered behind the wainscot .
There was a heavy electrical feeling in the air , which weighed us down with a foreboding of disaster .
`` What is it ? ''
I asked , in a subdued voice .
I could distinguish the sound clearly enough now to know that her quick , feminine perception had not deceived her , and that it was indeed caused by a running man .
`` My father ! ''
he gasped -- '' my father ! ''
`` We can do nothing until daybreak , '' he answered .
`` We shall then endeavour to obtain some trace of them .
It is hopeless at present . ''
`` If we can do nothing until the morning , '' I said , `` you have time to tell us all that has occurred . ''
`` Rushing to the window I drew the blind aside and looked out .
You know that the gravel-drive opens up so as to form a broad stretch immediately in front of the house .
Just in the centre of this clear space there stood three men looking up at the house .
`` The moon shone full upon them , glistening on their upturned eyeballs , and by its light I could see that they were swarthy-faced and black-haired , of a type that I was familiar with among the Sikhs and Afridis .
Two of them were thin , with eager , aesthetic countenances , while the third was kinglike and majestic , with a noble figure and flowing beard . ''
`` Ram Singh ! ''
`` They stood in a line , '' he continued , `` sweeping their arms upwards and downwards , while their lips moved as if repeating some prayer or incantation .
Suddenly they ceased to gesticulate , and broke out for the third time into the wild , weird , piercing cry which had roused me from my slumber .
Never shall I forget that shrill , dreadful summons swelling and reverberating through the silent night with an intensity of sound which is still ringing in my ears .
`` 'They have , ' I answered .
`` 'God 's will be done ! '
'Your poor father will be happier in the next world than he has ever been in this .
Thank Heaven that Gabriel is asleep .
I gave her chloral in her cocoa . '
`` 'Anything rather than that ' , my mother said earnestly .
'He has begged me again and again to avoid it .
My son , we shall never set eyes upon your father again .
You may marvel at my dry eyes , but it you knew as I know the peace which death would bring him , you could not find it in your heart to mourn for him .
All pursuit is , I feel , vain , and yet some pursuit there must be .
Let it be as private as possible .
We can not serve him better than by consulting his wishes . '
`` It was then , my dear friends , as I stood , not knowing in which direction to turn , that the horror and responsibility broke full upon me .
I felt that I was combating against forces of which I knew nothing .
All was strange and dark and terrible .
He turned from one to the other of us with outstretched hands and eager , questioning eyes .
I have reason to believe that many people , even among those who knew India well , thought that Sir Edward was romancing , and that he had evolved his incidents from his imagination .
The few faded sheets which I send you will show you that this is not the case , and that our men of science must recognise powers and laws which can and have been used by man , but which are unknown to European civilisation .
I do not wish to whine or to whimper , but I can not help feeling that I have had hard measure dealt me in this world .
I would not , God knows , take the life of any man , far less an aged one , in cold blood .
My temper and nature , however , were always fiery and headstrong , and in action when my blood is up , I have no knowledge of what I am about .
Neither the corporal nor I would have laid a finger upon Ghoolab Shah had we not seen that the tribesmen were rallying behind him .
Well , well , it is an old story now , and there is no profit in discussing it .
May no other poor fellow ever have the same evil fortune !
I threw aside the letter and picked up the roll of blue foolscap which contained the solution of the mystery .
It was all ragged and frayed at the inner edge , with traces of gum and thread still adhering to it , to show that it had been torn out of a strongly bound volume .
The ink with which it had been written was faded somewhat , but across the head of the first page was inscribed in bold , clear characters , evidently of later date than the rest : `` Journal of Lieutenant J .
B. Heatherstone in the Thull Valley during the autumn of 1841 , '' and then underneath :
Now , this morning two urgent messages were sent me from two different points more than sixteen miles apart , to say that there were signs of a descent of the tribes .
Punch and cigars _al fresco_ up to eleven o'clock .
No doubt these fellows at the Front will have C.B .
's and knighthoods showering upon them thick and fast , while we poor devils , who have had most of the responsibility and anxiety , will be passed over completely .
Elliott has a whitlow .
-- Seven o'clock in the evening .
_ Crown us with laurel -- Elliott and myself !
Who can compare with us as vermin killers ?
I had asked Chamberlain to throw out his men in skirmishing order , and to give them directions to retreat slowly upon the waggons so as to draw the Afridis on .
The ruse succeeded to perfection .
From every cranny and slit of the waggons came a blaze of fire , every shot of which told among the close-packed mob .
Two or three score rolled over like rabbits and the rest reeled for a moment , and then , with their chiefs at their head , came on again in a magnificent rush .
There is a smaller ravine which opens into the main pass , and in their hurry and confusion some of the fugitives rushed down this .
I saw sixty or seventy of them turn down , but I should have passed them by and continued in pursuit of the main body had not one of my scouts come rustling up to inform me that the smaller ravine was a _cul-de-sac_ , and that the Afridis who had gone up it had no possible means of getting out again except by cutting their way through our ranks .
Here was an opportunity of striking terror into the tribes .
Leaving Chamberlain and Elliott to continue the pursuit of the main body , I wheeled my Sepoys into the narrow path and proceeded slowly down it in extended order , covering the whole ground from cliff to cliff .
Not a jackal could have passed us unseen .
The rebels were caught like rats in a trap .
A sort of twilight reigned in this strange valley , and the dim , uncertain light made the great , basalt rocks loom up vague and fantastic .
There was no path , and the ground was most uneven , but I pushed on briskly , cautioning my fellows to have their fingers on their triggers , for I could see that we were nearing the point where the two cliffs would form an acute angle with each other .
Waving my sword , I was leading my men on , when we had a most dramatic interruption of a sort which I have seen once or twice on the boards of Drury Lane , but never in real life .
In the side of the cliff , close to the pile of stones where the Hillmen were making their last stand , there was a cave which looked more like the lair of some wild beast than a human habitation .
I dashed forward at the head of the white artillerymen who had stuck to me .
The old fellow rushed at us with his arms out as if to stop us , but it was not time to stick at trifles , so I passed my sword through his body at the same moment that one of the gunners brought his carbine down upon his head .
He dropped instantly , and the Hillmen , at the sight of his fall , set up the most unearthly howl of horror and consternation .
I was just dropping off to sleep , for I was dog-tired after the day's work , when I was aroused by some slight noise , and , looking round , I saw a man dressed in Asiatic costume standing at the entrance of my tent .
He was motionless when I saw him , and he had his eyes fixed upon me with a solemn and stern expression .
`` In former days these laws acted so instantaneously that the slayer perished with his victim .
It was judged afterwards that this prompt retribution prevented the offender from having time to realise the enormity of his offence .
`` It was therefore ordained that in all such cases the retribution should be left in the hands of the _chelas_ , or immediate disciples of the holy man , with power to extend or shorten it at their will , exacting it either at the time or at any future anniversary of the day when the crime was committed .
The man stared at me in amazement .
`` Has any one disturbed the sahib ? ''
When I awoke this morning I was inclined to put the whole of my yesternight 's experiences down to imagination , but I was soon disabused of the idea , for I had hardly risen before the same strange sound was repeated in my very ear as loudly , and to all appearance as causelesly , as before .
What it is or where it comes from I can not conceive .
I have not heard it since .
`` From that day to this , '' it said , `` I have had no night or day free from the intrusion of that dreadful sound with its accompanying train of thought .
Time and custom have brought me no relief , but on the contrary , as the years pass over my head my physical strength decreases and my nerves become less able to bear up against the continual strain .
`` I am a broken man in mind and body .
I live in a state of tension , always straining my ears for the hated sound , afraid to converse with my fellows for fear of exposing my dreadful condition to them , with no comfort or hope of comfort on this side of the grave .
I should be willing .
Heaven knows , to die , and yet as each 5th of October comes round , I am prostrated with fear because I do not know what strange and terrible experience may be in store for me .
`` Forty years have passed since I slew Ghoolab Shah , and forty times I have gone through all the horrors of death , without attaining the blessed peace which lies beyond .
`` Well , well , these things can not depend upon chance , and there is no doubt some deep reason for it all .
Right away to the horizon stretched the broad expanse of mud and of water , mingled and mixed together in the wildest chaos , like a portion of some world in the process of formation .
Here and there on the dun-coloured surface of this great marsh there had burst out patches of sickly yellow reeds and of livid , greenish scum , which only served to heighten and intensify the gloomy effect of the dull , melancholy expanse .
This is the great Bog of Cree .
It is a salt-water marsh formed by an inroad of the sea , and so intersected is it with dangerous swamps and treacherous pitfalls of liquid mud , that no man would venture through it unless he had the guidance of one of the few peasants who retain the secret of its paths .
If we could have had any doubts as to our dog 's guidance they would all have been removed now , for in the soft , black , oozing soil we could distinctly trace the tracks of the whole party .
From these we could see that they had walked abreast , and , furthermore , that each was about equidistant from the other .
Clearly , then , no physical force had been used in taking the general and his companion along .
The compulsion had been psychical and not material .
`` Where , then ? ''
`` How do you know about it , then ? ''
The tortuous path grew less and less defined as we proceeded , and was even covered in places with water , but the increasing excitement of the hound and the sight of the deep footmarks in the mud stimulated us to push on .
At last , after struggling through a grove of high bulrushes , we came on a spot the gloomy horror of which might have furnished Dante with a fresh terror for his `` Inferno . ''
Oh , the wearisome , tedious journey !
It had seemed long enough when we had some slight flicker of hope , or at least of expectation , before us , but now that our worst fears were fulfilled it appeared interminable .
In this way we came back to Edinburgh very much more important people than we left it , and with no further reason to be uneasy about the details of housekeeping .
But , in truth , the whole household has been dissolved , for I have been married for some months to my dear Gabriel , and Esther is to become Mrs. Heatherstone upon the 23rd of the month .
If she makes him as good a wife as his sister has made me , we may both set ourselves down as fortunate men .
My object in drawing up this statement and publishing the evidence which corroborates it , was certainly not to parade my private affairs before the public , but to leave on record an authentic narrative of a most remarkable series of events .
This I have endeavoured to do in as methodical a manner as possible , exaggerating nothing and suppressing nothing .
There is only one point which is still dark to me .
Why the _chelas_ of Ghoolab Shah should have removed their victims to the desolate Hole of Cree instead of taking their lives at Cloomber , is , I confess , a mystery to me .
On this point I should be sorry to be dogmatic , but at least we must allow that the Buddhist priests must have had some very good cause for the course of action which they so deliberately carried out .
His broken sleep led him to wander about the house at night , and the lamps which he burnt in every room were no doubt to prevent his imagination from peopling the darkness with terrors .
Lastly , his elaborate precautions were , as he has himself explained , rather the result of a feverish desire to do something than in the expectation that he could really ward off his fate .
`` Ah , yes , I remember .
My life depends upon it .
Plead with him , Watson .
There is no good feeling between us .
His nephew , Watson -- I had suspicions of foul play and I allowed him to see it .
The boy died horribly .
He has a grudge against me .
You will soften him , Watson .
Beg him , pray him , get him here by any means .
He can save me -- only he ! ''
He looked at me in a most singular fashion .
Had it not been too fiendish , I could have imagined that the gleam of the fanlight showed exultation in his face .
Lower Burke Street proved to be a line of fine houses lying in the vague borderland between Notting Hill and Kensington .
The particular one at which my cabman pulled up had an air of smug and demure respectability in its old-fashioned iron railings , its massive folding-door , and its shining brasswork .
All was in keeping with a solemn butler who appeared framed in the pink radiance of a tinted electrical light behind him .
`` What about Holmes ?
How is he ? ''
The man motioned me to a chair , and turned to resume his own .
As he did so I caught a glimpse of his face in the mirror over the mantelpiece .
I could have sworn that it was set in a malicious and abominable smile .
Yet I persuaded myself that it must have been some nervous contraction which I had surprised , for he turned to me an instant later with genuine concern upon his features .
`` Because , in some professional inquiry , he has been working among Chinese sailors down in the docks . ''
`` My dear Holmes ! ''
`` Is that you , Mr .
`` I hardly dared hope that you would come . ''
`` I should imagine not , '' he said .
`` And yet , you see , I am here .
Coals of fire , Holmes -- coals of fire ! ''
I heard the rasping , laboured breathing of the sick man .
`` Give me the water ! ''
`` Do what you can for me .
Let bygones be bygones , '' he whispered .
`` I'll put the words out of my head -- I swear I will .
Only cure me , and I'll forget it . ''
`` Yes , yes ; it is cramp . ''
`` Yes , yes , I opened it .
There was a sharp spring inside it .
`` A match and a cigarette . ''
`` But your appearance , Holmes -- your ghastly face ? ''
By midday I had got as far as the village of Saalfeldt , but as I was on the direct road for Osterode , where the Emperor was wintering , and also for the main camp of the seven divisions of infantry , the highway was choked with carriages and carts .
What with artillery caissons and waggons and couriers , and the ever-thickening stream of recruits and stragglers , it seemed to me that it would be a very long time before I should join my comrades .
The plains , however , were five feet deep in snow , so there was nothing for it but to plod upon our way .
It was with joy , therefore , that I found a second road which branched away from the other , trending through a fir-wood towards the north .
There was a small auberge at the cross-roads , and a patrol of the Third Hussars of Conflans -- the very regiment of which I was afterwards colonel -- were mounting their horses at the door .
On the steps stood their officer , a slight , pale young man , who looked more like a young priest from a seminary than a leader of the devil-may-care rascals before him .
'I am Sub-Lieutenant Duroc , of the Third , ' said he .
'May I ask , monsieur , whether you are going by this northern road ? '
So it proved , for this road led away from the army into a country which was given over to Cossacks and marauders , and it was as bare as the other was crowded .
Duroc and I rode in front , with our six troopers clattering in the rear .
He was a good boy , this Duroc , with his head full of the nonsense that they teach at St Cyr , knowing more about Alexander and Pompey than how to mix a horse 's fodder or care for a horse 's feet .
Still , he was , as I have said , a good boy , unspoiled as yet by the camp .
It pleased me to hear him prattle away about his sister Marie and about his mother in Amiens .
Presently we found ourselves at the village of Hayenau .
Duroc rode up to the post-house and asked to see the master .
'Why do you call it the Castle of Gloom ? '
'A Polish nobleman ? '
'You can not , in any case , reach it tonight .
Tomorrow will bring you to Rossel .
By staying with me you will confer the very greatest kindness upon me , and you will aid me in a matter which concerns my own honour and the honour of my family .
I am compelled , however , to confess to you that some personal danger may possibly be involved . '
'You will think , doubtless , that it would be easy for us to find him , since we had both his name and his title .
You must remember , however , that the Revolution left us without money , and that without money such a search is very difficult .
Then came the Empire , and it became more difficult still , for , as you are aware , the Emperor considered that the 18th Brumaire brought all accounts to a settlement , and that on that day a veil had been drawn across the past .
None the less , we kept our own family story and our own family plans .
'My brother joined the army , and passed with it through all Southern Europe , asking everywhere for the Baron Straubenthal .
Last October he was killed at Jena , with his mission still unfulfilled .
Then it became my turn , and I have the good fortune to hear of the very man of whom I am in search at one of the first Polish villages which I have to visit , and within a fortnight of joining my regiment .
And then , to make the matter even better , I find myself in the company of one whose name is never mentioned throughout the army save in connection with some daring and generous deed . '
'By coming up with me . '
'Enough talk , ' said he , pushing the man to one side .
'It is with your master that I have to deal . '
'Not the son of -- -- ? '
'The son of the man you murdered . '
'Because it is the hand which struck him on his vile , lying mouth .
Because it may be the hand which will avenge my mother .
I am his step-daughter .
The woman whose heart he broke was my mother .
I loathe him , I fear him .
Ah , there is his step ! '
In an instant she had vanished as suddenly as she had come .
A moment later , the Baron entered with a drawn sword in his hand , and the fellow who had admitted us at his heels .
There was only one window , which had no glass in it , and was so narrow that one could not so much as get one 's head through .
It was high up , and Duroc had to stand upon a barrel in order to see from it .
'That is all very well , ' I said at last , as I heard Duroc muttering his threats .
'You may do what you like to him when you get the upper hand .
At present the question rather is , what is _he_ going to do to us ? '
My remark brought him to his senses .
'We must get out before he returns . '
But I am not easily baffled .
After all , this key must have been sent to us for a purpose .
The lady could not bring us that of the door , because this murderous step-father of hers would most certainly have it in his pocket .
Yet this other must have a meaning , or why should she risk her life to place it in our hands ?
It would say little for our wits if we could not find out what that meaning might be .
There was no time for us to pause .
A woman 's scream from in front -- a scream of mortal terror -- told us that even now we might be too late .
There were two other men in the hall , but they cowered away from our drawn swords and furious faces .
The blood was streaming from Duroc's neck and dyeing the grey fur of his pelisse .
Such was the lad 's fire , however , that he shot in front of me , and it was only over his shoulder that I caught a glimpse of the scene as we rushed into the chamber in which we had first seen the master of the Castle of Gloom .
'Have your way , then ! '
he snarled , and leaped at me like a madman .
For a minute I saw only the blazing blue eyes , and the red glazed point which stabbed and stabbed , rasping off to right or to left , and yet ever back at my throat and my breast .
I had never thought that such good sword-play was to be found at Paris in the days of the Revolution .
I do not suppose that in all my little affairs I have met six men who had a better knowledge of their weapon .
But he knew that I was his master .
He read death in my eyes , and I could see that he read it .
The flush died from his face .
His breath came in shorter and in thicker gasps .
Yet he fought on , even after the final thrust had come , and died still hacking and cursing , with foul cries upon his lips , and his blood clotting upon his orange beard .
I who speak to you have seen so many battles , that my old memory can scarce contain their names , and yet of all the terrible sights which these eyes have rested upon , there is none which I care to think of less than of that orange beard with the crimson stain in the centre , from which I had drawn my sword-point .
When the Emperor returned to Paris , after the declaration of peace in the year 1807 , he spent much of his time with the Empress and the Court at Fontainebleau .
It was the time when he was at the pinnacle of his career .
He had in three successive campaigns humbled Austria , crushed Prussia , and made the Russians very glad to get upon the right side of the Niemen .
The old Bulldog over the Channel was still growling , but he could not get very far from his kennel .
If we could have made a perpetual peace at that moment , France would have taken a higher place than any nation since the days of the Romans .
So I have heard the wise folk say , though for my part I had other things to think of .
All the girls were glad to see the army back after its long absence , and you may be sure that I had my share of any favours that were going .
You may judge how far I was a favourite in those days when I say that even now , in my sixtieth year -- but why should I dwell upon that which is already sufficiently well known ?
Our regiment of hussars was quartered with the horse chasseurs of the guard at Fontainebleau .
It is , as you know , but a little place , buried in the heart of the forest , and it was wonderful at this time to see it crowded with Grand Dukes and Electors and Princes , who thronged round Napoleon like puppies round their master , each hoping that some bone might be thrown to him .
There was more German than French to be heard in the street , for those who had helped us in the late war had come to beg for a reward , and those who had opposed us had come to try and escape their punishment .
Well , one day I was seated in my quarters playing cards with young Morat , of the horse chasseurs , when the door opened and in walked Lasalle , who was our Colonel .
You know what a fine , swaggering fellow he was , and the sky-blue uniform of the Tenth suited him to a marvel .
My faith , we youngsters were so taken by him that we all swore and diced and drank and played the deuce whether we liked it or no , just that we might resemble our Colonel !
We forgot that it was not because he drank or gambled that the Emperor was going to make him the head of the light cavalry , but because he had the surest eye for the nature of a position or for the strength of a column , and the best judgment as to when infantry could be broken , or whether guns were exposed , of any man in the army .
We were too young to understand all that , however , so we waxed our moustaches and clicked our spurs and let the ferrules of our scabbards wear out by trailing them along the pavement in the hope that we should all become Lasalles .
When he came clanking into my quarters , both Morat and I sprang to our feet .
I saluted , and the statesman took me in from the top of my panache to the rowel of my spur , with a glance that played over me like a rapier point .
'Well , Monsieur Gerard , ' said he , at last , tapping his forefinger upon one of the brandebourgs of gold braid upon the front of my pelisse , 'I am informed that you are a very deserving young officer .
Your Colonel gives me an excellent account of you . '
'I believe that you are the very man that I want , ' said he .
'Brave and clever men surround me upon every side .
But a brave man who -- -- ' He did not finish his sentence , and for my own part I could not understand what he was driving at .
I contented myself with assuring him that he could count upon me to the death .
'Tolerable , sire , ' I answered .
'The fencing master of the 23rd Light Infantry touched me on the left elbow , sire . '
'I understand , sire . '
'I have heard , Colonel de Lasalle , ' said he , with an icy dignity , 'that your opinion is of great weight upon the subject of light cavalry .
Should I have occasion to seek information about that branch of the army , I shall be very happy to apply to you .
At present , however , the matter concerns diplomacy , and you will permit me to form my own views upon that question .
As long as the welfare of France and the safety of the Emperor 's person are largely committed to my care , I will use every means in my power to secure them , even if it should be against the Emperor 's own temporary wishes .
I have the honour , Colonel de Lasalle , to wish you a very good-day ! '
I put on my military overcoat , as I did not know how much of the night I might have to spend in the woods , and I fastened my sword outside it .
I pulled off my hussar boots also , and wore a pair of shoes and gaiters , that I might be lighter upon my feet .
Then I stole out of my quarters and made for the forest , feeling very much easier in my mind , for I am always at my best when the time of thought has passed and the moment for action arrived .
My first thought was that he would be angry with me for having kept him waiting , but as I approached him , we heard the big church clock of Fontainebleau clang out the hour of ten .
It was evident , therefore , that it was he who was too soon , and not I too late .
I remembered his order that I should make no remark , so contented myself with halting within four paces of him , clicking my spurs together , grounding my sabre , and saluting .
He glanced at me , and then without a word he turned and walked slowly through the forest , I keeping always about the same distance behind him .
Once or twice he seemed to me to look apprehensively to right and to left , as if he feared that someone was observing us .
I looked also , but although I have the keenest sight , it was quite impossible to see anything except the ragged patches of moonshine between the great black shadows of the trees .
My ears are as quick as my eyes , and once or twice I thought that I heard a twig crack ; but you know how many sounds there are in a forest at night , and how difficult it is even to say what direction they come from .
Vanished utterly , you understand .
I rushed to the spot , and gazed down into the black abyss .
Had he hurled himself over ?
I had almost made up my mind that he had done so , when a gentle sound rising and falling came out of the darkness beneath me .
It was his breathing once more , and it showed me where he must be .
He was hiding in the tool-house .
'You have killed one , I see , ' said he , jerking his head towards the beech .
'I am unhurt , sire .
But in another minute I should in my despair -- -- '
'You saw it , sire ! '
Again there came that hardening of his mouth and cold glitter of his eyes .
He smiled , but he shook his head .
The landlord would not hear of my crossing the mountains without an escort , for he assured me that El Cuchillo , the Spanish guerilla chief , was out that way with his band , and that it meant a death by torture to fall into his hands .
The old priest observed , however , that he did not think a French hussar would be deterred by that , and if I had had any doubts , they would of course have been decided by his remark .
'I am Monsieur Vidal , of the commissariat , ' he answered , 'and I am myself upon my way to Pastores .
I should be glad to have your company , Colonel , for I hear that the mountains are far from safe . '
With that he led me down the village to an old cow-house , in which we found a tumble-down sort of diligence , such as they used to run early in this century , between some of our remote villages .
There were three old mules , too , none of which were strong enough to carry a man , but together they might draw the coach .
The sight of their gaunt ribs and spavined legs gave me more delight than the whole two hundred and twenty hunters of the Emperor which I have seen in their stalls at Fontainebleau .
In ten minutes the owner was harnessing them into the coach , with no very good will , however , for he was in mortal dread of this terrible Cuchillo .
It was only by promising him riches in this world , while the priest threatened him with perdition in the next , that we at last got him safely upon the box with the reins between his fingers .
Then he was in such a hurry to get off , out of fear lest we should find ourselves in the dark in the passes , that he hardly gave me time to renew my vows to the innkeeper 's daughter .
I can not at this moment recall her name , but we wept together as we parted , and I can remember that she was a very beautiful woman .
You will understand , my friends , that when a man like me , who has fought the men and kissed the women in fourteen separate kingdoms , gives a word of praise to the one or the other , it has a little meaning of its own .
I clutched the creature in both hands , and , hurling him on to the floor of the coach , I stamped on him with my heavy boots .
He had drawn a pistol from the front of his soutane , but I kicked it out of his hand , and again I fell with my knees upon his chest .
Then , for the first time , he screamed horribly , while I , half blinded , felt about for the sword which he had so cunningly concealed .
My hand had just lighted upon it , and I was dashing the blood from my face to see where he lay that I might transfix him , when the whole coach turned partly over upon its side , and my weapon was jerked out of my grasp by the shock .
What , then , had become of Commissariat Vidal ?
Was it possible that there was another Frenchman in as perilous a plight as myself ?
The thought had hardly entered my head when our party stopped and one of them uttered a peculiar cry .
It was answered from among the brambles which lined the base of a cliff at one side of a clearing , and an instant later ten or a dozen more brigands came out from amongst them , and the two parties greeted each other .
The new-comers surrounded my friend of the brad-awl with cries of grief and sympathy , and then , turning upon me , they brandished their knives and howled at me like the gang of assassins that they were .
So frantic were their gestures that I was convinced that my end had come , and was just bracing myself to meet it in a manner which should be worthy of my past reputation , when one of them gave an order and I was dragged roughly across the little glade to the brambles from which this new band had emerged .
'The Third Hussars of Conflans . '
'My career has been an eventful one . '
'You buried him alive ! '
I only tell you this , however , to show you that I was never a mere rough soldier like Rapp or Ney .
As I lay in that brigands ' camp , I had little time or inclination to think about such matters .
They had thrown me down under a tree , the three villains squatting round and smoking their cigarettes within hands ' touch of me .
What to do I could not imagine .
In my whole career I do not suppose that I have ten times been in as hopeless a situation .
'But courage , ' thought I .
'Courage , my brave boy !
You were not made a Colonel of Hussars at twenty-eight because you could dance a cotillon .
You are a picked man , Etienne ; a man who has come through more than two hundred affairs , and this little one is surely not going to be the last . '
I began eagerly to glance about for some chance of escape , and as I did so I saw something which filled me with great astonishment .
'Your excellency will observe that this Frenchman is our prisoner , ' said he .
'Two can play at that game , my dear Bart , ' said I .
'That 's all very well , ' said he ; 'but you 've got to come along with me to the camp . '
'Where are your dice ? '
He held his cards in his hand , but his jaw had fallen , and his eyes were staring over my shoulder with the most dreadful expression of consternation and surprise .
I whisked round , and I was myself amazed at what I saw .
And first of all I may say that if it were not that I have set off to tell you about what befell myself , I could keep you here until morning with my stories about Dartmoor itself , and about the singular things which occurred there .
It was one of the very strangest places in the whole world , for there , in the middle of that great desolate waste , were herded together seven or eight thousand men -- warriors , you understand , men of experience and courage .
Around there were a double wall and a ditch , and warders and soldiers ; but , my faith !
you could not coop men like that up like rabbits in a hutch !
They would escape by twos and tens and twenties , and then the cannon would boom , and the search parties run , and we , who were left behind , would laugh and dance and shout 'Vive l'Empereur ' until the warders would turn their muskets upon us in their passion .
And then we would have our little mutinies , too , and up would come the infantry and the guns from Plymouth , and that would set us yelling 'Vive l'Empereur ' once more , as though we wished them to hear us in Paris .
We had lively moments at Dartmoor , and we contrived that those who were about us should be lively also .
You must know that the prisoners there had their own Courts of Justice , in which they tried their own cases , and inflicted their own punishments .
Stealing and quarrelling were punished -- but most of all treachery .
When I came there first there was a man , Meunier , from Rheims , who had given information of some plot to escape .
Well , that night , owing to some form or other which had to be gone through , they did not take him out from among the other prisoners , and though he wept and screamed , and grovelled upon the ground , they left him there amongst the comrades whom he had betrayed .
That night there was a trial with a whispered accusation and a whispered defence , a gagged prisoner , and a judge whom none could see .
In the morning , when they came for their man with papers for his release , there was not as much of him left as you could put upon your thumb-nail .
They were ingenious people , these prisoners , and they had their own way of managing .
I had no sooner got into Dartmoor than I began to plan to get out again , and you can readily believe that , with wits sharpened by twelve years of warfare , it was not very long before I saw my way .
You will ask me what better off I was , since , as I have said , a child could not have fitted through the opening .
I will tell you .
I had gained two things -- a tool and a weapon .
With the one I might loosen the stone which flanked the window .
With the other I might defend myself when I had scrambled through .
So now I turned my attention to that stone , and I picked and picked with the sharpened end of my bar until I had worked out the mortar all round .
You understand , of course , that during the day I replaced everything in its position , and that the warder was never permitted to see a speck upon the floor .
At the end of three weeks I had separated the stone , and had the rapture of drawing it through , and seeing a hole left with ten stars shining through it , where there had been but four before .
All was ready for us now , and I had replaced the stone , smearing the edges of it round with a little fat and soot , so as to hide the cracks where the mortar should have been .
In three nights the moon would be gone , and that seemed the best time for our attempt .
'Courage , my friend ! '
I cried , slapping him upon the shoulder .
'You will see your guns before another month be past . '
In the darkness I could hear the fellow 's teeth chattering , and I wondered whether a man ever had such a partner in a desperate enterprise .
I seized the bar , however , and mounting upon my stool , I thrust my head and shoulders into the hole .
I had wriggled through as far as my waist , when my companion seized me suddenly by the knees , and yelled at the top of his voice : 'Help !
A prisoner is escaping ! '
'Perhaps I can be of some assistance to madame , ' said I , scrambling out from among the bushes into the glare of the lamps .
A woman in distress is a sacred thing to me , and this one was beautiful .
You must not forget that , although I was a colonel , I was only eight-and-twenty years of age .
'And you have taken it from the carriage , ' she cried .
I lay quietly then among the ferns .
Presently I heard the steps of the runner , and there he was quite close to me , with his huge coat , and the perspiration running down his face .
He seemed to be a very solid man -- but small -- so small that I feared that his clothes might be of little use to me .
When I jumped out upon him he stopped running , and looked at me in the greatest astonishment .
'Because I need them . '
'Be jabers , ' said I , 'I shall have no choice but to take them . '
'I should think it was time to jaw , ' the elderly man answered .
'If this knee do n't get well before next Wednesday , they 'll have it that you fought a cross , and a pretty job you 'll have next time you look for a backer . '
'Pooh , man , what are the clothes worth ?
D'you know that Lord Rufton alone has five thousand pounds on you ?
When you jump the ropes on Wednesday , you 'll carry every penny of fifty thousand into the ring .
A pretty thing to turn up with a swollen knee and a story about a Frenchman ! '
'He 's a game cove , too , and he came for me like a bantam , ' said the other , still rubbing his knee .
'I got my old left-right in , and he went over as if he had been pole-axed .
It was n't my fault , mounseer .
I told you you 'd get pepper if you went on . '
'He can take his gruel , ' said the Bustler .
'Not if I know it , Bustler , ' he screamed .
'None of your games while I am by .
Get away out of this , Frenchy .
We only want to see your back .
Run away , run away , or he 'll get loose ! '
'This must be the letter which Sir Charles Meredith lost , ' said he .
And as he read it , he laughed again , and the warders laughed , and the two men from the cottage laughed , and then , as I heard this universal merriment , and thought of all my hopes and fears , and my struggles and dangers , what could a debonair soldier do but lean against the porch once more , and laugh as heartily as any of them ?
And of them all was it not I who had the best reason to laugh , since in front of me I could see my dear France , and my mother , and the Emperor , and my horsemen ; while behind lay the gloomy prison , and the heavy hand of the English King ?
'Seven hundred incomparable men upon seven hundred excellent horses . '
'Because I have always new ones . '
'Forwards , ' I suggested .
He shook his grizzled head .
'This is Santarem , ' he said pointing .
'Her power of paying a ransom , ' said Massena .
'You have three missions , then : To rescue this unfortunate lady ; to punish this villain ; and , if possible , to break up this nest of brigands .
It will be a proof of the confidence which I have in you when I say that I can only spare you half a squadron with which to accomplish all this . '
Halting my men I hastened to the edge of the wood .
There could be no doubt about it .
A party of English cavalry was travelling in a line with us , and in the same direction .
I caught a glimpse of their red coats and of their flashing arms glowing and twinkling among the tree-trunks .
Once , as they passed through a small clearing , I could see their whole force , and I judged that they were of about the same strength as my own -- a half squadron at the most .
'I thought we were in for some sport , ' said he .
'I never dreamed that it was you . '
'Tut , never mind about that . '
'Lord Wellington is coming there with 60,000 men . '
he cried , with such an earnestness of pity that he set me laughing again .
'But look here , Gerard , ' he continued ; 'this is all very well , but it is not business , you know .
I do n't know what Massena would say to it , but our Chief would jump out of his riding-boots if he saw us .
We were n't sent out here for a picnic -- either of us . '
'Very good , Bart , ' said I .
'We have seen the front of your dragoons .
We shall now have a look at their backs . '
'It is the name of a rascal who lives out this way .
My dragoons have been sent by Lord Wellington to see him safely hanged . '
In the light of the lantern I saw that this monk was a magnificent man , dark and bearded , with the eyes of a hawk , and so tall that his cowl came up to Rataplan 's ears .
He wore the look of one who had been through much suffering , but he carried himself like a king , and we could form some opinion of his learning when we each heard him talk our own language as fluently as if he were born to it .
'Cheer up , sir , ' said the Bart .
'I 'll lay nine to four that we have you back again by tomorrow night . '
'We must have a shot at it , come what may , ' said he .
'Pray tell us , father , ' we cried , both together .
'You must know that bodies of deserters , both French and English , are continually coming in to them , carrying their weapons with them .
Now , what is there to prevent you and your men from pretending to be such a body , and so making your way into the Abbey ? '
I was amazed at the simplicity of the thing , and I embraced the good Abbot .
The Bart , however , had some objections to offer .
'Well , then , ' I cried , 'let us send fifty in , and let them at daybreak throw open the gates to the other fifty , who will be waiting outside . '
'Hang him , ' I answered .
No doubt you have heard my name mentioned as being the beau-ideal of a soldier , and that not only by friends and admirers like our fellow-townsfolk , but also by old officers of the great wars who have shared the fortunes of those famous campaigns with me .
Truth and modesty compel me to say , however , that this is not so .
There are some gifts which I lack -- very few , no doubt -- but , still , amid the vast armies of the Emperor there may have been some who were free from those blemishes which stood between me and perfection .
Of bravery I say nothing .
Those who have seen me in the field are best fitted to speak about that .
I have often heard the soldiers discussing round the camp-fires as to who was the bravest man in the Grand Army .
Some said Murat , and some said Lasalle , and some Ney ; but for my own part , when they asked me , I merely shrugged my shoulders and smiled .
It would have seemed mere conceit if I had answered that there was no man braver than Brigadier Gerard .
At the same time , facts are facts , and a man knows best what his own feelings are .
But there are other gifts besides bravery which are necessary for a soldier , and one of them is that he should be a light sleeper .
Now , from my boyhood onwards , I have been hard to wake , and it was this which brought me to ruin upon that night .
The French soldier of those days had seen too much to be ever taken by surprise .
His eyes had hardly rested upon my bound figure and the sinister face beside me before he had seen how the matter lay .
'Luck always comes to the aid of a fool , ' he answered .
'Perhaps it is as well , otherwise the world would fall too completely into the power of the astute .
So , you have killed Chenier , I see .
He was an insubordinate dog , and always smelt abominably of garlic .
Might I trouble you to lay me upon the bed ?
The floor of these Portuguese tabernas is hardly a fitting couch for anyone who has prejudices in favour of cleanliness . '
'I ask nothing more .
You may not be aware of my exalted birth , but I am so placed that I can not name my father without treason , nor my mother without a scandal .
I can not _claim_ Royal honours , but these things are so much more graceful when they are conceded without a claim .
The thongs are cutting my skin .
Might I beg you to loosen them ? '
'You do not give me credit for much intelligence , ' I remarked , repeating his own words .
'Fourteen were cut down before they could be secured . '
Alas for my poor Bart !
I had met him but twice , and yet he was a man very much after my heart .
I have always had a regard for the English for the sake of that one friend .
A braver man and a worse swordsman I have never met .
'This gentleman , ' said the Marshal , 'is exceedingly anxious to convey you to a place where you will never see us more .
It is for you to decide whether you would wish to go with him , or whether you prefer to remain with me . '
'So be it , ' said I at last ; 'give me the dragoons and let me go . '
'To give fitting burial to this young officer and his men . '
'But this is all strange to me , ' said I , still fumbling at the leathers of my horse .
'What is this Tugendbund ? '
'And these T 's stand for it ? '
And it was not long before I had shown to me that there was something more serious abroad than rough words and hard looks .
I had come to a spot where the road runs upwards through a wild tract of heath-land and vanishes into an oak wood .
I may have been half-way up the hill when , looking forward , I saw something gleaming under the shadow of the tree-trunks , and a man came out with a coat which was so slashed and spangled with gold that he blazed like a fire in the sunlight .
He appeared to be very drunk , for he reeled and staggered as he came towards me .
One of his hands was held up to his ear and clutched a great red handkerchief , which was fixed to his neck .
'Who has done this ? '
I asked , 'and what are you ?
You are French , and yet the uniform is strange to me . '
It was a mad ride , that -- a ride with a loose rein , girth-deep in heather and in gorse , plunging through bushes , flying down hill-sides , with my neck at the mercy of my dear little Violette .
But she -- she never slipped , she never faltered , as swift and as surefooted as if she knew that her rider carried the fate of all Germany beneath the buttons of his pelisse .
And I -- I had long borne the name of being the best horseman in the six brigades of light cavalry , but I never rode as I rode then .
My friend the Bart had told me of how they hunt the fox in England , but the swiftest fox would have been captured by me that day .
The wild pigeons which flew overhead did not take a straighter course than Violette and I below .
As an officer , I have always been ready to sacrifice myself for my men , though the Emperor would not have thanked me for it , for he had many men , but only one -- well , cavalry leaders of the first class are rare .
But here I had an object which was indeed worth a sacrifice , and I thought no more of my life than of the clods of earth that flew from my darling 's heels .
The heavy-cheeked landlord was there and his flaxen-haired wife , the two men from the stables , a chambermaid , and two or three villagers .
All of them , women and men , were flushed and angry , while there in the centre of them , with pale cheeks and terror in her eyes , stood the loveliest woman that ever a soldier would wish to look upon .
With her queenly head thrown back , and a touch of defiance mingled with her fear , she looked as she gazed round her like a creature of a different race from the vile , coarse-featured crew who surrounded her .
I had not taken two steps from my door before she sprang to meet me , her hand resting upon my arm and her blue eyes sparkling with joy and triumph .
'Yes , madam , you are safe , ' said I , and I could not resist taking her hand in mine in order that I might reassure her .
'You have only to command me , ' I added , kissing the hand as a sign that I meant what I was saying .
I had only the dog to fear , for the two forks and the blunderbuss were shaking about like branches in a wind .
Still , I considered that , though I might force an answer with my sword-point at the throat of this fat rascal , still I should have no means of knowing whether that answer was the truth .
It would be a struggle , then , with much to lose and nothing certain to gain .
I looked them up and down , therefore , in a way that set their foolish weapons shaking worse than ever , and then , throwing myself upon my mare , I galloped away with the shrill laughter of the landlady jarring upon my ears .
'Ah , you can act ! '
'You have shown me that already . '
He bowed to show that all was over , and the people with a shout made for the door to carry the tidings into the town .
For my own part , I had done all that a brave man might , and so I was not sorry to be carried out amid the stream .
Why should I linger in the palace ?
I had had my answer and must carry it , such as it was .
I wished neither to see Hof nor its people again until I entered it at the head of a vanguard .
I turned from the throng , then , and walked silently and sadly in the direction in which they had led the mare .
'Tut , man , do you not see that the Prince will then be committed to our side ?
He will be beyond all hope of forgiveness .
At present he may swing round tomorrow as he has done before .
He may eat his words , but a dead hussar is more than he can explain . '
she cried , sweeping up to me , and tearing with her own hands the noose from my neck .
'You are fighting in God 's own quarrel , and yet you would begin with such a devil 's deed as this .
This man is mine , and he who touches a hair of his head will answer for it to me . '
'You tell me nothing that I have not seen . '
'The Emperor has a mission for you . '
'If we find our route unsafe , are we at liberty to choose another ? '
Well , we came at last to Bazoches , where he was to take the southern road and I the northern .
He half turned in his saddle before he left me , and he looked at me with a singular expression of inquiry in his face .
'What do you make of it , Brigadier ? '
Why should the Emperor tell us his plans ? '
'Because he recognized our intelligence . '
Old Bouvet laughed in his wheezy way , until I had to give my moustachios a twirl and look him up and down in a manner which brought him to reason .
There was a slight ray of light coming from some slit or grating .
The dawn had broken outside , and I could dimly see the long , curving sides of several huge casks , which made me think that perhaps this was where the Mayor kept his reserves of wine while they were maturing .
At any rate , it seemed to be a safer hiding-place than the outer cellar , so gathering up my candle , I was just closing the door behind me , when I suddenly saw something which filled me with amazement , and even , I confess , with the smallest little touch of fear .
At first I had feared to light my candle lest I should make a mark of myself , but now , after cracking my shin over a box , and catching my spurs in some canvas , I thought the bolder course the wiser .
I lit it , therefore , and then I advanced with long strides , my sword in my hand .
'Come out , you rascal ! '
'Nothing can save you .
You will at last meet with your deserts . '
'Sir , ' said I , 'a Frenchman knows how to treat an unfortunate enemy .
Your life is safe . '
With that he handed his sword over the top of the barrel , and I bowed with the candle on my heart .
'Whom have I the honour of capturing ? '
'And would it be an indiscretion , ' I asked , 'if I were to inquire how you came into the back cellar ? '
The Russian grew pale at my words and the way in which I said them .
'It is not the French I fear so much as the Poles . '
At this a young officer galloped out from among the dragoons , also brandishing his sword , and it warmed my heart to think that he should come riding with such ardour and enthusiasm to greet me .
I made Violette caracole , and as we came together I brandished my sword more gallantly than ever , but you can imagine my feelings when he suddenly made a cut at me which would certainly have taken my head off if I had not fallen forward with my nose in Violette 's mane .
My faith , it whistled just over my cap like an east wind .
Of course , it came from this accursed Cossack uniform which , in my excitement , I had forgotten all about , and this young dragoon had imagined that I was some Russian champion who was challenging the French cavalry .
My word , he was a frightened man when he understood how near he had been to killing the celebrated Brigadier Gerard .
'There may be other reasons , ' said Talleyrand , and he gave that singular smile of his .
he yelled , and his two eyes transfixed me like bayonets .
Oh , those dreadful eyes , shifting from grey to blue , like steel in the sunshine .
I can see them now when I have a bad dream .
'Sire , ' said I , and the tears would trickle down my cheeks whilst I spoke , 'when you are dealing with a man like me you would find it wiser to deal openly .
Had I known that you had wished the despatch to fall into the hands of the enemy , I would have seen that it came there .
As I believed that I was to guard it , I was prepared to sacrifice my life for it .
I do not believe , sire , that any man in the world ever met with more toils and perils than I have done in trying to carry out what I thought was your will . '
He had a suite of rooms at the end of the gallery of Francis the First , not very far from those of the Emperor .
In the ante-chamber were waiting two men whom I knew well : Colonel Despienne , of the 57th of the line , and Captain Tremeau , of the Voltigeurs .
They were both old soldiers -- Tremeau had carried a musket in Egypt -- and they were also both famous in the army for their courage and their skill with weapons .
Tremeau had become a little stiff in the wrist , but Despienne was capable at his best of making me exert myself .
He was a tiny fellow , about three inches short of the proper height for a man -- he was exactly three inches shorter than myself -- but both with the sabre and with the small-sword he had several times almost held his own against me when we used to exhibit at Verron 's Hall of Arms in the Palais Royal .
You may think that it made us sniff something in the wind when we found three such men called together into one room .
You can not see the lettuce and dressing without suspecting a salad .
To all of us the idea appeared not improbable .
Certainly in the whole army we were the very three who might have been chosen to meet them .
In I went , leaving my two companions consumed with impatience behind me .
It was a small room , but very gorgeously furnished .
Berthier was seated opposite to me at a little table , with a pen in his hand and a note-book open before him .
He was looking weary and slovenly -- very different from that Berthier who used to give the fashion to the army , and who had so often set us poorer officers tearing our hair by trimming his pelisse with fur one campaign , and with grey astrakhan the next .
On his clean-shaven , comely face there was an expression of trouble , and he looked at me as I entered his chamber in a way which had in it something furtive and displeasing .
'Then for what do you care ? '
'For my own honour and for the service of my glorious master , the Emperor Napoleon . '
'Sir , ' I cried , 'I never thought to have seen the day when a Marshal of France would have so far degraded himself as to put forward such a proposal .
I leave you to your own conscience ; but as for me , until I have the Emperor 's own order , there shall always be the sword of Etienne Gerard between his enemies and himself . '
'And yet it was in the cause of France , ' returned the Emperor .
Then , turning to us , he took old Tremeau by the ear .
'Ah , old grumbler , ' said he , 'you were one of my Egyptian grenadiers , were you not , and had your musket of honour at Marengo .
I remember you very well , my good friend .
So the old fires are not yet extinguished !
They still burn up when you think that your Emperor is wronged .
And you , Colonel Despienne , you would not even listen to the tempter .
And you , Gerard , your faithful sword is ever to be between me and my enemies .
Well , well , I have had some traitors about me , but now at last we are beginning to see who are the true men . '
You can fancy , my friends , the thrill of joy which it gave us when the greatest man in the whole world spoke to us in this fashion .
Tremeau shook until I thought he would have fallen , and the tears ran down his gigantic moustache .
If you had not seen it , you could never believe the influence which the Emperor had upon those coarse-grained , savage old veterans .
'What I say to you now I have said to no one -- not to my wife or my brothers ; only to you .
It is all up with us , my friends .
We have come to our last rally .
The game is finished , and we must make provision accordingly . '
The Countess had a very beautiful , cream-tinted complexion of a sort which I particularly admire , but she grew whiter and whiter as she looked up at me .
Harsh lines deepened upon her face until she seemed , even as I looked at her , to turn from youth into age .
'Indeed , madame , ' said I .
'You do us less than justice .
These are the Colonel Despienne and Captain Tremeau .
For myself , my name is Brigadier Gerard , and I have only to mention it to assure anyone who has heard of me that -- -- '
'God help me , I do not know .
They stopped the berline , and I handed them over to them without hesitation , thinking that they had come from the Emperor . '
'Who are they , sire ? '
'I can not tell .
I am surrounded with treason .
But they will take them to Paris .
To whom should they carry them but to the villain Talleyrand ?
Yes , yes , they are on the Paris road , and may yet be overtaken .
With the three best mounts in my stables and -- -- '
'No one has passed ? '
'There they are ! '
When this stunning blow came upon me I could have sat down by the roadside and wept .
Fate seemed to be fighting against me , and that is an enemy from whom even a gallant hussar might not be ashamed to flinch .
I stood with my arm over the neck of my poor wounded Violette , and I tried to think it all out , that I might act in the wisest way .
I was aware that the Emperor had no great respect for my wits , and I longed to show him that he had done me an injustice .
Montluc had not the papers .
And yet Montluc had sacrificed his companions in order to make his escape .
I could make nothing of that .
On the other hand , it was clear that , if he had not got them , one or other of his comrades had .
One of them was certainly dead .
The other I had left fighting with Tremeau , and if he escaped from the old swordsman he had still to pass me .
Clearly , my work lay behind me .
'Gerard , ' he cried , 'you are a marvel ! '
I did not wish to contradict him , and it brought a flush of joy upon my cheeks to know that he had done me justice at last .
'Sire , ' said I , for I had had time for thought as well as he , 'if your plans about these papers have been carried to the ears of your enemies , I trust you do not think that it was owing to any indiscretion upon the part of myself or of my comrades . '
'It would be hardly reasonable for me to do so , ' he answered , 'seeing that this plot was hatched in Paris , and that you only had your orders a few hours ago . '
When he said 'two ' it turned me cold .
'Yes , I have paid a price for my papers , ' he said , and I heard them crackle as he put his hand up to his bosom .
'No man has ever had more faithful servants -- no man since the beginning of the world . '
'He was with me since Rivoli , ' said he , sadly .
'He was one of my old grumblers in Egypt . '
And the voice brought the man back from the dead .
I saw his eyelids shiver .
He twitched his arm , and moved the sword-hilt a few inches .
He was trying to raise it in salute .
Then the mouth opened , and the hilt tinkled down on to the ground .
'May we all die as gallantly , ' said the Emperor , as he rose , and from my heart I added 'Amen . '
The Emperor did not at first talk much upon the way .
Perhaps the deaths of Despienne and Tremeau still weighed heavily upon his spirits .
He was always a reserved man , and in those times , when every hour brought him the news of some success of his enemies or defection of his friends , one could not expect him to be a merry companion .
Nevertheless , when I reflected that he was carrying in his bosom those papers which he valued so highly , and which only a few hours ago appeared to be for ever lost , and when I further thought that it was I , Etienne Gerard , who had placed them there , I felt that I had deserved some little consideration .
The same idea may have occurred to him , for when we had at last left the Paris high road , and had entered the forest , he began of his own accord to tell me that which I should have most liked to have asked him .
'As to the papers , ' said he , 'I have already told you that there is no one now , except you and me , who knows where they are to be concealed .
My Mameluke carried the spades to the pigeon-house , but I have told him nothing .
Our plans , however , for bringing the packet from Paris have been formed since Monday .
There were three in the secret , a woman and two men .
The woman I would trust with my life ; which of the two men has betrayed us I do not know , but I think that I may promise to find out . '
We were riding in the shadow of the trees at the time , and I could hear him slapping his riding-whip against his boot , and taking pinch after pinch of snuff , as was his way when he was excited .
`` And why with wonder ? ''
`` Father said to-night . ''
`` And his name ? ''
Two maids stood , screaming at the pitch of their lungs , at either side .
In the centre the aged man-servant Pierre , a stern old Calvinist , whose dignity had never before been shaken , was spinning round , waving his arms , and roaring so that he might have been heard at the Louvre .
Attached to the gray worsted stocking which covered his fleshless calf was a fluffy black hairy ball , with one little red eye glancing up , and the gleam of two white teeth where it held its grip .
At the shrieks , the young stranger , who had gone out to his horse , came rushing back , and plucking the creature off , he slapped it twice across the snout , and plunged it head-foremost back into the leather bag from which it had emerged .
`` Ah , my God ! ''
cried Pierre , wiping the drops from his brow .
`` Ah , it has aged me five years !
I was at the door , bowing to monsieur , and in a moment it had me from behind . ''
`` It was my fault for leaving the bag loose .
The creature was but pupped the day we left New York , six weeks come Tuesday .
Do I speak with my father 's friend , Monsieur Catinat ? ''
She pressed it to her cheek , her white face showing up like marble against its absolute blackness .
`` I am sorry my father is not here to welcome you , monsieur , '' she said ; `` but I do so very heartily in his place .
Your room is above .
Pierre will show you to it , if you wish . ''
`` I thank you , mademoiselle .
Then I shall take my things out there , and I shall groom my horse . ''
`` And you will be here ? ''
`` I shall do so . ''
`` Is the officer of the oven here ? ''
As Bontems passed noiselessly across the room , his feet sinking into the moss-like carpet , there was the heavy close smell of sleep in the air , and he could near the long thin breathing of the sleeper .
He passed through the opening in the rails , and stood , watch in hand , waiting for the exact instant when the iron routine of the court demanded that the monarch should be roused .
Beneath him , from under the costly green coverlet of Oriental silk , half buried in the fluffy Valenciennes lace which edged the pillow , there protruded a round black bristle of close-cropped hair , with the profile of a curving nose and petulant lip outlined against the white background .
The valet snapped his watch , and bent over the sleeper .
The chief valet walked swiftly across to the door and threw it open .
In rushed the officer of the ovens and the four red-coated , white-wigged footmen , ready-handed , silent-footed , each intent upon his own duties .
The one seized upon Bontem 's rug and couch , and in an instant had whipped them off into an ante-chamber , another had carried away the _en cas_ meal and the silver taper-stand ; while a third drew back the great curtains of stamped velvet and let a flood of light into the apartment .
Then , as the flames were already flickering among the pine shavings in the fireplace , the officer of the ovens placed two round logs crosswise above them , for the morning air was chilly , and withdrew with his fellow-servants .
Bontems had poured on the king 's hands a few drops of spirits of wine , catching them again in a silver dish ; and the first lord of the bedchamber had presented the bowl of holy water with which he made the sign of the cross , muttering to himself the short office of the Holy Ghost .
Then , with a nod to his brother and a short word of greeting to the dauphin and to the Due du Maine , he swung his legs over the side of the bed and sat in his long silken night-dress , his little white feet dangling from beneath it -- a perilous position for any man to assume , were it not that he had so heart-felt a sense of his own dignity that he could not realise that under any circumstances it might be compromised in the eyes of others .
So he sat , the master of France , yet the slave to every puff of wind , for a wandering draught had set him shivering and shaking .
Monsieur de St. Quentin , the noble barber , flung a purple dressing-gown over the royal shoulders , and placed a long many-curled court wig upon his head , while Bontems drew on his red stockings and laid before him his slippers of embroidered velvet .
The monarch thrust his feet into them , tied his dressing-gown , and passed out to the fireplace , where he settled himself down in his easy-chair , holding out his thin delicate hands towards the blazing logs , while the others stood round in a semicircle , waiting for the _grand lever_ which was to follow .
The little group glanced from one to the other with protestations of innocence .
The faithful Bontems , however , with his stealthy step , had passed along behind them , and had detected the offender .
`` If you please , sire , it is possible that Mademoiselle de Grammont may have wet my coat with her casting-bottle when we all played together at Marly yesterday , '' he stammered .
`` I had not observed it , but if it offends your Majesty -- ''
`` Take it away !
take it away ! ''
it chokes and stifles me !
Open the lower casement , Bontems .
No ; never heed , now that he is gone .
Monsieur de St. Quentin , is not this our shaving morning ? ''
`` Yes , sire ; all is ready . ''
`` And yet she has one gift too many . ''
`` And that is ? ''
`` Ah , but that is another thing . ''
`` Ah , you rascal !
Then you have made up your mind that five-and-forty years with tact will hold the field against nine-and-thirty with beauty .
Well , when your lady has won , she will doubtless remember who were the first to pay court to her . ''
`` Then it may be a little serious for you . ''
`` I have asked for troops , sire . ''
`` On my word , count , '' said he , `` you have caught something of this gift of Indian eloquence of which we have heard .
But about these English folk .
They are Huguenots , are they not ? ''
`` That is the name .
The harbours might be of service to us .
Tell me , now , Frontenac , '' lowering his voice so that his words might be audible only to the count , Louvois , and the royal circle , `` what force would you need to clear these people out ?
One regiment , two regiments , and perhaps a frigate or two ? ''
`` Ay , '' sighed De Frontenac .
`` You know that my fortunes have sunk as yours have risen .
I have been recalled , and De la Barre is in my place .
But there will be a storm there which such a man as he can never stand against .
With the Iroquois all dancing the scalp-dance , and Dongan behind them in New York to whoop them on , they will need me , and they will find me waiting when they send .
I will see the king now , and try if I can not rouse him to play the great monarch there as well as here .
Had I but his power in my hands , I should change the world 's history . ''
`` It really does not rest with me , monsieur . ''
The angry nobleman stamped his foot , and stared at the door as though he had some thoughts of forcing a passage .
Then turning on his heel , he hastened away down the corridor with the air of a man who has come to a decision .
`` Good-morning , Captain de Catinat . ''
`` Certainly , mademoiselle .
And how is Madame , your mistress ? ''
`` Oh , but I do not trouble about such differences .
I let the Sorbonne and Geneva fight it out between them .
Yet a man must stand by his family , you know . ''
`` Your humble servant , marquise . ''
`` It was about my brother , Monsieur de Vivonne .
It is almost too laughable to mention , but he was actually refused admission to the _lever_ . ''
`` But such dreams are not very fortunate to the dreamer .
Go , tell the king that I am here , and would have a word with him . ''
`` To carry any message ? ''
`` You will ruin me if you pass . ''
`` And none the less , I shall do so . ''
`` It is not yet time . ''
Louis had walked on to his devotions in no very charitable frame of mind , as was easily to be seen from his clouded brow and compressed lips .
He knew his late favourite well , her impulsiveness , her audacity , her lack of all restraint when thwarted or opposed .
She was capable of making a hideous scandal , of turning against him that bitter tongue which had so often made him laugh at the expense of others , perhaps even of making some public exposure which would leave him the butt and gossip of Europe .
He shuddered at the thought .
At all costs such a catastrophe must be averted .
And yet how could he cut the tie which bound them ?
He had broken other such bonds as these ; but the gentle La Valliere had shrunk into a convent at the very first glance which had told her of waning love .
That was true affection .
But this woman would struggle hard , fight to the bitter end , before she would quit the position which was so dear to her .
She spoke of her wrongs .
What were her wrongs ?
In his intense selfishness , nurtured by the eternal flattery which was the very air he breathed , he could not see that the fifteen years of her life which he had absorbed , or the loss of the husband whom he had supplanted , gave her any claim upon him .
In his view he had raised her to the highest position which a subject could occupy .
Now he was weary of her , and it was her duty to retire with resignation , nay , even with gratitude for past favours .
She should have a pension , and the children should be cared for .
What could a reasonable woman ask for more ?
But he had found out where they were to be enjoyed .
From the day when De Montespan had introduced the stately and silent widow as a governess for his children , he had found a never-failing and ever-increasing pleasure in her society .
In the early days of her coming he had sat for hours in the rooms of his favourite , watching the tact and sweetness of temper with which her dependent controlled the mutinous spirits of the petulant young Duc du Maine and the mischievous little Comte de Toulouse .
He had been there nominally for the purpose of superintending the teaching , but he had confined himself to admiring the teacher .
And then in time he too had been drawn into the attraction of that strong sweet nature , and had found himself consulting her upon points of conduct , and acting upon her advice with a docility which he had never shown before to minister or mistress .
For a time he had thought that her piety and her talk of principle might be a mere mask , for he was accustomed to hypocrisy all round him .
It was surely unlikely that a woman who was still beautiful , with as bright an eye and as graceful a figure as any in his court , could , after a life spent in the gayest circles , preserve the spirit of a nun .
But on this point he was soon undeceived , for when his own language had become warmer than that of friendship , he had been met by an iciness of manner and a brevity of speech which had shown him that there was one woman at least in his dominions who had a higher respect for herself than for him .
And perhaps it was better so .
The placid pleasures of friendship were very soothing after the storms of passion .
To sit in her room every afternoon , to listen to talk which was not tainted with flattery , and to hear opinions which were not framed to please his ear , were the occupations now of his happiest hours .
And then her influence over him was all so good !
She spoke of his kingly duties , of his example to his subjects , of his preparation for the World beyond , and of the need for an effort to snap the guilty ties which he had formed .
She was as good as a confessor -- a confessor with a lovely face and a perfect arm .
`` I am a citizen of Paris , and I have been cruelly wronged . ''
`` I thought as much ! ''
`` That alters matters , '' said Bossuet .
The king shook his head and his brow darkened .
`` You have only yourself to thank , then .
The remedy is in your hands . ''
The king shook his head .
`` They have always been stubborn folk , '' said he .
`` The kingdom is mine and all that is in it , '' remarked Louis , as they entered the _Grand Salon_ , in which the court assembled after chapel , `` yet I trust that it may be long before I have to claim the wealth of the Church . ''
`` With your powerful assistance , father . ''
`` But there is another who has more weight than I . ''
`` I hear that she is very devout . ''
`` I shall do so . ''
`` The widow of the poet Scarron ! ''
The old Huguenot shot a glance of anger and contempt at them , and was turning to go , when one of them thrust at his ribs with the butt end of his halberd .
`` What is the meaning of this ? ''
The two had stumbled on to their feet again , very shamefaced and ruffled .
De Catinat was white with fury .
`` And so , when a French citizen has come to have a word with the great master of his country , he must be harassed by two Swiss dogs like you ? ''
`` By my faith , we shall soon see about that ! ''
`` See that they are tried to-day . ''
`` He was a Huguenot on his own confession , '' cried the culprits together .
`` That is better , '' answered the sergeant , with the freedom of a privileged veteran .
`` Thunder of God , but you have disgraced the guards !
An hour on the wooden horse with a musket at either foot may teach you that halberds were made for a soldier 's hand , and not for the king's grass-plot .
The Huguenot had stood in the background , grave and composed , without any sign of exultation , during this sudden reversal of fortune ; but when the soldiers were gone , he and the young officer turned warmly upon each other .
`` The king would not couple us together .
But indeed , nephew , it is strange to me how you can live in this house of Baal and yet bow down to no false gods . ''
`` Tut , uncle ! ''
said the young man impatiently .
`` I am a soldier of the king 's , and I am willing to let the black gown and the white surplice settle these matters between them .
Let me live in honour and die in my duty , and I am content to wait to know the rest . ''
`` Ay , and the scattered remnant has also a score against this murderous dog and self-seeking Ziphite . ''
`` Because I have dragged him back when in his drunken love he would have thrown his arms about your cousin Adele . ''
`` Where is it ? ''
`` I know not about Israel , '' cried De Catinat impatiently .
`` I only know that if my Adele chose to worship the thunder like an Abenaqui squaw , or turned her innocent prayers to the Mitche Manitou , I should like to set eyes upon the man who would dare to lay a hand upon her .
Ha , here comes our caleche !
Whip up , driver , and five livres to you if you pass the gate of the Invalides within the hour . ''
`` When was all this , then ? ''
`` He is useless . ''
`` She is in God 's hands , Amory . ''
`` I trust so .
Oh , I am on fire to be there ! ''
It was surrounded on every side by an immense crowd .
`` All in good time .
I fear that it is inconvenient to you to talk with your heels in the air . ''
`` On the contrary , I am going to pull you up . ''
Only pull me up ! ''
As he spoke , a clatter and shouting which had burst out again upstairs ended suddenly in a tremendous crash , with volleys of oaths and a prolonged bumping and smashing , which shook the old house to its foundations .
The soldier and the Huguenot rushed swiftly up the first flight of stairs , and were about to ascend the second one , from the head of which the uproar seemed to proceed , when a great eight-day clock came hurtling down , springing four steps at a time , and ending with a leap across the landing and a crash against the wall , which left it a shattered heap of metal wheels and wooden splinters .
An instant afterwards four men , so locked together that they formed but one rolling bundle , came thudding down amid a _debris_ of splintered stair-rails , and writhed and struggled upon the landing , staggering up , falling down , and all breathing together like the wind in a chimney .
So twisted and twined were they that it was hard to pick one from the other , save that the innermost was clad in black Flemish cloth , while the three who clung to him were soldiers of the king .
Yet so strong and vigorous was the man whom they tried to hold that as often as he could find his feet he dragged them after him from end to end of the passage , as a boar might pull the curs which had fastened on to his haunches .
An officer , who had rushed down at the heels of the brawlers , thrust his hands in to catch the civilian by the throat , but he whipped them back again with an oath as the man 's strong white teeth met in his left thumb .
Clapping the wound to his mouth , he flashed out his sword and was about to drive it through the body of his unarmed opponent , when De Catinat sprang forward and caught him by the wrist .
`` I am here on duty , I tell you ! ''
`` I have no quarrel with you . ''
`` Upon my word , gentlemen , upon my word ! ''
said he , looking sternly from one to the other .
He was a very small , dapper man , as thin as a herring , with projecting teeth and a huge drooping many-curled wig , which cut off the line of his skinny neck and the slope of his narrow shoulders .
His dress was a long overcoat of mouse-coloured velvet slashed with gold , beneath which were high leather boots , which , with his little gold-laced , three-cornered hat , gave a military tinge to his appearance .
In his gait and bearing he had a dainty strut and backward cock of the head , which , taken with his sharp black eyes , his high thin features , and his assured manner , would impress a stranger with the feeling that this was a man of power .
And , indeed , in France or out of it there were few to whom this man 's name was not familiar , for in all France the only figure which loomed up as large as that of the king was this very little gentleman who stood now , with gold snuff-box in one hand , and deep-laced handkerchief in the other , upon the landing of the Huguenot 's house .
For who was there who did not know the last of the great French nobles , the bravest of French captains , the beloved Conde , victor of Recroy and hero of the Fronde ?
At the sight of his pinched , sallow face the dragoons and their leader had stood staring , while De Catinat raised the stump of his sword in a salute .
`` The king 's orders , your Highness . ''
`` I will tell the king when I see him that I left soldiers and that I find brigands .
Not a word , sir !
You take your shame with you , and you leave your honour behind . ''
He had turned in an instant from the sneering , strutting old beau to the fierce soldier with set face and eye of fire .
Dalbert shrank back from his baleful gaze , and muttering an order to his men , they filed off down the stair with clattering feet and clank of sabres .
Conde raised his thick eyebrows at the scriptural fashion of the merchant 's speech , but he bowed courteously to the invitation , and entered the chamber , looking around him in surprise and admiration at its magnificence .
With its panelling of dark shining oak , its polished floor , its stately marble chimney-piece , and its beautifully moulded ceiling , it was indeed a room which might have graced a palace .
`` My carriage waits below , '' said he , `` and I must not delay longer .
It is not often that I leave my castle of Chantilly to come to Paris , and it was a fortunate chance which made me pass in time to be of service to honest men .
When a house hangs out such a sign as an officer of dragoons with his heels in the air , it is hard to drive past without a question .
But I fear that as long as you are a Huguenot , there will be no peace for you in France , monsieur . ''
`` My business and my duty lie here . ''
`` France could ill spare those forty years , your Highness . ''
`` Nay , that is but a sorry compliment to the court .
Surely , mademoiselle , you would love to go out into the great world , to hear sweet music , see all that is lovely , and wear all that is costly , rather than look out ever upon the Rue St. Martin , and bide in this great dark house until the roses wither upon your cheeks . ''
`` And that is your ship ? ''
`` My father 's ship .
She has been to Bristol , is now at Rouen , and then must go to Bristol again .
When she comes back once more , Ephraim comes to Paris for me , and it will be time for me to go . ''
`` And how like you Paris ? ''
`` That I may see the stars . ''
`` Oh , fear not for that , '' said the Huguenot .
`` The order of the Prince of Conde will be as a shield and a buckler to us for many a day .
I will order Pierre to saddle the horses . ''
`` I only know that I wish that I had my fringed hunting tunic and leggings on once more . ''
His companion , however , large-limbed and strong , turning his bold and yet thoughtful face from side to side , and eagerly taking in all the strange , new life amidst which he found himself , was also a type , unfinished , it is true , but bidding fair to be the higher of the two .
His close yellow hair , blue eyes , and heavy build showed that it was the blood of his father , rather than that of his mother , which ran in his veins ; and even the sombre coat and swordless belt , if less pleasing to the eye , were true badges of a race which found its fiercest battles and its most glorious victories in bending nature to its will upon the seas and in the waste places of the earth .
`` You have been to Montreal , then ?
You remember the fort ? ''
`` I have soldiered there , and at Quebec , too .
Why , my friend , you are not the only man of the woods in Paris , for I give you my word that I have worn the caribou mocassins , the leather jacket , and the fur cap with the eagle feather for six months at a stretch , and I care not how soon I do it again , ''
Amos Green 's eyes shone with delight at finding that his companion and he had so much in common , and he plunged into a series of questions which lasted until they had crossed the river and reached the south-westerly gate of the city .
By the moat and walls long lines of men were busy at their drill .
`` Who are those , then ? ''
he asked , gazing at them with curiosity .
Why then all these men ? ''
`` And why has he done all this ? ''
`` You will come to know our ways soon , '' said he .
`` This is a crowded land , and if all men rode and shot as they listed , much harm would come from it .
But let us talk rather of your own country .
You have lived much in the woods from what you tell me . ''
But as he was rich , he thought it best that I should learn some things that are not to be found in the woods .
And so he sent me in the _Golden Rod_ , under the care of Ephraim Savage . ''
`` Nay ; he is the first man that ever was born at Boston . ''
`` I think that God 's best work is in America , and man 's in Europe . ''
`` You seem to have a nice taste in beauty , for all your woodland training . ''
`` You may find dames at the court who are both tender and sweet , but you will look long , my friend , before you find the holy one .
This one would ruin me if she can , and only because I have done what it was my duty to do .
To keep oneself in this court is like coming down the La Chine Rapids where there is a rock to right , and a rock to left , and another perchance in front , and if you so much as graze one , where are you and your birch canoe ?
But our rocks are women , and in our canoe we bear all our worldly fortunes .
Now here is another who would sway me over to her side , and indeed I think it may prove to be the better side too . ''
`` Then let the captain step in . ''
The voice was firm , and yet sweetly musical .
`` They are very good women , '' said he shortly , remembering Mademoiselle Nanon 's warning , and fearing to trench upon the dangerous subject .
`` I have heard , madame , that the Jesuits are the stronger at Quebec , and the others at Montreal . ''
She rose , and throwing herself down upon the _prie-dieu_ sunk her face in her hands for some few minutes , during which the object of her devotions stood in some perplexity in the middle of the room , hardly knowing whether such an attention should be regarded as an insult or as a favour .
A tap at the door brought the lady back to this world again , and her devoted attendant answered her summons to enter .
`` I did , madame . ''
`` Oh , but your Majesty must not trouble your mind about such matters . ''
`` You would not have me do it , madame ? ''
`` Nay , sire ; I have nothing but hatred for heresy . ''
`` But I have erred , and erred deeply .
You have yourself said as much . ''
`` Why should you seek to read the secrets of a woman 's heart ? ''
`` Because , sire , it is my highest hope upon earth that I have been chosen to lift up your mind towards loftier things -- that mind the greatness and nobility of which none know more than I . ''
`` And not the tragedy , monsieur , '' said Madame de Maintenon , glancing up from her tapestry .
`` The king has enough that is serious in his graver hours , and so I trust that you will use your talent to amuse him . ''
`` Even as you have taught our generals war and our builders art , so you would have set your poor singers a loftier strain .
But Mars would hardly deign to share the humbler laurels of Apollo . ''
`` I think , Monsieur Corneille , that you had better go on with your reading , '' said the king dryly .
`` You do not seem very clear about the matter , and I confess that it does not interest me deeply , '' said he .
`` Pray turn to something else . ''
`` There is my _Pretended Astrologer_ . ''
cried the king suddenly .
`` There is something amiss there .
The second last line has a limp in it , surely . ''
It was one of his foibles to pose as a critic , and the wise poet would fall in with his corrections , however unreasonable they might be .
`` Your Majesty is perfectly right , '' said Corneille unblushingly .
`` I shall mark the passage , and see that it is corrected . ''
`` I can readily believe it , your Majesty . ''
Corneille had picked up his book again , and was about to resume his reading when there came a sharp tap at the door .
`` But , sire -- ''
`` We have had enough of this . ''
`` You forget yourself , madame .
I beg that you will leave the room . ''
`` I thank you , madame , but I have not found this interview so pleasant that I should seek another . ''
`` But , sire -- ''
`` Oh , sire , be firm , then ! ''
It was with an anxious face that she watched him start off , walking rapidly , with angry gestures , down the corridor .
Then she turned back , and dropping upon her knees on the _prie-dieu_ , bowed her head in prayer for the king , for herself , and for France .
You again , Captain de Catinat ?
You have not been on duty since morning ? ''
`` No , sire .
It is my second guard . ''
`` She has just returned , sire . ''
It was a large and lofty room , very different to that from which he had just come .
Three long windows from ceiling to floor took up one side , and through the delicate pink-tinted blinds the evening sun cast a subdued and dainty light .
Great gold candelabra glittered between the mirrors upon the wall , and Le Brun had expended all his wealth of colouring upon the ceiling , where Louis himself , in the character of Jove , hurled down his thunder-bolts upon a writhing heap of Dutch and Palatine Titans .
Pink was the prevailing tone in tapestry , carpet , and furniture , so that the whole room seemed to shine with the sweet tints of the inner side of a shell , and when lit up , as it was then , formed such a chamber as some fairy hero might have built up for his princess .
At the further side , prone upon an ottoman , her face buried in the cushion , her beautiful white arms thrown over it , the rich coils of her brown hair hanging in disorder across the long curve of her ivory neck , lay , like a drooping flower , the woman whom he had come to discard .
`` Oh , I have been wicked ! ''
`` I know it , I know it ! ''
`` Oh , sire , it slipped from me unawares .
Think no more of it .
`` You said that it was reported that I had changed my life not through religion , but through stress of years .
Who said so ? ''
`` Have I , then , grown so aged ?
You have known me for nearly twenty years .
Do you see such changes in me ? ''
The king smiled as he looked at the beautiful woman before him .
`` I had rather die than cause you an instant of grief .
Oh , sire , I have seen so little of you lately !
And I love you so !
It has maddened me .
And then that dreadful woman -- ''
`` Yes , yes , you must be civil .
I can not have any unpleasantness . ''
`` They are here , sire , upon the side table .
I have also a note which , if I may leave you for an instant , I will write in the anteroom . ''
She swept out with triumph in her eyes .
It had been a terrible fight , but all the greater the credit of her victory .
She took a little pink slip of paper from an inlaid desk , and dashed off a few words upon it .
They were : `` Should Madame de Maintenon have any message for his Majesty , he will be for the next few hours in the room of Madame de Montespan . ''
This she addressed to her rival , and it was sent on the spot , together with the king 's order , by the hands of the little black page .
And as the king brightened , so all the great court brightened too .
The _salons_ began to resume their former splendour , and gay coats and glittering embroidery which had lain in drawers for years were seen once more in the halls of the palace .
In the chapel , Bourdaloue preached in vain to empty benches , but a ballet in the grounds was attended by the whole court , and received with a frenzy of enthusiasm .
The Montespan ante-room was crowded every morning with men and women who had some suit to be urged , while her rival 's chambers were as deserted as they had been before the king first turned a gracious look upon her .
Faces which had been long banished the court began to reappear in the corridors and gardens unchecked and unrebuked , while the black cassock of the Jesuit and the purple soutane of the bishop were less frequent colours in the royal circle .
The lady 's brow clouded , and she glanced at the prelate as though his speech were not altogether to her taste .
`` I trust that pride does not lead me astray , '' she said .
`` But if I can read my own soul aright , there is no thought of myself in the grief which now tears my heart .
What is power to me ?
What do I desire ?
A little room , leisure for my devotions , a pittance to save me from want -- what more can I ask for ?
Why , then , should I covet power ?
If I am sore at heart , it is not for any poor loss which I have sustained .
I think no more of it than of the snapping of one of the threads on yonder tapestry frame .
It is for the king I grieve -- for the noble heart , the kindly soul , which might rise so high , and which is dragged so low , like a royal eagle with some foul weight which ever hampers its flight .
It is for him and for France that my days are spent in sorrow and my nights upon my knees . ''
`` There is no shame in loving , my daughter .
The shame lies only in yielding to love .
I say again that you love the king . ''
The lady half rose , glancing from the prelate to the priest with eyes which had a lurking horror in their depths .
`` My daughter , we give no counsel which is unworthy of our office .
We speak for the interests of Holy Church , and those interests demand that you should marry the king . ''
`` And then there are the reasons of state .
If the king marry , it should be to form a powerful alliance , to cement a friendship with a neighbour nation , or to gain some province which may be the bride 's dowry .
What is my dowry ?
A widow 's pension and a work-box . ''
She laughed bitterly , and yet glanced eagerly at her companions , as one who wished to be confuted .
`` Oh , if it could be so !
But think , father , think of those about him -- the dauphin , monsieur his brother , his ministers .
You know how little this would please them , and how easy it is for them to sway his mind .
No , no ; it is a dream , father , and it can never be . ''
`` My daughter , '' said the Jesuit gravely , `` that is a matter which you may leave to the Church .
It may be that we , too , have some power over the king 's mind , and that we may lead him in the right path , even though those of his own blood would fain have it otherwise .
The future only can show with whom the power lies .
Love and duty both draw you one way now , and the Church may count upon you . ''
`` And think , too , of their sufferings should they be driven forth . ''
`` Nay , they have answered for their own sins .
Is it possible that the Church has been mistaken in you ?
Do you then refuse the first favour which she asks of you ?
You would accept her aid , and yet you would give none in return . ''
`` May God make me worthy of such an honour , sire ! ''
`` And here I swear that if heaven double my life , every hour shall be spent in the one endeavour to make you a happier man ! ''
`` Then why set a slight upon me ? ''
The king had stared in amazement at his brother , but his anger now overcame his astonishment .
But the king was to have no quiet that day .
If Madame de Maintenon's friends had rallied to her yesterday , her enemies were active to-day .
Monsieur had hardly disappeared before there rushed into the room a youth who bore upon his rich attire every sign of having just arrived from a dusty journey .
He was pale-faced and auburn-haired , with features which would have been strikingly like the king 's if it were not that his nose had been disfigured in his youth .
The king 's face had lighted up at the sight of him , but it darkened again as he hurried forward and threw himself down at his feet .
`` You talk like a fool ! ''
cried his father roughly .
`` I propose to marry a virtuous and charming lady of one of the oldest noble families of France , and you talk as if I were doing something degrading and unheard of .
What is your objection to this lady ? ''
`` The Abbe Fenelon came with me , sire .
Is it your pleasure to see him ? ''
Why all these words ? ''
`` You have been sent here by others to try and influence me against Madame de Maintenon . ''
The Bishop of Meaux was waiting in the ante-room , and Father la Chaise in a few brief words let him see the danger of the situation and the means by which they should meet it .
Together they sought Madame de Maintenon in her room .
She had discarded the sombre widow 's dress which she had chosen since her first coming to court , and wore now , as more in keeping with her lofty prospects , a rich yet simple costume of white satin with bows of silver serge .
A single diamond sparkled in the thick coils of her dark tresses .
The change had taken years from a face and figure which had always looked much younger than her age , and as the two plotters looked upon her perfect complexion , her regular features , so calm and yet so full of refinement , and the exquisite grace of her figure and bearing , they could not but feel that if they failed in their ends , it was not for want of having a perfect tool at their command .
She had risen at their entrance , and her expression showed that she had read upon their faces something of the anxiety which filled their minds .
`` You have evil news ! ''
Her face shone at the mention of her lover .
This very night , if possible . ''
`` Oh , father , you ask too much .
The king would never consent to such a proposal . ''
`` Because we shall force him to .
It is only thus that all the opposition can be stopped .
When it is done , the court will accept it .
Until it is done , they will resist it . ''
`` Resign the king . ''
`` It is the best course , madame . ''
`` But such an end as this can not be gained without risks .
Go , my child , and may heaven 's blessing go with you ! ''
`` Sire , I fear that you have been troubled . ''
`` A day would be too long , sire , for you to be unhappy through my fault .
It is a misery to me to think of it .
Believe me , it would be better that I should leave you . ''
It is my wish .
It is my order .
That is my answer to those who would drive me .
They shall know nothing of it until it is done , and then let us see which of them will dare to treat my wife with anything but respect .
Let it be done secretly , Francoise .
I will send in a trusty messenger this very night for the Archbishop of Paris , and I swear that , if all France stand in the way , he shall make us man and wife before he departs . ''
The king was all on fire with the excitement of this new resolution .
He had lost his air of doubt and discontent , and he paced swiftly about the room with a smiling face and shining eyes .
Then he touched a small gold bell , which summoned Bontems , his private body-servant .
To De Catinat an audience with the monarch was a common incident of his duties , but it was with profound astonishment that he learned from Bontems that his friend and companion was included in the order .
He was eagerly endeavouring to whisper into the young American 's ear some precepts and warnings as to what to do and what to avoid , when Bontems reappeared and ushered them into the presence .
`` The marriage is to-night . ''
`` You are mad , Charles . ''
`` What will you give , my sister ? ''
`` Of my husband ! ''
`` But when my husband returns ? ''
`` There is no such thing at a court .
There is the dauphin , or the king's brother , either of them , or any of their friends , would be right glad that we should be in the Seine before we reach the archbishop 's house this night .
But who is this ? ''
`` I go there myself within an hour .
Will you not wait , that we may go together ? ''
`` I think that perhaps you had best ride into Paris at your leisure , my friend , '' said he .
`` If I go upon the king 's service I can not be delayed whenever the whim takes you . ''
`` It 's one of my stirrup leathers .
It has fallen . ''
They had galloped for about five minutes in this fashion , De Catinat's horse 's head within a few feet of the other 's tail , when there was a second snap , and the guardsman rolled out of the saddle on to the ground .
He kept his grip of the reins , however , and was up in an instant at his horse 's head , sputtering out oaths as only an angry Frenchman can .
`` And so does mine .
I can feel it when I pass my hand along .
Have you a tinder-box ?
Let us strike a light . ''
`` And so is mine . ''
`` One neck they might break , but scarce those of two , since the fate of the one would warn the other . ''
`` You may do what you like , '' said De Catinat angrily .
By my soul , men did not die like that when I was young ! ''
answered the other , leaning forward his fierce grizzled face into the light of the lantern .
`` I 've been cast from my horse as often as there are tags to my doublet , but , save for the snap of a bone or two , I never had any harm from it .
Pass your rapier under the third rib of the horses , De la Touche ; they will never be fit to set hoof to ground again . ''
Two sobbing gasps and the thud of their straining necks falling back to earth told that the two steeds had come to the end of their troubles .
The man bent over De Catinat , and placed his hand upon his heart .
As he did so the soldier heaved a long sigh , opened his eyes , and gazed about him with the face of one who knows neither where he is nor how he came there .
De Vivonne , who had drawn his hat down over his eyes , and muffled the lower part of his face in his mantle , took out his flask , and poured a little of the contents down the injured man 's throat .
In an instant a dash of colour had come back into the guardsman's bloodless cheeks , and the light of memory into his eyes .
He struggled up on to his feet , and strove furiously to push away those who held him .
But his head still swam , and he could scarce hold himself erect .
`` He has done it in his death-struggle , '' gasped the other hoarsely , sitting up and rubbing his throat .
`` I tell you that he was _in extremis_ .
He can not be far off . ''
But then came a return of that common-sense which lies so very closely beneath the impetuosity of the Celt .
The matter was done now , and he must see if it could not be mended .
Amos Green had escaped .
That was one grand point in his favour .
And Amos Green had heard the king's message , and realised its importance .
It was true that he knew nothing of Paris , but surely a man who could pick his way at night through the forests of Maine would not be baulked in finding so well-known a house as that of the Archbishop of Paris .
But then there came a sudden thought which turned De Catinat 's heart to lead .
The city gates were locked at eight o'clock in the evening .
It was now nearly nine .
It would have been easy for him , whose uniform was a voucher for his message , to gain his way through .
But how could Amos Green , a foreigner and a civilian , hope to pass ?
It was impossible , clearly impossible .
And yet , somehow , in spite of the impossibility , he still clung to a vague hope that a man so full of energy and resource might find some way out of the difficulty .
`` At the horse , Despard , at the horse ! ''
cried an authoritative voice from behind .
`` Ay ; there is no other way out of it . ''
`` By my soul ! ''
cried old Despard , `` I had never much love for old Etienne , but I have emptied a cup of wine with him before now , and I shall see that he has justice .
Let us cast these reins round the fellow 's neck and hang him upon this tree . ''
`` Those infernal horses ! ''
`` Why , an American horse would have taken to the water like a duck .
Many a time have I swum my old stallion Sagamore across the Hudson .
Once over the river , we should have had a clear lead to Paris . ''
`` Tut , man !
I never gave it a thought . ''
`` You were right a thousand times , and I was , as you said , a fool -- a blind , obstinate fool .
How nobly you have stood by me !
But how came you there ?
Never in my life have I been so astonished as when I saw your face . ''
`` I have not lived among the Indians for nothing . ''
Such things are only done among savages . ''
`` And what now ? ''
`` Well , they 'll need to be smart about it . ''
`` What do you mean ? ''
`` I know not who your master may be , '' said De Catinat , `` but I would ask you by what warrant he dares to stop two messengers of the king while travelling in his service ? ''
If the American had expected to surprise or delight his companion by this curt announcement he was woefully disappointed , for De Catinat approached him with a face which was full of sympathy and trouble , and laid his hand caressingly upon his shoulder .
It was no wonder that the young woodsman was alarmed at the effect of his own announcement .
His slow and steady nature was incapable of the quick , violent variations of the fiery Frenchman .
De Catinat , who had thrown off his bonds before he had lain down , spun round the cell now , waving his arms and his legs , with his shadow capering up the wall behind him , all distorted in the moonlight .
Finally he threw himself into his comrade 's arms with a torrent of thanks and ejaculations and praises and promises , patting him with his hands and hugging him to his breast .
`` You can , then .
Lie down on that straw and go to sleep . ''
`` No ; it was the little black one . ''
`` Maybe if we got these stirrup leathers round his ankles he would not get them off quite as easy as we have done . ''
`` Three allurions in chief over a tower proper , maybe .
Those are the arms of the Provence De Hautevilles .
But it can not be that .
They have no chateau within a hundred leagues .
No , I can not tell where we are . ''
`` One thing at a time , friend .
You might as well stick at the Kennebec because you could not see how you would cross the Penobscot .
Anyway , there is more air in the yard than in here , and when the window is clear we shall soon plan out the rest . ''
`` By thunder ! ''
said he , `` there 's some one working on the other side . ''
They both stood listening .
There were the thud of hammers , the rasping of a saw , and the clatter of wood from the other side of the wall .
`` What can they be building , then ? ''
`` But we may as well finish our work , for all that . ''
The gentle scrapings of his iron were drowned amid the noise which swelled ever louder from without .
The bar loosened at the end , and he drew it slowly towards him .
At that instant , however , just as he was disengaging it , a round head appeared between him and the moonlight , a head with a great shock of tangled hair and a woollen cap upon the top of it .
So astonished was Amos Green at the sudden apparition that he let go his grip upon the bar , which , falling outwards , toppled over the edge of the window-sill .
`` Yes ; and here come more .
See , at the centre gate !
Now what in the name of heaven is this ? ''
`` No , no , Louvois .
My thoughts were in truth beginning to be very indifferent company , and I am glad to be rid of them . ''
`` When so many of our young nobles went into Germany and Hungary , you were pleased in your wisdom to say that you would like well to see what reports they sent home to their friends ; also what news was sent out from the court to them . ''
`` I should indeed like to read the hearts of these people , '' said he .
`` Thus only can I tell the true thoughts of those who bow and simper before my face .
I suppose , '' with a sudden flash of suspicion from his eyes , `` that you have not yourself looked into these ? ''
`` You swear it ? ''
Louvois changed colour , and stammered as he looked at the envelope .
`` Your Majesty will find that he is as loyal out of your presence as in it , else he is no son of mine , '' said he .
`` Then we shall begin with his .
it is but ten lines long .
'Dearest Achille , how I long for you to come back !
The court is as dull as a cloister now that you are gone .
My ridiculous father still struts about like a turkey-cock , as if all his medals and crosses could cover the fact that he is but a head lackey , with no more real power than I have .
He wheedles a good deal out of the king , but what he does with it I can not imagine , for little comes my way .
I still owe those ten thousand livres to the man in the Rue Orfevre .
Unless I have some luck at lansquenet , I shall have to come out soon and join you . '
I did you an injustice , Louvois .
I see that you have _not_ looked over these letters . ''
Louis sank his face in his hands .
`` It is infamous , sire ; infamous ! ''
The minister was thrusting them back into the bag when suddenly his eye caught the bold , clear writing of Madame de Maintenon upon one of the letters .
Some demon whispered to him that here was a weapon which had been placed in his hands , with which he might strike one whose very name filled him with jealousy and hatred .
Had she been guilty of some indiscretion in this note , then he might even now , at this last hour , turn the king 's heart against her .
He was an astute man , and in an instant he had seen his chance and grasped it .
`` Madame 's writing ! ''
The minister opened the letter out and flattened it upon the table , with a malicious light dancing in his eyes , which might have cost him his position had the king but read it aright .
`` Ah , '' cried the king , his love shining in his eyes , `` how could I for an instant doubt her !
And yet I had been so shaken by the others !
Francoise is as true as steel .
Was it not a beautiful letter , Louvois ? ''
`` To what , sire ? ''
`` A colonel , sire !
Why , he is not yet twenty . ''
The lady smiled at the adroit slip of the courtier dressmaker .
`` My tastes lean little towards dress , '' said she , `` yet I would fain look as he would wish me to look . ''
`` My God ! ''
he whispered ; `` she frowned and spat at me ! ''
She was still in her boudoir putting the last touches to her toilet when her page announced to her that the king was waiting in her _salon_ .
Madame de Montespan could hardly believe in such good fortune .
She had racked her brain all morning as to how she should win her way to him , and here he was waiting for her .
With a last glance at the mirror , she hastened to meet him .
`` I know , madame , I know .
I have wronged you deeply .
Believe me that every atonement which is in my power shall be made .
Nay , do not look so angrily at me , I beg .
Let our last sight of each other be one which may leave a pleasant memory behind it . ''
`` Nay , Francoise , be reasonable , I implore you .
We have both left our youth behind . ''
`` My patience can bear no more , '' cried the king furiously .
`` I leave you , madame , and forever . ''
But her fury had swept all fear and discretion from her mind .
She stepped between the door and him , her face flushed , her eyes blazing , her face thrust a little forward , one small white satin slipper tapping upon the carpet .
It is you who have driven me to this ! ''
A Mortemart is pitied by the widow Scarron !
Your pity may go where your gratitude is , and where your character is .
We shall be troubled with it no longer then . ''
`` I can believe that you are not sensitive . ''
`` I would that I heard it upon yours . ''
Your hypocrisy sickens me !
If you pretend to be a nun , why are you not where the nuns are ?
You would have the best of two worlds -- would you not ?
-- have all that the court can give , and yet ape the manners of the cloister .
But you need not do it with me !
I know you as your inmost heart knows you .
I was honest , and what I did , I did before the world .
You , behind your priests and your directors and your _prie-dieus_ and your missals -- do you think that you deceive me , as you deceive others ? ''
She rose from the couch , feeling that she had aged ten years in an hour .
There was much to be done , and little time in which to do it .
She had cast down her jewels when the king had spoken as though they would atone for the loss of his love ; but now that the love was gone there was no reason why the jewels should be lost too .
If she had ceased to be the most powerful , she might still be the richest woman in France .
There was her pension , of course .
That would be a munificent one , for Louis was always generous .
And then there was all the spoil which she had collected during these long years -- the jewels the pearls , the gold , the vases , the pictures , the crucifixes , the watches , the trinkets -- together they represented many millions of livres .
With her own hands she packed away the more precious and portable of them , while she arranged with her brother for the safe-keeping of the others .
All day she was at work in a mood of feverish energy , doing anything and everything which might distract her thoughts from her own defeat and her rival 's victory .
By evening all was ready , and she had arranged that her property should be sent after her to Petit Bourg , to which castle she intended to retire .
`` Monsieur de Vivonne regrets , madame , that the rumour of your departure has got abroad among the court . ''
`` No ; at the east .
The carriage waits . ''
`` And why that ? ''
`` Because he is watched ; and were he seen beside the carriage , all would be known . ''
Then , monsieur , if you will take my cloak and this casket we may start at once . ''
`` Surely , monsieur , we have passed the park gate where we were to pick up my brother . ''
A thrill ran through her nerves .
Who or what could he be , this silent man ?
Then suddenly it struck her that he might be dumb .
`` Perhaps monsieur is afflicted , '' she said .
`` Perhaps monsieur can not speak .
If that be the cause of your silence , will you raise your hand , and I shall understand . ''
He sat rigid and silent .
it is you ! ''
`` Oh , villain , you have twisted my wrist !
You have broken my arm ! ''
`` You have a stone for a heart . ''
`` I will see that you atone . ''
`` Who are these men , Marceau ? ''
cried the seigneur furiously .
He glanced round with furious eyes , but they fell only upon hung heads and averted faces .
With a hideous curse he flashed out his sword and rushed at his wife , who knelt half insensible beside the block .
De Catinat sprang between them to protect her ; but Marceau , the bearded seneschal , had already seized his master round the waist .
With the strength of a maniac , his teeth clenched and the foam churning from the corners of his lips , De Montespan writhed round in the man 's grasp , and shortening his sword , he thrust it through the brown beard and deep into the throat behind it .
Marceau fell back with a choking cry , the blood bubbling from his mouth and his wound ; but before his murderer could disengage his weapon , De Catinat and the American , aided by a dozen of the retainers , had dragged him down on to the scaffold , and Amos Green had pinioned him so securely that he could but move his eyes and his lips , with which he lay glaring and spitting at them .
So savage were his own followers against him -- for Marceau was well loved amongst them -- that , with axe and block so ready , justice might very swiftly have had her way , had not a long clear bugle-call , rising and falling in a thousand little twirls and flourishes , clanged out suddenly in the still morning air .
De Catinat pricked up his ears at the sound of it like a hound at the huntsman 's call .
`` My friend and I were just in time to save her .
Her husband lies there .
He is a fiend , De Brissac . ''
The eloquent Bishop Bossuet was there , with Louvois , the minister of war , and the famous Jesuit , Father la Chaise , each piling argument upon argument to overcome the reluctance of the king .
Beside them stood another priest , so thin and so pale that he might have risen from his bed of death , but with a fierce light burning in his large dark eyes , and with a terrible resolution in his drawn brows and in the set of his grim , lanky jaw .
Madame bent over her tapestry and weaved her coloured silks in silence , while the king leaned upon his hand and listened with the face of a man who knows that he is driven , and yet can hardly turn against the goads .
On the low table lay a paper , with pen and ink beside it .
It was the order for the revocation , and it only needed the king 's signature to make it the law of the land .
The king started angrily , and frowned at the speaker .
`` Sire , I will say what I hold to be the truth were you fifty times a king .
What care I for any man when I know that I speak for the King of kings ?
See ; are these the limbs of one who would shrink from testifying to truth ? ''
With a sudden movement he threw back the long sleeves of his gown and shot out his white fleshless arms .
The bones were all knotted and bent and screwed into the most fantastic shapes .
Even Louvois , the hardened man of the court , and his two brother priests , shuddered at the sight of those dreadful limbs .
He raised them above his head and turned his burning eyes upwards .
`` They would change , '' cried Du Chayla , with a drawn smile upon his ghastly face .
`` They must bend or they must break .
What matter if they be ground to powder , if we can but build up a complete Church in the land ? ''
His deep-set eyes glowed with ferocity , and be shook one bony hand in savage wrath above his head .
`` Besides , sire , '' said Pere la Chaise softly , `` there would be little need for these stronger measures of which the good abbe speaks .
As I have already remarked to you , you are so beloved in your kingdom that the mere assurance that you had expressed your will upon the subject would be enough to turn them all to the true faith . ''
`` I wish that I could think so , father ; I wish that I could think so .
But what is this ? ''
Louis and his wife exchanged a quick glance of relief .
`` It is not a very severe one .
You see this paper upon the table .
It is an order that all the Huguenots in my dominions shall give up their errors , under pain of banishment or captivity .
Now I have hopes that there are many of my faithful subjects who are at fault in this matter , but who will abjure it when they learn that it is my clearly expressed wish that they should do so .
It would be a great joy to me to find that it was so , for it would be a pain to me to use force against any man who bears the name of Frenchman .
Do you follow me ? ''
`` I have none , sire , outside your service . ''
But the king checked him with a gesture .
`` I desire no protestations , '' said he .
`` I judge a man by his acts .
Do you abjure or not ? ''
`` I can not , sire . ''
`` Very good , sire . ''
`` And when do you sail ? ''
`` Yes , yes , Ephraim . ''
`` Nay , nay , Ephraim .
Surely one may see such a sight , and think no harm of it , on our side of the water .
`` Ah , New York !
I said in no godly country .
I can not answer for New York or Virginia .
South of Cape Cod , or of New Haven at the furthest , there is no saying what folk will do .
Very sure I am that in Boston or Salem or Plymouth she would see the bridewell and he the stocks for half as much .
He shook his head and bent his brows at the guilty couple .
`` Because they are Protestants , and the king will not abide their creed . ''
And so at last it was arranged .
That very night , within five minutes of the closing of the gates , there passed out of Paris a small party of five , three upon horseback , and two in a closed carriage which bore several weighty boxes upon the top .
They were the first leaves flying before the hurricane , the earliest of that great multitude who were within the next few months to stream along every road which led from France , finding their journey 's end too often in galley , dungeon and torture chamber , and yet flooding over the frontiers in numbers sufficient to change the industries and modify the characters of all the neighbouring peoples .
Like the Israelites of old , they had been driven from their homes at the bidding of an angry king , who , even while he exiled them , threw every difficulty in the way of their departure .
Like them , too , there were none of them who could hope to reach their promised land without grievous wanderings , penniless , friendless , and destitute .
What passages befell these pilgrims in their travels , what dangers they met , and overcame in the land of the Swiss , on the Rhine , among the Walloons , in England , in Ireland , in Berlin , and even in far-off Russia , has still to be written .
This one little group , however , whom we know , we may follow in their venturesome journey , and see the chances which befell them upon that great continent which had lain fallow for so long , sown only with the weeds of humanity , but which was now at last about to quicken into such glorious life .
And very slow work it was .
There was half a moon shining and a breeze from the east , but the stream writhed and twisted and turned until sometimes they seemed to be sailing up rather than down .
In the long reaches they set the yard square and ran , but often they had to lower their two boats and warp her painfully along , Tomlinson of Salem , the mate , and six grave , tobacco-chewing , New England seamen with their broad palmetto hats , tugging and straining at the oars .
Amos Green , De Catinat , and even the old merchant had to take their spell ere morning , when the sailors were needed aboard for the handling of the canvas .
At last , however , with the early dawn the river broadened out and each bank trended away , leaving a long funnel-shaped estuary between .
Ephraim Savage snuffed the air and paced the deck briskly with a twinkle in his keen gray eyes .
The wind had fallen away , but there was still enough to drive them slowly upon their course .
The old man and his nephew , him with the blue coat , can have the two empty bunks .
But you must speak to that man , Amos .
I'll have no philandering aboard my ship , lad -- no whispering or cuddling or any such foolishness .
Tell him that this ship is just a bit broke off from Boston , and he 'll have to put up with Boston ways until he gets off her .
They 've been good enough for better men than him .
You give me the French for 'no philandering , ' and I 'll bring him up with a round turn when he drifts . ''
`` It seems to me to be all mixed up , '' said Amos .
`` like the fat and the lean in a bag of pemmican .
Look at that sun just pushing its edge over the trees , and see the pink flush on the clouds and the river like a rosy ribbon behind us .
It 's mighty pretty to our eyes , and very pleasing to us , and it would n't be so to my mind if the Creator hadn't wanted it to be .
Many a time when I have lain in the woods in the fall and smoked my pipe , and felt how good the tobacco was , and how bright the yellow maples were , and the purple ash , and the red tupelo blazing among the bushwood , I 've felt that the real fool 's talk was with the man who could doubt that all this was meant to make the world happier for us . ''
When father and daughter had left the deck , De Catinat made his way aft again to where Amos Green and the captain were standing .
`` You see the white road which runs by the southern bank of the river .
Twice within the last half-hour I have seen horsemen spurring for dear life along it .
Where the spires and smoke are yonder is Honfleur , and thither it was that these men went .
I know not who could ride so madly at such an hour unless they were the messengers of the king .
Oh , see , there is a third one ! ''
On the white band which wound among the green meadows a black dot could be seen which moved along with great rapidity , vanished behind a clump of trees , and then reappeared again , making for the distant city .
Captain Savage drew out his glass and gazed at the rider .
Ephraim Savage looked at his passenger with eyes which had lost something of their sternness .
`` Young man , '' said he , `` I see that you can understand something of my talk . ''
`` It 's a mortal fact .
I 'd a jack-knife in my pocket , Same as this one , and I kicked my legs to keep the brute off , and I whittled away at the spar until I 'd got a good jagged bit off , sharp at each end , same as a nigger told me once down Delaware way .
Then I waited for him , and stopped kicking , so he came at me like a hawk on a chick-a-dee .
When he turned up his belly I jammed my left hand with the wood right into his great grinnin ' mouth , and I let him have it with my knife between the gills .
He tried to break away then , but I held on , d 'ye see , though he took me so deep I thought I 'd never come up again .
I was nigh gone when we got to the surface , but he was floatin ' with the white up , and twenty holes in his shirt front .
Then I got back to my spar , for we 'd gone a long fifty fathoms under water , and when I reached it I fainted dead away . ''
`` Sleeping , you say ?
We had best surprise him . ''
`` Come with me , corporal , '' said he .
`` Down this ladder , you say ? ''
The officer made his way slowly down the ladder which led into the hold , and the corporal followed him , and had his chest level with the deck when the other had reached the bottom .
It may have been something in Ephraim Savage 's face , or it may have been the gloom around him which startled the young Frenchman , but a sudden suspicion flashed into his mind .
Amid a solemn hush they ran alongside this lonely craft which hung out so sinister a signal .
Within ten yards of her the foreyard was hauled aback and they gazed down upon her terrible crew .
The French soldier shrugged his shoulders and looked around him with a lengthening face .
He and his corporal were limp with sea-sickness , and as miserable as a Frenchman is when first he finds that France has vanished from his view .
`` My God , what happiness !
Corporal Lemoine , the boat !
Let us push off at once . ''
The two Frenchmen were soon provided with all that they were likely to require , and pushed off with a waving of hats and a shouting of _bon voyage_ .
The foreyard was swung round again and the _Golden Rod_ turned her bowsprit for the west .
For hours a glimpse could be caught of the boat , dwindling away on the wave-tops , until at last it vanished into the haze , and with it vanished the very last link which connected them with the great world which they were leaving behind them .
The merchant shook his head , and then suddenly a thought flashed upon him , and he ran with joy upon his face and whispered eagerly to Amos Green .
Amos laughed , and strode across to the captain .
The mate 's watch that night was from twelve to four , and the moon was shining brightly for the first hour of it .
In the early morning , however , it clouded over , and the _Golden Rod_ plunged into one of those dim clammy mists which lie on all that tract of ocean .
So thick was it that from the poop one could just make out the loom of the foresail , but could see nothing of the fore-topmast-stay sail or the jib .
The wind was north-east with a very keen edge to it , and the dainty brigantine lay over , scudding along with her lee rails within hand 's touch of the water .
It had suddenly turned very cold -- so cold that the mate stamped up and down the poop , and his four seamen shivered together under the shelter of the bulwarks .
And then in a moment one of them was up , thrusting with his forefinger into the air and screaming , while a huge white wall sprang out of the darkness at the very end of the bowsprit , and the ship struck with a force which snapped her two masts like dried reeds in a wind , and changed her in an instant to a crushed and shapeless heap of spars and wreckage .
`` Tell him he can take his spell at the pumps , '' said the Captain to Amos .
`` And you , Amos , you are a handy man with a tool .
Get into yonder long-boat with a lantern and see if you can not patch her up . ''
For half an hour Amos Green hammered and trimmed and caulked , while the sharp measured clanking of the pumps sounded above the dash of the seas .
Slowly , very slowly , the bows of the brigantine were settling down , and her stern cocking up .
`` Here , sir . ''
`` The fog is lifting on the starboard quarter , '' cried one of the men .
`` Yes , there is the berg , quarter of a mile to leeward ! ''
`` The boat leaks like a sieve , '' said the mate .
`` I will take her to the berg , leave you all there , if we can find footing , and go back for the captain .
Put your heart into it , my lads , for the sooner we are there the sooner we shall get back . ''
`` Friend Tomlinson , '' said he , `` when I tell you to row for an iceberg I mean you to row right away there , d 'ye see , and not to go philandering about over the ocean .
It 's not your fault that I 'm not froze , and so I would have been if I had n't some dry tobacco and my tinder-box to keep myself warm . ''
`` Rig up that boat-sail and make quarters for the gal .
Then get our supper and such rest as we can , for there is nothing to be done to-night , and there may be much in the morning . ''
But neither the American nor the Frenchman had time now to give a thought to the novelty and beauty of their situation .
The latter 's face was grave , and his friend read danger in his eyes .
cried Amos Green , `` what 's that ? ''
`` Did you hear nothing ? ''
`` It must have been my fancy then . ''
`` Let us go through , '' said the captain .
`` It can but come out on the other side . ''
He led the way and the other two followed him .
It was very dark as they advanced , with high dripping ice walls on either side and one little zigzagging slit of blue sky above their heads .
Tripping and groping their way , they stumbled along until suddenly the passage grew wider and opened out into a large square of flat ice .
The berg was level in the centre and sloped upwards from that point to the high cliffs which bounded it on each side .
In three directions this slope was very steep , but in one it slanted up quite gradually , and the constant thawing had grooved the surface with a thousand irregularities by which an active man could ascend .
With one impulse they began all three to clamber up until a minute later they were standing not far from the edge of the summit , seventy feet above the sea , with a view which took in a good fifty miles of water .
In all that fifty miles there was no sign of life , nothing but the endless glint of the sun upon the waves .
A minute later the old merchant was on the deck , and the two young men had seated him upon a coil of rope with his back against the mast , where he should be away from the crush .
The soldiers were already crowding down into the boats , and all were so busy over their own affairs that they paid no heed to the little group of refugees who gathered round the stricken man .
He turned his head painfully from side to side , but his eyes brightened as they fell upon the broad blue stretch of water , the flash of the distant falls , the high castle , and the long line of purple mountains away to the north-west .
`` It is not like France , '' said he .
`` It is not green and peaceful and smiling , but it is grand and strong and stern like Him who made it .
As I have weakened , Adele , my soul has been less clogged by my body , and I have seen clearly much that has been dim to me .
And it has seemed to me , my children , that all this country of America , not Canada alone , but the land where you were born also , Amos Green , and all that stretches away towards yonder setting sun , will be the best gift of God to man .
For this has He held it concealed through all the ages , that now His own high purpose may be wrought upon it .
For here is a land which is innocent , which has no past guilt to atone for , no feud , nor ill custom , nor evil of any kind .
And as the years roll on all the weary and homeless ones , all who are stricken and landless and wronged , will turn their faces to it , even as we have done .
And hence will come a nation which will surely take all that is good and leave all that is bad , moulding and fashioning itself into the highest .
Do I not see such a mighty people , a people who will care more to raise their lowest than to exalt their richest -- who will understand that there is more bravery in peace than in war , who will see that all men are brothers , and whose hearts will not narrow themselves down to their own frontiers , but will warm in sympathy with every noble cause the whole world through ?
That is what I see , Adele , as I lie here beside a shore upon which I shall never set my feet , and I say to you that if you and Amory go to the building of such a nation then indeed your lives are not misspent .
It will come , and when it comes , may God guard it , may God watch over it and direct it ! ''
His head had sunk gradually lower upon his breast and his lids had fallen slowly over his eyes which had been looking away out past Point Levi at the rolling woods and the far-off mountains .
Adele gave a quick cry of despair and threw her arms round the old man 's neck .
The Franciscan started back at the words , and his hard suspicious eyes shot from De Catinat to the weeping girl .
`` Well , well , you know how it is with us here .
Frontenac could keep them in their place , but De la Barre was as clay in their hands , and this new one promises to follow in his steps .
What with the Sulpitians at Montreal and the Jesuits here , we poor devils are between the upper and the nether stones .
But I am grieved from my heart to give such a welcome as this to an old comrade , and still more to his wife . ''
`` What is to be done , then ? ''
De Catinat groaned as he listened .
After all their strivings and trials and efforts , to return to Paris , the scorn of his enemies , and an object of pity to his friends , was too deep a humiliation .
He flushed with shame at the very thought .
To be led back like the home-sick peasant who has deserted from his regiment !
Better one spring into the broad blue river beneath him , were it not for little pale-faced Adele who had none but him to look to .
It was so tame !
And yet in this floating prison , with a woman whose fate was linked with his own , what hope was there of escape ?
That night old Theophile Catinat was buried from the ship 's side , his sole mourners the two who bore his own blood in their veins .
The next day De Catinat spent upon deck , amid the bustle and confusion of the unlading , endeavouring to cheer Adele by light chatter which came from a heavy heart .
He pointed out to her the places which he had known so well , the citadel where he had been quartered , the college of the Jesuits , the cathedral of Bishop Laval , the magazine of the old company , dismantled by the great fire , and the house of Aubert de la Chesnaye , the only private one which had remained standing in the lower part .
From where they lay they could see not only the places of interest , but something also of that motley population which made the town so different to all others save only its younger sister , Montreal .
Passing and repassing along the steep path with the picket fence which connected the two quarters , they saw the whole panorama of Canadian life moving before their eyes , the soldiers with their slouched hats , their plumes , and their bandoleers , habitants from the river _cotes_ in their rude peasant dresses , little changed from their forefathers of Brittany or Normandy , and young rufflers from France or from the seigneuries , who cocked their hats and swaggered in what they thought to be the true Versailles fashion .
There , too , might be seen little knots of the men of the woods , _coureurs-de-bois_ or _voyageurs_ , with leathern hunting tunics , fringed leggings , and fur cap with eagle feather , who came back once a year to the cities , leaving their Indian wives and children in some up-country wigwam .
Redskins , too , were there , leather-faced Algonquin fishers and hunters , wild Micmacs from the east , and savage Abenakis from the south , while everywhere were the dark habits of the Franciscans , and the black cassocks and broad hats of the Recollets , and Jesuits , the moving spirits of the whole .
`` I confess that I was cut to the heart by it . ''
it is glorious to be free once more .
What do I not owe you , Amos ? ''
`` Well , you looked after me when I was in your country , and I am going to look after you now . ''
there you have me .
It is this way or none , for we ca n't get down to the sea .
We must make our way over land as best we can , and we must leave a good stretch between Quebec citadel and us before the day breaks , for from what I hear they would rather have a Huguenot prisoner than an Iroquois sagamore .
By the eternal , I can not see why they should make such a fuss over how a man chooses to save his own soul , though here is old Ephraim just as fierce upon the other side , so all the folly is not one way . ''
`` Where are they , then ? ''
The Indian waved his hand along the whole southern and western horizon .
`` He was an enemy of the Church , and the right hand of the foul fiend in this country , '' said a voice from the bottom of the canoe .
`` His jaw-tackle has come adrift , '' said the seaman .
`` Let me brace it up again . ''
`` Nay , upon the bank . ''
They shot over to the island and landed the friar , who said nothing , but cursed them with his eye .
They left with him a small supply of biscuit and of flour to last him until he should be picked up .
Then , having passed a bend in the river , they ran their canoe ashore in a little cove where the whortleberry and cranberry bushes grew right down to the water 's edge , and the sward was bright with the white euphorbia , the blue gentian , and the purple balm .
There they laid out their small stock of provisions , and ate a hearty breakfast while discussing what their plans should be for the future .
Concealed among the brushwood , they watched their pursuers fly past and vanish round a curve in the stream .
Then they looked at one another in perplexity .
`` Well , we ca n't take the back track anyhow , '' remarked Amos .
`` Let me cipher it out . ''
Amos Green sat on a fallen maple with his head sunk upon his hands .
`` Well , '' said he presently , `` if it 's no good going on , and no good going back , there 's only one way , and that is to go to one side .
That 's so , Ephraim , is it not ? ''
`` Ay , ay , lad , if you ca n't run you must tack , but it seems shoal water on either bow . ''
But if man were absent , there was at least no want of life .
It buzzed and chirped and chattered all round them from marsh and stream and brushwood .
Sometimes it was the dun coat of a deer which glanced between the distant trunks , sometimes the badger which scuttled for its hole at their approach .
Once the long in-toed track of a bear lay marked in the soft earth before them , and once Amos picked a great horn from amid the bushes which some moose had shed the month before .
Little red squirrels danced and clattered above their heads , and every oak was a choir with a hundred tiny voices piping from the shadow of its foliage .
As they passed the lakes the heavy gray stork flapped up in front of them , and they saw the wild duck whirring off in a long V against the blue sky , or heard the quavering cry of the loon from amid the reeds .
`` Fort St. Louis !
Ah , then , we are no great way from my friend's seigneury . ''
He was a very small man , so dark and weather-stained that he might have passed for an Indian were it not that he walked and was clad as no Indian had ever been .
He wore a broad-brimmed hat , frayed at the edges , and so discoloured that it was hard to say what its original tint had been .
His dress was of skins , rudely cut and dangling loosely from his body , and he wore the high boots of a dragoon , as tattered and stained as the rest of his raiment .
On his back he bore a huge bundle of canvas with two long sticks projecting from it , and under each arm he carried what appeared to be a large square painting .
`` He 's neither _voyageur_ , nor soldier , nor _coureur-de-bois_ , '' said De Catinat .
`` 'Pears to me to have a jurymast rigged upon his back , and fore and main staysails set under each of his arms , '' said Captain Ephraim .
`` Well , he seems to have no consorts , so we may hail him without fear . ''
`` Oh , the good God has placed plenty of food in these forests for a traveller who dare not eat very much .
I have had wild plums , and wild grapes , and nuts and cranberries , and a nice little dish of _tripe-de-mere_ from the rocks . ''
Amos , with a sly twinkle of the eyes , translated the proposal to Ephraim , who stood with his huge red hands clenched , mumbling about the saltless pottage of papacy .
De Catinat replied briefly , however , that they were all of the laity , and that if they were to reach their destination before nightfall , it was necessary that they should push on .
Across the river was the terrible Iroquois country , and at two points they could see the smoke of fires curling up into the evening air .
They had the Jesuit 's word for it that none of the war-parties had crossed yet , so they followed the track which led down the eastern bank .
As they pushed onwards , however , a stern military challenge suddenly brought them to a stand , and they saw the gleam of two musket barrels which covered them from a thicket overlooking the path .
`` Whence come you , then ? ''
asked an invisible sentinel .
`` You may not know my friend here , '' said he , pointing to the other sentinel , `` but I am quite sure that his name is not unfamiliar to you .
This is Greysolon du Lhut . ''
`` What do you think of those fires over yonder , Du Lhut ? ''
asked young De la Noue .
`` Tut , an Indian papoose could have told , '' said Du Lhut impatiently .
`` Iroquois on the trail do nothing without an object .
They have an object then in showing that smoke .
If their war-parties were over yonder there would be no object .
Therefore their braves must have crossed the river .
And they could not get over to the north without being seen from the fort .
They have got over on the south then . ''
Amos nodded with intense appreciation .
`` That 's it ! ''
said he , `` that's Injun ways .
I 'll lay that he is right . ''
A man in very shabby black livery , all stained and faded , advanced with a large tin platter and carried off the pile of white fish .
Then , as each of the tenants stepped forward to pay their old-world homage , they all left some share of their industry for their lord 's maintenance .
With some it was a bundle of wheat , with some a barrel of potatoes , while others had brought skins of deer or of beaver .
All these were carried off by the major-domo , until each had paid his tribute , and the singular ceremony was brought to a conclusion .
As the seigneur rose , his son , who had returned , took De Catinat by the sleeve and led him through the throng .
The seigneur bowed with much condescension , and shook the guardsman by the hand .
`` If the snow comes , it will be a thousand times more dangerous , '' said Amos , `` for we shall leave a track then that a papoose could follow . ''
`` And why should we fear ? ''
`` I have seen them in peace , '' remarked Amos .
`` I have traded to Onondaga and to the country of the Senecas .
I know them as fine hunters and brave men . ''
`` My comrade is from New England ; I am from New York . ''
`` We are good friends with the Indians , '' said Amos .
`` We do not wish to conquer . ''
`` No , behind us . ''
`` They are following us . ''
`` Are they enemies ? ''
`` Shall we turn , then ? ''
`` About two hundred paces , I think . ''
`` They can not see us , then ? ''
`` They would pick two of us off , and be gone like shadows through the woods .
No , we had best go on our way . ''
`` Yes , monsieur , it is well for a man to make a comrade of his wife , but not on the borders of the Iroquois country , nor of any other Indian country either . ''
`` On the contrary , she is always there to welcome me .
By Saint Anne , I should be heavy-hearted if I came to any village between this and the Bluffs of the Illinois , and did not find my wife waiting to greet me . ''
`` You hear them ? ''
`` Put them on as if they were gloves , '' said the pioneer , and an instant later Ephraim Savage and Amos had their comrades ' shoes upon their hands .
`` Have you been awake ? ''
`` Have you heard anything ? ''
`` Nothing but the hooting of the owl . ''
Du Lhut advanced from the bushes as he spoke , and the four men crossed the open ground in the direction of the line of men who waited silently for them in the dim twilight .
They were within fifty paces , and yet none of them had raised hand or voice to challenge their approach .
There was something uncanny in the silence , and a change came over Du Lhut 's face as he peered in front of him .
He craned his head round and looked up the river .
`` My God ! ''
`` Look at the fort ! ''
They had cleared the clump of trees , and the outline of the blockhouse should have shown up in front of them .
There was no sign of it .
So unexpected was the blow that even De Lhut , hardened from his childhood to every shock and danger , stood shaken and dismayed .
Then , with an oath , he ran at the top of his speed towards the line of figures , his companions following at his heels .
`` Then we have come through them ? ''
`` Or an abandoned camp ? ''
`` No , it has not been lit more than an hour . ''
`` They had one who was dressed like a white man , '' remarked Amos .
Day was just breaking as the four comrades entered the gate of the stockade , but early as it was the _censitaires_ and their families were all afoot staring at the prodigious fire which raged to the south of them .
De Catinat burst through the throng and rushed upstairs to Adele , who had herself flown down to meet him , so that they met in each other's arms half-way up the great stone staircase with a burst of those little inarticulate cries which are the true unwritten language of love .
Together , with his arm round her , they ascended to the great hall where old De la Noue with his son were peering out of the window at the wonderful spectacle .
`` You will have another game to play , Monsieur de Sainte-Marie , '' said he .
`` There are six hundred Iroquois in the woods and they are preparing to attack . ''
`` De Lannes of Poitou is dead , and all his people , '' said Du Lhut .
`` The blockhouse is a heap of smoking ashes . ''
`` Men are rushing from the woods , '' cried Onega .
`` A thousand of them , you say ? ''
At first the attack had been all upon the south face , but as fresh bodies of the Iroquois came up their line spread and lengthened until the whole east face was girt with fire , which gradually enveloped the north also .
The fort was ringed in by a great loop of smoke , save only where the broad river flowed past them .
Over near the further bank the canoes were lurking , and one , manned by ten warriors , attempted to pass up the stream , but a good shot from the brass gun dashed in her side and sank her , while a second of grape left only four of the swimmers whose high scalp-locks stood out above the water like the back-fins of some strange fish .
On the inland side , however , the seigneur had ordered the cannon to be served no more , for the broad embrasures drew the enemy's fire , and of the men who had been struck half were among those who worked the guns .
`` Ay , but not so heavily as ourselves in proportion to our numbers .
They have fifty out of a thousand , and we twenty out of threescore .
No , no , they are holding a council , and we shall soon hear from them again .
But it may be some hours first , and if you will take my advice you will have an hour 's sleep , for you are not , as I can see by your eyes , as used to doing without it as I am , and there may be little rest for any of us this night . ''
The words were hardly out of his mouth when a shrill yell burst from the wood , and in an instant a cloud of warriors dashed out and charged across the open , howling , springing , and waving their guns or tomahawks in the air .
With their painted faces , smeared and striped with every vivid colour , their streaming scalp-locks , their waving arms , their open mouths , and their writhings and contortions , no more fiendish crew ever burst into a sleeper 's nightmare .
Some of those in front bore canoes between them , and as they reached the stockade they planted them against it and swarmed up them as if they had been scaling-ladders .
Others fired through the embrasures and loop-holes , the muzzles of their muskets touching those of the defenders , while others again sprang unaided on to the tops of the palisades and jumped fearlessly down upon the inner side .
The Canadians , however , made such a resistance as might be expected from men who knew that no mercy awaited them .
They fired whilst they had time to load , and then , clubbing their muskets , they smashed furiously at every red head which showed above the rails .
The din within the stockade was infernal , the shouts and cries of the French , the whooping of the savages , and the terrified screaming of the frightened women blending into one dreadful uproar , above which could be heard the high shrill voice of the old seigneur imploring his _censitaires_ to stand fast .
With his rapier in his hand , his hat lost , his wig awry , and his dignity all thrown to the winds , the old nobleman showed them that day how a soldier of Rocroy could carry himself , and with Du Lhut , Amos , De Catinat and Ephraim Savage , was ever in the forefront of the defence .
So desperately did they fight , the sword and musket-butt outreaching the tomahawk , that though at one time fifty Iroquois were over the palisades , they had slain or driven back nearly all of them when a fresh wave burst suddenly over the south face which had been stripped of its defenders .
Du Lhut saw in an instant that the enclosure was lost and that only one thing could save the house .
THE COMING OF THE FRIAR .
But their case was a very evil one .
Had the guns been lost so that they might be turned upon the door , all further resistance would have been vain , but Du Lhut 's presence of mind had saved them from that danger .
The two guns upon the river face and the canoes were safe , for they were commanded by the windows of the house .
But their numbers were terribly reduced , and those who were left were weary and wounded and spent .
Nineteen had gained the house , but one had been shot through the body and lay groaning in the hall , while a second had his shoulder cleft by a tomahawk and could no longer raise his musket .
Du Lhut , De la Noue , and De Catinat were uninjured , but Ephraim Savage had a bullet-hole in his forearm , and Amos was bleeding from a cut upon the face .
Of the others hardly one was without injury , and yet they had no time to think of their hurts for the danger still pressed and they were lost unless they acted .
A few shots from the barricaded windows sufficed to clear the enclosure , for it was all exposed to their aim ; but on the other hand they had the shelter of the stockade now , and from the further side of it they kept up a fierce fire upon the windows .
Half-a-dozen of the _censitaires_ returned the fusillade , while the leaders consulted as to what had best be done .
`` By Saint Anne of Beaupre , '' exclaimed Du Lhut , `` I think it would be well if you could get your men out of this also , for I can not see how it is to be held until morning . ''
`` I think that there is rain in those clouds , and that will make it darker still . ''
`` But I feel so sure that it would be best . ''
`` It is for my sake , dear .
You do not know what a load it will be from my heart when I know that you are safe .
And you need not be afraid for me .
We can easily hold the place until morning .
Then the people from the fort will come , for I hear that they have plenty of canoes , and we shall all meet again . ''
`` How many warriors are in it ? ''
`` What is it then ? ''
cried De la Noue impatiently .
`` So , you have not escaped me ! ''
`` We have caught the evil seed before it has had time to root . ''
`` This is Amory de Catinat , the heretic and Huguenot , '' cried the monk .
`` I have followed him up the St. Lawrence , and I have followed him up the Richelieu , and I would have followed him to the world 's end if I could but bring him back with me . ''
`` Look at this , '' said he , whipping a paper out of his bosom .
`` It is signed by the governor , and calls upon you , under pain of the king's displeasure , to return this man to Quebec .
Ah , monsieur , when you left me upon the island that morning you little thought that I would return to Quebec for this , and then hunt you down so many hundreds of miles of river .
But I have you now , and I shall never leave you until I see you on board the ship which will carry you and your wife back to France . ''
`` It seems to me , father , that you would have shone more as a soldier than as a follower of Christ , '' said he ; `` but , since you have followed us here , and since there is no getting away , we may settle this question at some later time . ''
`` The captain and I could easily get rid of him , '' said the young woodsman , drawing De Catinat aside .
`` If he _will_ cross our path he must pay for it . ''
`` Thank God for this storm ! ''
`` It will prevent the cottages from blazing up too quickly . ''
`` They are rushing through the woods .
They are making for the water's edge , '' cried De Catinat .
`` They have some canoes down there , '' said Du Lhut .
`` But they must pass us ! ''
cried the Seigneur of Sainte Marie .
`` Get down to the cannon and see if you can not stop them . ''
`` Monsieur , you go too far in your very natural anxiety , '' said the seigneur coldly .
`` I am not inclined to leave my post so easily ! ''
`` Ah , what is it ?
Only wood and stone , which can be built again .
But to think of the women in the hands of these devils !
Oh , I am going mad !
For Christ 's sake come ! ''
His face was deadly pale , and he raved with his clenched hands in the air .
`` There is one lying there . ''
What had occurred is easily explained .
The watchers in the windows at the front found that it was more than flesh and blood could endure to remain waiting at their posts while the fates of their wives and children were being decided at the back .
All was quiet at the stockade , and the Indians appeared to be as absorbed as the Canadians in what was passing upon the river .
One by one , therefore , the men on guard had crept away and had assembled at the back to cheer the seaman 's shot and to groan as the remaining canoe sped like a bloodhound down the river in the wake of the fugitives .
But the savages had one at their head who was as full of wiles and resource as Du Lhut himself .
The Flemish Bastard had watched the house from behind the stockade as a dog watches a rat-hole , and he had instantly discovered that the defenders had left their post .
With a score of other warriors he raised a great log from the edge of the forest , and crossing the open space unchallenged , he and his men rushed it against the door with such violence as to crack the bar across and tear the wood from the hinges .
The first intimation which the survivors had of the attack was the crash of the door , and the screams of two of the negligent watchmen who had been seized and scalped in the hall .
The whole basement floor was in the hands of the Indians , and De Catinat and his enemy the friar were cut off from the foot of the stairs .
`` No , no , I 'll answer for it , '' cried Amos , and an instant later down came the ladder .
De Catinat and the friar rushed up it , and they hardly had their feet upon the rungs when a swarm of warriors burst out from the door and poured along the river bank .
Two muskets flashed from above , something plopped like a salmon in the water , and next instant the two were among their comrades and the ladder had been drawn up once more .
A man had suddenly sprung out at the foot of the stair and had swung his arm as though throwing something .
It was the Flemish Bastard .
Amos Green 's musket flashed , but the savage had sprung back again as rapidly as he appeared .
Something splashed down amongst them and rolled across the floor in the lamp-light .
For four hours sounds of riot , of dancing and of revelling rose up from the store-house , and the smell of the open brandy casks filled the whole air .
More than once the savages quarrelled and fought among themselves , and it seemed as if they had forgotten their enemies above , but the besieged soon found that if they attempted to presume upon this they were as closely watched as ever .
The major-domo , Theuriet , passing between a loop-hole and a light , was killed instantly by a bullet from the stockade , and both Amos and the old seigneur had narrow escapes until they blocked all the windows save that which overlooked the river .
There was no danger from this one , and , as day was already breaking once more , one or other of the party was forever straining their eyes down the stream in search of the expected succour .
`` Do you wish to die before your time ? ''
The two Americans and the old pioneer held the barricade , while the eyes of all the others were turned upon the approaching boat .
A groan broke suddenly from the only surviving _censitaire_ .
And so the watchers at the window saw the strangest of sights .
There , in mid-stream , lay the canoe , with a ring of dark warriors clustering in the stern , and the two women crouching in the midst of them .
Swimming madly towards them was De Catinat , rising to the shoulders with the strength of every stroke , and behind him again was the tonsured head of the friar , with his brown capote and long trailing gown floating upon the surface of the water behind him .
But in his zeal he had thought too little of his own powers .
He was a good swimmer , but he was weighted and hampered by his unwieldy clothes .
Slower and slower grew his stroke , lower and lower his head , until at last with a great shriek of _In manus tuas , Domine !
_ he threw up his hands , and vanished in the swirl of the river .
A minute later the watchers , hoarse with screaming to him to return , saw De Catinat pulled aboard the Iroquois canoe , which was instantly turned and continued its course up the river .
`` I have seen some strange things in these forty years , but never the like of that ! ''
`` They are leaving the house ! ''
cried the _censitaire_ , who was peeping through one of the side windows .
`` What can it mean ?
Holy Virgin , is it possible that we are saved ?
See how they throng through the trees .
They are making for the canoe .
Now they are waving their arms and pointing . ''
Amos took a steady aim , resting his gun upon the window sill , and fired .
A shout of delight burst from the little knot of survivors .
The Flemish Bastard had fallen .
But he was on his feet again in an instant and shook his hand defiantly at the window .
`` Ah , it was my one consolation to think that you were safe . ''
`` They have not ill-used us yet , '' said De Catinat .
`` Perhaps they will keep us for ransom or exchange . ''
The Indian woman seemed surprised .
`` It is strange to me , '' she said , `` that you should think of what befalls me when you are yourselves under the same shadow .
But our fate will be as I said . ''
What shall I do ! ''
He tore his hair in his helplessness and distraction .
She smiled again , and walked from the hut amidst the warriors with the quick firm step of a queen who sweeps to a throne .
As to Captain Ephraim Savage , he returned safely to his beloved Boston , where he fulfilled his ambition by building himself a fair brick house upon the rising ground in the northern part of the city , whence he could look down both upon the shipping in the river and the bay .
There he lived , much respected by his townsfolk , who made him selectman and alderman , and gave him the command of a goodly ship when Sir William Phips made his attack upon Quebec , and found that the old Lion Frontenac was not to be driven from his lair .
So , honoured by all , the old seaman lived to an age which carried him deep into the next century , when he could already see with his dim eyes something of the growing greatness of his country .
NOTE ON THE HUGUENOTS AND THEIR DISPERSION .
In England three Huguenot regiments were formed for the service of William .
The exiles established themselves as silk workers in Spitalfields , cotton spinners at Bideford , tapestry weavers at Exeter , wool carders at Taunton , kersey makers at Norwich , weavers at Canterbury , bat makers at Wandsworth , sailcloth makers at Ipswich , workers in calico in Bromley , glass in Sussex , paper at Laverstock , cambric at Edinburgh .
THE CAPTAIN OF THE POLESTAR AND OTHER TALES .
A. CONAN DOYLE , M.D .
THE CAPTAIN OF THE POLE-STAR J. HABAKUK JEPHSON 'S STATEMENT THE GREAT KEINPLATZ EXPERIMENT THE MAN FROM ARCHANGEL THAT LITTLE SQUARE BOX JOHN HUXFORD 'S HIATUS A LITERARY MOSAIC JOHN BARRINGTON COWLES THE PARSON OF JACKMAN 'S GULCH THE RING OF THOTH THE CAPTAIN OF THE `` POLE-STAR . ''
[ Being an extract from the singular journal of JOHN M'ALISTER RAY , student of medicine . ]
81 degrees 40 ' N. ; long .
2 degrees E. Still lying-to amid enormous ice fields .
The one which stretches away to the north of us , and to which our ice-anchor is attached , can not be smaller than an English county .
To the right and left unbroken sheets extend to the horizon .
This morning the mate reported that there were signs of pack ice to the southward .
Should this form of sufficient thickness to bar our return , we shall be in a position of danger , as the food , I hear , is already running somewhat short .
It is late in the season , and the nights are beginning to reappear .
This morning I saw a star twinkling just over the fore-yard , the first since the beginning of May .
There is considerable discontent among the crew , many of whom are anxious to get back home to be in time for the herring season , when labour always commands a high price upon the Scotch coast .
As yet their displeasure is only signified by sullen countenances and black looks , but I heard from the second mate this afternoon that they contemplated sending a deputation to the Captain to explain their grievance .
I much doubt how he will receive it , as he is a man of fierce temper , and very sensitive about anything approaching to an infringement of his rights .
I shall venture after dinner to say a few words to him upon the subject .
I have always found that he will tolerate from me what he would resent from any other member of the crew .
Amsterdam Island , at the north-west corner of Spitzbergen , is visible upon our starboard quarter -- a rugged line of volcanic rocks , intersected by white seams , which represent glaciers .
It is curious to think that at the present moment there is probably no human being nearer to us than the Danish settlements in the south of Greenland -- a good nine hundred miles as the crow flies .
A captain takes a great responsibility upon himself when he risks his vessel under such circumstances .
No whaler has ever remained in these latitudes till so advanced a period of the year .
9 P.M , -- I have spoken to Captain Craigie , and though the result has been hardly satisfactory , I am bound to say that he listened to what I had to say very quietly and even deferentially .
When I had finished he put on that air of iron determination which I have frequently observed upon his face , and paced rapidly backwards and forwards across the narrow cabin for some minutes .
At first I feared that I had seriously offended him , but he dispelled the idea by sitting down again , and putting his hand upon my arm with a gesture which almost amounted to a caress .
There was a depth of tenderness too in his wild dark eyes which surprised me considerably .
`` Look here , Doctor , '' he said , `` I 'm sorry I ever took you -- I am indeed -- and I would give fifty pounds this minute to see you standing safe upon the Dundee quay .
It 's hit or miss with me this time .
There are fish to the north of us .
How dare you shake your head , sir , when I tell you I saw them blowing from the masthead ? ''
-- this in a sudden burst of fury , though I was not conscious of having shown any signs of doubt .
`` Two-and-twenty fish in as many minutes as I am a living man , and not one under ten foot .
[ 1 ] Now , Doctor , do you think I can leave the country when there is only one infernal strip of ice between me and my fortune ?
If it came on to blow from the north to-morrow we could fill the ship and be away before the frost could catch us .
If it came on to blow from the south -- well , I suppose the men are paid for risking their lives , and as for myself it matters but little to me , for I have more to bind me to the other world than to this one .
I confess that I am sorry for you , though .
I wish I had old Angus Tait who was with me last voyage , for he was a man that would never be missed , and you -- you said once that you were engaged , did you not ? ''
[ Footnote 1 : A whale is measured among whalers not by the length of its body , but by the length of its whalebone . ]
`` Yes , '' I answered , snapping the spring of the locket which hung from my watch-chain , and holding up the little vignette of Flora .
`` Curse you ! ''
he yelled , springing out of his seat , with his very beard bristling with passion .
`` What is your happiness to me ?
What have I to do with her that you must dangle her photograph before my eyes ? ''
I almost thought that he was about to strike me in the frenzy of his rage , but with another imprecation he dashed open the door of the cabin and rushed out upon deck , leaving me considerably astonished at his extraordinary violence .
It is the first time that he has ever shown me anything but courtesy and kindness .
I can hear him pacing excitedly up and down overhead as I write these lines .
I should like to give a sketch of the character of this man , but it seems presumptuous to attempt such a thing upon paper , when the idea in my own mind is at best a vague and uncertain one .
Several times I have thought that I grasped the clue which might explain it , but only to be disappointed by his presenting himself in some new light which would upset all my conclusions .
It may be that no human eye but my own shall ever rest upon these lines , yet as a psychological study I shall attempt to leave some record of Captain Nicholas Craigie .
A man 's outer case generally gives some indication of the soul within .
The Captain is tall and well-formed , with dark , handsome face , and a curious way of twitching his limbs , which may arise from nervousness , or be simply an outcome of his excessive energy .
His jaw and whole cast of countenance is manly and resolute , but the eyes are the distinctive feature of his face .
They are of the very darkest hazel , bright and eager , with a singular mixture of recklessness in their expression , and of something else which I have sometimes thought was more allied with horror than any other emotion .
Generally the former predominated , but on occasions , and more particularly when he was thoughtfully inclined , the look of fear would spread and deepen until it imparted a new character to his whole countenance .
It is at these times that he is most subject to tempestuous fits of anger , and he seems to be aware of it , for I have known him lock himself up so that no one might approach him until his dark hour was passed .
He sleeps badly , and I have heard him shouting during the night , but his cabin is some little distance from mine , and I could never distinguish the words which he said .
This is one phase of his character , and the most disagreeable one .
It is only through my close association with him , thrown together as we are day after day , that I have observed it .
Otherwise he is an agreeable companion , well-read and entertaining , and as gallant a seaman as ever trod a deck .
I shall not easily forget the way in which he handled the ship when we were caught by a gale among the loose ice at the beginning of April .
I have never seen him so cheerful , and even hilarious , as he was that night , as he paced backwards and forwards upon the bridge amid the flashing of the lightning and the howling of the wind .
He has told me several times that the thought of death was a pleasant one to him , which is a sad thing for a young man to say ; he can not be much more than thirty , though his hair and moustache are already slightly grizzled .
Some great sorrow must have overtaken him and blighted his whole life .
Perhaps I should be the same if I lost my Flora -- God knows !
I think if it were not for her that I should care very little whether the wind blew from the north or the south to-morrow .
There , I hear him come down the companion , and he has locked himself up in his room , which shows that he is still in an unamiable mood .
And so to bed , as old Pepys would say , for the candle is burning down ( we have to use them now since the nights are closing in ) , and the steward has turned in , so there are no hopes of another one .
-- Calm , clear day , and still lying in the same position .
What wind there is comes from the south-east , but it is very slight .
Captain is in a better humour , and apologised to me at breakfast for his rudeness .
He still looks somewhat distrait , however , and retains that wild look in his eyes which in a Highlander would mean that he was `` fey '' -- at least so our chief engineer remarked to me , and he has some reputation among the Celtic portion of our crew as a seer and expounder of omens .
It is strange that superstition should have obtained such mastery over this hard-headed and practical race .
I could not have believed to what an extent it is carried had I not observed it for myself .
We have had a perfect epidemic of it this voyage , until I have felt inclined to serve out rations of sedatives and nerve-tonics with the Saturday allowance of grog .
The first symptom of it was that shortly after leaving Shetland the men at the wheel used to complain that they heard plaintive cries and screams in the wake of the ship , as if something were following it and were unable to overtake it .
This fiction has been kept up during the whole voyage , and on dark nights at the beginning of the seal-fishing it was only with great difficulty that men could be induced to do their spell .
No doubt what they heard was either the creaking of the rudder-chains , or the cry of some passing sea-bird .
I have been fetched out of bed several times to listen to it , but I need hardly say that I was never able to distinguish anything unnatural .
That is his story , given as far as I can in his own words .
I fancy what he saw must , in spite of his denial , have been a young bear erect upon its hind legs , an attitude which they often assume when alarmed .
In the uncertain light this would bear a resemblance to a human figure , especially to a man whose nerves were already somewhat shaken .
Whatever it may have been , the occurrence is unfortunate , for it has produced a most unpleasant effect upon the crew .
Their looks are more sullen than before , and their discontent more open .
The double grievance of being debarred from the herring fishing and of being detained in what they choose to call a haunted vessel , may lead them to do something rash .
Even the harpooners , who are the oldest and steadiest among them , are joining in the general agitation .
Apart from this absurd outbreak of superstition , things are looking rather more cheerful .
The pack which was forming to the south of us has partly cleared away , and the water is so warm as to lead me to believe that we are lying in one of those branches of the gulf-stream which run up between Greenland and Spitzbergen .
There are numerous small Medusse and sealemons about the ship , with abundance of shrimps , so that there is every possibility of `` fish '' being sighted .
Indeed one was seen blowing about dinner-time , but in such a position that it was impossible for the boats to follow it .
`` Sometimes , '' I answered .
`` Seeing a thing which is not there is a delusion . ''
-- The Bogie again .
Thank Heaven that I have strong nerves !
The superstition of these poor fellows , and the circumstantial accounts which they give , with the utmost earnestness and self-conviction , would horrify any man not accustomed to their ways .
There are many versions of the matter , but the sum-total of them all is that something uncanny has been flitting round the ship all night , and that Sandie M'Donald of Peterhead and `` lang '' Peter Williamson of Shetland saw it , as also did Mr. Milne on the bridge -- so , having three witnesses , they can make a better case of it than the second mate did .
I spoke to Milne after breakfast , and told him that he should be above such nonsense , and that as an officer he ought to set the men a better example .
He shook his weatherbeaten head ominously , but answered with characteristic caution , `` Mebbe aye , mebbe na , Doctor , '' he said ; `` I didna ca ' it a ghaist .
I canna ' say I preen my faith in sea-bogles an ' the like , though there 's a mony as claims to ha ' seen a ' that and waur .
I'm no easy feared , but maybe your ain bluid would run a bit cauld , mun , if instead o ' speerin ' aboot it in daylicht ye were wi ' me last night , an' seed an awfu ' like shape , white an ' gruesome , whiles here , whiles there , an ' it greetin ' and ca'ing in the darkness like a bit lambie that hae lost its mither .
Ye would na ' be sae ready to put it a ' doon to auld wives ' clavers then , I 'm thinkin ' . ''
I saw it was hopeless to reason with him , so contented myself with begging him as a personal favour to call me up the next time the spectre appeared -- a request to which he acceded with many ejaculations expressive of his hopes that such an opportunity might never arise .
He sat silent a little , swinging his leg thoughtfully backwards and forwards .
`` Look here , '' he continued ; `` it 's a dangerous place this , even at its best -- a treacherous , dangerous place .
I have known men cut off very suddenly in a land like this .
A slip would do it sometimes -- a single slip , and down you go through a crack , and only a bubble on the green water to show where it was that you sank .
It 's a queer thing , '' he continued with a nervous laugh , `` but all the years I 've been in this country I never once thought of making a will -- not that I have anything to leave in particular , but still when a man is exposed to danger he should have everything arranged and ready -- do n't you think so ? ''
By the sudden intensity of his attitude I felt that he saw something .
I crept up behind him .
He was staring with an eager questioning gaze at what seemed to be a wreath of mist , blown swiftly in a line with the ship .
It was a dim , nebulous body , devoid of shape , sometimes more , sometimes less apparent , as the light fell on it .
The moon was dimmed in its brilliancy at the moment by a canopy of thinnest cloud , like the coating of an anemone .
`` Coming , lass , coming , '' cried the skipper , in a voice of unfathomable tenderness and compassion , like one who soothes a beloved one by some favour long looked for , and as pleasant to bestow as to receive .
Among the most assiduous of the negresses who had watched my couch during my illness there was one old crone who appeared to exert considerable authority over the others .
She was exceedingly attentive to me , and I gathered from the few words that passed between us that she had heard of me , and that she was grateful to me for championing her oppressed race .
As my wound had nearly healed by this time , I took my leave of Mr. Murray shortly afterwards .
The Union armies were everywhere victorious and converging on Richmond , so that my assistance seemed unnecessary , and I returned to Brooklyn .
There I resumed my practice , and married the second daughter of Josiah Vanburger , the well-known wood engraver .
In the course of a few years I built up a good connection and acquired considerable reputation in the treatment of pulmonary complaints .
I still kept the old black stone in my pocket , and frequently told the story of the dramatic way in which I had become possessed of it .
I also kept my resolution of showing it to Professor Shroeder , who was much interested both by the anecdote and the specimen .
He pronounced it to be a piece of meteoric stone , and drew my attention to the fact that its resemblance to an ear was not accidental , but that it was most carefully worked into that shape .
A dozen little anatomical points showed that the worker had been as accurate as he was skilful .
`` I should not wonder , '' said the Professor , `` if it were broken off from some larger statue , though how such hard material could be so perfectly worked is more than I can understand .
If there is a statue to correspond I should like to see it ! ''
So I thought at the time , but I have changed my opinion since .
That gentleman examined me , and pronounced the apex of my left lung to be in a state of consolidation , recommending me at the same time to go through a course of medical treatment and to take a long sea-voyage .
`` No , none , sir . ''
`` Is there room for another passenger ? ''
Night had fallen , and the clamour of the negroes had died gradually away .
I was stretched on the couch of skins which had been provided for me , and was still meditating over my future , when Goring walked stealthily into the hut .
My first idea was that he had come to complete his murderous holocaust by making away with me , the last survivor , and I sprang up upon my feet , determined to defend myself to the last .
He smiled when he saw the action , and motioned me down again while he seated himself upon the other end of the couch .
`` Oh , there is no credit to me in the matter .
I am quite consistent .
There is no reason why I should not be perfectly candid with you .
I wish to be king over these fellows -- not a very high ambition , certainly , but you know what Caesar said about being first in a village in Gaul .
Well , this unlucky stone of yours has not only saved your life , but has turned all their heads so that they think you are come down from heaven , and my influence will be gone until you are out of the way .
That is why I am going to help you to escape , since I can not kill you '' -- this in the most natural and dulcet voice , as if the desire to do so were a matter of course .
`` You would give the world to ask me a few questions , '' he went on , after a pause ; `` but you are too proud to do it .
Never mind , I 'll tell you one or two things , because I want your fellow white men to know them when you go back -- if you are lucky enough to get back .
About that cursed stone of yours , for instance .
These negroes , or at least so the legend goes , were Mahometans originally .
While Mahomet himself was still alive , there was a schism among his followers , and the smaller party moved away from Arabia , and eventually crossed Africa .
They took away with them , in their exile , a valuable relic of their old faith in the shape of a large piece of the black stone of Mecca .
The stone was a meteoric one , as you may have heard , and in its fall upon the earth it broke into two pieces .
One of these pieces is still at Mecca .
The larger piece was carried away to Barbary , where a skilful worker modelled it into the fashion which you saw to-day .
These men are the descendants of the original seceders from Mahomet , and they have brought their relic safely through all their wanderings until they settled in this strange place , where the desert protects them from their enemies . ''
`` And the ear ? ''
I asked , almost involuntarily .
`` And now , '' he continued , `` there is no difficulty about your escape .
These stupid adopted children of mine will say that you have gone back to heaven from whence you came .
The wind blows off the land .
I have a boat all ready for you , well stored with provisions and water .
I am anxious to be rid of you , so you may rely that nothing is neglected .
Rise up and follow me . ''
Young Fritz von Hartmann was a handsome lad enough .
There were broad acres , too , which would descend to him when his father died .
To many he would have seemed an eligible suitor ; but Madame frowned upon his presence in the house , and lectured the Professor at times on his allowing such a wolf to prowl around their lamb .
To tell the truth , Fritz had an evil name in Keinplatz .
Never was there a riot or a duel , or any other mischief afoot , but the young Rhinelander figured as a ringleader in it .
No one used more free and violent language , no one drank more , no one played cards more habitually , no one was more idle , save in the one solitary subject .
When the good Professor finally fulfilled his promise , and published an account of what occurred , the narrative was so extraordinary that it was received with general incredulity .
The tone of some of the papers was so offensive in their comments upon the matter that the angry savant declared that he would never open his mouth again or refer to the subject in any way -- a promise which he has faithfully kept .
This narrative has been compiled , however , from the most authentic sources , and the events cited in it may be relied upon as substantially correct .
`` What is it , then , Fritz ? ''
the physiologist asked , looking at him in mild surprise .
There was considerable applause from this eminent assembly upon the appearance of Professor von Baumgarten and his subject upon the platform .
The lecturer , in a few well-chosen words , explained what his views were , and how he proposed to test them .
`` I hold , '' he said , `` that when a person is under the influence of mesmerism , his spirit is for the time released from his body , and I challenge any one to put forward any other hypothesis which will account for the fact of clairvoyance .
I therefore hope that upon mesmerising my young friend here , and then putting myself into a trance , our spirits may be able to commune together , though our bodies lie still and inert .
After a time nature will resume her sway , our spirits will return into our respective bodies , and all will be as before .
With your kind permission , we shall now proceed to attempt the experiment . ''
Now although all these learned men were filing out of the lecture-room under the impression that they had seen nothing of note , as a matter of fact one of the most wonderful things in the whole history of the world had just occurred before their very eyes Professor von Baumgarten had been so far correct in his theory that both his spirit and that of his pupil had been for a time absent from his body .
But here a strange and unforeseen complication had occurred .
In their return the spirit of Fritz von Hartmann had entered into the body of Alexis von Baumgarten , and that of Alexis von Baumgarten had taken up its abode in the frame of Fritz von Hartmann .
Hence the slang and scurrility which issued from the lips of the serious Professor , and hence also the weighty words and grave statements which fell from the careless student .
It was an unprecedented event , yet no one knew of it , least of all those whom it concerned .
cried a student , bolder than the others `` Is Madame dead , then ? ''
`` Oh , if you choose to turn ill-tempered , you may go where you like , '' the students said , releasing him .
`` We can do very well without you . ''
Thus roughly summoned , the young lady came timidly downstairs and into the presence of her lover .
she cried , throwing her arms round him , `` I know this is all done for my sake !
It is a RUSE in order to see me . ''
`` Never have I passed such a day in my life , '' Von Hartmann cried , stamping upon the floor .
`` My experiment has failed .
Von Althaus has insulted me .
Two students have dragged me along the public road .
My wife nearly faints when I ask her for dinner , and my daughter flies at me and hugs me like a grizzly bear . ''
`` Well , sonny , '' said the drunken man , surveying Von Hartmann and swaying about in front of him , `` where the Henker have I seen you before ?
I know you as well as I know myself .
Who the deuce are you ? ''
`` I am Professor von Baumgarten , '' said the student .
`` May I ask who you are ?
I am strangely familiar with your features . ''
For some time after that people had some suspicion of the sanity of both the actors in this strange episode .
When the Professor published his experiences in the Medicalschrift as he had promised , he was met by an intimation , even from his colleagues , that he would do well to have his mind cared for , and that another such publication would certainly consign him to a madhouse .
The student also found by experience that it was wisest to be silent about the matter .
On the fourth day of March , in the year 1867 , being at that time in my five-and-twentieth year , I wrote down the following words in my note-book -- the result of much mental perturbation and conflict : --
These words , as I have said , I wrote down in my note-book , and they reflected accurately the thoughts which I found rooted far down in my soul , ever present and unaffected by the passing emotions of the hour .
At last , however , came a time when my uncle , M'Vittie of Glencairn , died -- the same who was at one time chairman of committees of the House of Commons .
He divided his great wealth among his many nephews , and I found myself with sufficient to provide amply for my wants during the remainder of my life , and became at the same time owner of a bleak tract of land upon the coast of Caithness , which I think the old man must have bestowed upon me in derision , for it was sandy and valueless , and he had ever a grim sense of humour .
Up to this time I had been an attorney in a midland town in England .
Now I saw that I could put my thoughts into effect , and , leaving all petty and sordid aims , could elevate my mind by the study of the secrets of nature .
My departure from my English home was somewhat accelerated by the fact that I had nearly slain a man in a quarrel , for my temper was fiery , and I was apt to forget my own strength when enraged .
There was no legal action taken in the matter , but the papers yelped at me , and folk looked askance when I met them .
It ended by my cursing them and their vile , smoke-polluted town , and hurrying to my northern possession , where I might at last find peace and an opportunity for solitary study and contemplation .
I borrowed from my capital before I went , and so was able to take with me a choice collection of the most modern philosophical instruments and books , together with chemicals and such other things as I might need in my retirement .
`` Because , '' he cried , throwing out his long arms with a passionate , despairing gesture , `` there -- there in that blue smiling bay , lies my soul , my treasure -- everything that I loved and lived for . ''
`` One of us ? ''
`` Yes -- if you could take her off with you I should be still more grateful . ''
I said , pulling him back from her .
`` This is a pretty to-do !
What do you mean ?
Do you think this is a wayside inn or place of public accommodation ? ''
`` I am not so sure of that , '' I answered .
`` And what is your object in keeping me from Sophie ? ''
`` Do you imagine that I would injure her ?
Why , man , I would give my life freely to save her from the slightest harm .
Why do you do this thing ? ''
`` Stand off , '' I said , putting my hand on my pistol .
`` If you lay a finger on me I shall kill you . ''
He put his hand into his pocket , and for a moment I thought he was about to produce a weapon too , but instead of that he whipped out a cigarette and lit it , breathing the smoke rapidly into his lungs .
No doubt he had found by experience that this was the most effectual way of curbing his passions .
I had had a long day of heavy and wearying work , so that in the evening I determined upon taking a long walk .
When I emerged from the house my attention was attracted by the appearance of the sea .
It lay like a sheet of glass , so that never a ripple disturbed its surface .
Yet the air was filled with that indescribable moaning sound which I have alluded to before -- a sound as though the spirits of all those who lay beneath those treacherous waters were sending a sad warning of coming troubles to their brethren in the flesh .
The fishermen 's wives along that coast know the eerie sound , and look anxiously across the waters for the brown sails making for the land .
When I heard it I stepped back into the house and looked at the glass .
It was down below 29 degrees .
Then I knew that a wild night was coming upon us .
I was too late .
By the time I reached the water 's edge he was a hundred yards away , making the boat spring with every stroke of his powerful arms .
I uttered a wild cry of impotent anger , and stamped up and down the sands like a maniac .
He turned and saw me .
Rising from his seat he made me a graceful bow , and waved his hand to me .
It was not a triumphant or a derisive gesture .
Even my furious and distempered mind recognised it as being a solemn and courteous leave-taking .
Then he settled down to his oars once more , and the little skiff shot away out over the bay .
The sun had gone down now , leaving a single dull , red streak upon the water , which stretched away until it blended with the purple haze on the horizon .
Gradually the skiff grew smaller and smaller as it sped across this lurid band , until the shades of night gathered round it and it became a mere blur upon the lonely sea .
Then this vague loom died away also and darkness settled over it -- a darkness which should never more be raised .
And why did I pace the solitary shore , hot and wrathful as a wolf whose whelp has been torn from it ?
Was it that I loved this Muscovite girl ?
No -- a thousand times no .
I am not one who , for the sake of a white skin or a blue eye , would belie my own life , and change the whole tenor of my thoughts and existence .
My heart was untouched .
But my pride -- ah , there I had been cruelly wounded .
That night a great wind rose up from the sea , and the wild waves shrieked upon the shore as though they would tear it back with them into the ocean .
The turmoil and the uproar were congenial to my vexed spirit .
All night I wandered up and down , wet with spray and rain , watching the gleam of the white breakers and listening to the outcry of the storm .
My heart was bitter against the Russian .
I joined my feeble pipe to the screaming of the gale .
`` If he would but come back again ! ''
I cried with clenched hands ; `` if he would but come back ! ''
Glancing through a chink between two colossal chests , I saw that the passengers who had joined us at the last moment were standing at the other side of the pile .
They had evidently failed to see me as I crouched in the shadow of the boxes .
The one who had spoken was a tall and very thin man with a blue-black beard and a colourless face .
His manner was nervous and excited .
His companion was a short plethoric little fellow , with a brisk and resolute air .
He had a cigar in his mouth , and a large ulster slung over his left arm .
They both glanced round uneasily , as if to ascertain whether they were alone .
`` This is just the place , '' I heard the other say .
They sat down on a bale of goods with their backs turned towards me , and I found myself , much against my will , playing the unpleasant part of eavesdropper to their conversation .
`` Ruined them entirely , '' said the little man , and puffed furiously at his cigar for some minutes .
`` Is no one looking ? ''
`` It seems right enough , '' he said at last .
`` No , '' I continued , `` it 's no laughing matter ; and I speak in sober earnest , I assure you .
I have discovered an infamous conspiracy , Dick , to destroy this ship and every soul that is in her ; '' and I then proceeded systematically , and in order , to lay before him the chain of evidence which I had collected .
`` There , Dick , '' I said , as I concluded , `` what do you think of that ?
and , above all , what am I to do ? ''
`` The weather is fine , '' I said ; `` why should we not be heard of at our destination . ''
My appetite , I need hardly say , had not been improved by the incidents which had occurred during the day .
I sat down , however , mechanically at the table , and listened to the talk which was going on around me .
There were nearly a hundred first-class passengers , and as the wine began to circulate , their voices combined with the clash of the dishes to form a perfect Babel .
I found myself seated between a very stout and nervous old lady and a prim little clergyman ; and as neither made any advances I retired into my shell , and spent my time in observing the appearance of my fellow-voyagers .
I could see Dick in the dim distance dividing his attentions between a jointless fowl in front of him and a self-possessed young lady at his side .
Captain Dowie was doing the honours at my end , while the surgeon of the vessel was seated at the other .
I was glad to notice that Flannigan was placed almost opposite to me .
As long as I had him before my eyes I knew that , for the time at least , we were safe .
He was sitting with what was meant to be a sociable smile on his grim face .
It did not escape me that he drank largely of wine -- so largely that even before the dessert appeared his voice had become decidedly husky .
His friend Muller was seated a few places lower down .
He ate little , and appeared to be nervous and restless .
`` I have no doubt they would if they could .
But I am very sure they shall never blow up mine . ''
`` May I ask what precautions are taken against them ? ''
asked an elderly man at the end of the table .
`` Do n't you think you are rather underrating them ? ''
`` Every secret society has produced desperate men -- why should n't the Fenians have them too ?
Many men think it a privilege to die in the service of a cause which seems right in their eyes , though others may think it wrong . ''
`` Then they lied , '' said the Captain .
`` It was proved conclusively at the court-martial to have arisen from an explosion of coal-gas -- but we had better change the subject , or we may cause the ladies to have a restless night ; '' and the conversation once more drifted back into its original channel .
It was a glorious evening .
Even in my excited state of mind I could not help leaning against the bulwarks and enjoying the refreshing breeze .
Away to the westward a solitary sail stood out as a dark speck against the great sheet of flame left by the setting sun .
I shuddered as I looked at it .
It was grand but appalling .
A single star was twinkling faintly above our mainmast , but a thousand seemed to gleam in the water below with every stroke of our propeller .
The only blot in the fair scene was the great trail of smoke which stretched away behind us like a black slash upon a crimson curtain .
It was hard to believe that the great peace which hung over all Nature could be marred by a poor miserable mortal .
`` No , not yet , '' said I ; `` but that 's no proof that we are not going to be . ''
`` Nonsense , man ! ''
said Dick ; `` I ca n't conceive what has put this extraordinary idea into your head .
I have been talking to one of your supposed assassins , and he seems a pleasant fellow enough ; quite a sporting character , I should think , from the way he speaks . ''
Left to myself , I bethought me of my retreat of the morning , and climbing on the bulwark I mounted into the quarter-boat , and lay down there .
In it I could reconsider my course of action , and by raising my head I was able at any time to get a view of my disagreeable neighbours .
`` Yes , at ten sharp .
We have eight minutes yet . ''
There was a pause .
Then the voice began again --
How long do you reckon it will be before they hear of us ? ''
`` Three minutes more , '' he said .
`` Put it down upon the deck . ''
It was the little square box .
I knew by the sound that they had placed it near the davit , and almost exactly under my head .
`` By what right do you prevent us ? ''
I felt that I was standing on the verge of eternity .
Half-strangled in the arms of the taller ruffian , I saw the other approach the fatal box .
He stooped over it and seized the string .
I breathed one prayer when I saw his grasp tighten upon it .
Then came a sharp snap , a strange rasping noise .
The trigger had fallen , the side of the box flew out , and let off -- TWO GREY CARRIER PIGEONS !
The workman turned back and stood swinging his cap awkwardly in front of his ex-employer , while the crowd pushed on until the doorway was clear , and the heavy fog-wreaths rolled unchecked into the deserted factory .
An old silvery-haired woman and a young girl hardly out of her teens were sitting on either side of the fire , and the latter sprang to her feet as he entered .
`` Oh , never mind about me , '' the old woman broke in cheerfully .
`` I 'll be no drag on you .
If you want granny , granny 's not too old to travel ; and if you do n't want her , why she can look after the cottage , and have an English home ready for you whenever you turn back to the old country . ''
In the meantime neither the opinion held by the minority that John Huxford was dead , nor that of the majority , which pronounced him to be faithless , represented the true state of the case .
Still alive , and of stainless honour , he had yet been singled out by fortune as her victim in one of those strange freaks which are of such rare occurrence , and so beyond the general experience , that they might be put by as incredible , had we not the most trustworthy evidence of their occasional possibility .
`` He is mad , '' one suggested .
`` Or a foreigner , '' said another .
`` There were no papers on him when he came in .
His linen is marked 'J .
H. ' Let us try him in French and German . ''
`` You have overtired yourself , '' he said .
`` It does n't do for old chaps like you and me to forget our years . ''
John 's share in the Quebec business was sold out , and gave rise to a very interesting legal question as to whether , knowing that his name was Huxford , he could still sign that of Hardy , as was necessary for the completion of the business .
It was decided , however , that on his producing two trustworthy witnesses to his identity all would be right , so the property was duly realised and produced a very handsome fortune .
Part of this John devoted to building a pretty villa just outside Brisport , and the heart of the proprietor of Beach Terrace leaped within him when he learned that the cottage was at last to be abandoned , and that it would no longer break the symmetry and impair the effect of his row of aristocratic mansions .
Even when condemned to the prosaic duties which fell to my lot in the office , I continued faithful to my first love .
I have introduced pieces of word-painting into the most commonplace business letters which have , I am told , considerably astonished the recipients .
My refined sarcasm has made defaulting creditors writhe and wince .
Occasionally , like the great Silas Wegg , I would drop into poetry , and so raise the whole tone of the correspondence .
Thus what could be more elegant than my rendering of the firm 's instructions to the captain of one of their vessels .
It ran in this way : --
`` From England , Captain , you must steer a Course directly to Madeira , Land the casks of salted beef , Then away to Teneriffe .
Pray be careful , cool , and wary With the merchants of Canary .
When you leave them make the most Of the trade winds to the coast .
Down it you shall sail as far As the land of Calabar , And from there you 'll onward go To Bonny and Fernando Po '' -- --
and so on for four pages .
The captain , instead of treasuring up this little gem , called at the office next day , and demanded with quite unnecessary warmth what the thing meant , and I was compelled to translate it all back into prose .
On this , as on other similar occasions , my employer took me severely to task -- for he was , you see , a man entirely devoid of all pretensions to literary taste !
`` Very true , Defoe , '' said a genial-looking man in a red waistcoat , who was sitting at the modern end of the table .
`` But all this wo n't help our good friend Smith in making a start at his story , which , I believe , was the reason why we assembled . ''
`` That would be a case of haltering , '' returned the other , on which everybody laughed again .
`` Well , '' said Sir Walter Scott , speaking with a pronounced accent , `` ye ken the auld proverb , sirs , 'Ower mony cooks , ' or as the Border minstrel sang --
`` Na , na ! ''
cried Sir Walter ; `` I 'll do my share , but there 's Chairlie over there as full o ' wut as a Radical 's full o ' treason .
He 's the laddie to give a cheery opening to it . ''
`` I had had my doubts hitherto as to whether this new-found country was inhabited or no , but as I approached nearer to it , being on the summit of a great wave , I perceived a number of figures on the beach , engaged apparently in watching me and my vessel .
My joy , however , was considerably lessened when on reaching the land I found that the figures consisted of a vast concourse of animals of various sorts who were standing about in groups , and who hurried down to the water 's edge to meet me .
I had scarce put my foot upon the sand before I was surrounded by an eager crowd of deer , dogs , wild boars , buffaloes , and other creatures , none of whom showed the least fear either of me or of each other , but , on the contrary , were animated by a common feeling of curiosity , as well as , it would appear , by some degree of disgust . ''
`` A second edition , '' whispered Lawrence Sterne to his neighbour ; `` Gulliver served up cold . ''
`` My words were not addressed to you , sir , '' answered Sterne , looking rather frightened .
`` Better that than to wallow in all the filth of Yahoo-land , '' returned Sterne warmly , and a quarrel would certainly have ensued but for the interposition of the remainder of the company .
As it was , the Dean refused indignantly to have any further hand in the story , and Sterne also stood out of it , remarking with a sneer that he was loth to fit a good blade on to a poor handle .
Under these circumstances some further unpleasantness might have occurred had not Smollett rapidly taken up the narrative , continuing it in the third person instead of the first : --
`` Our hero , being anxious to continue his journey , and learning that it would be some time before any conveyance would be ready , determined to push on alone mounted on his gallant grey steed .
Travelling was particularly dangerous at that time , for besides the usual perils which beset wayfarers , the southern parts of England were in a lawless and disturbed state which bordered on insurrection .
The young man , however , having loosened his sword in his sheath , so as to be ready for every eventuality , galloped cheerily upon his way , guiding himself to the best of his ability by the light of the rising moon .
`` 'What ho , my masters ! '
'Are beds so scarce , then , that ye must hamper the high road of the king with your bodies ?
Now , by St. Ursula of Alpuxerra , there be those who might think that birds who fly o ' nights were after higher game than the moorhen or the woodcock ! '
`` 'Nay , Allen , ' interrupted one of the party , addressing him who seemed to be their leader ; 'this is a lad of mettle , and such a one as our honest Jack longs for .
But we lure not hawks with empty hands .
Look ye , sir , there is game afoot which it may need such bold hunters as thyself to follow .
Come with us and take a firkin of canary , and we will find better work for that glaive of thine than getting its owner into broil and bloodshed ; for , by my troth !
Milan or no Milan , if my curtel axe do but ring against that morion of thine it will be an ill day for thy father 's son . '
`` The apparition which frightened the loquacious little man was sufficiently strange to cause a qualm even in the bosom of the knight .
Through the darkness there loomed a figure which appeared to be of gigantic size , and a hoarse voice , issuing apparently some distance above the heads of the party , broke roughly on the silence of the night .
`` 'Now out upon thee , Thomas Allen , and foul be thy fate if thou hast abandoned thy post without good and sufficient cause .
By St. Anselm of the Holy Grove , thou hadst best have never been born than rouse my spleen this night .
Wherefore is it that you and your men are trailing over the moor like a flock of geese when Michaelmas is near ? '
`` 'Nay , take it not to heart , bold Allen , ' exclaimed their leader , who was none other than the great Jack Cade himself .
'Thou knowest of old that my temper is somewhat choleric , and my tongue not greased with that unguent which oils the mouths of the lip-serving lords of the land .
And you , ' he continued , turning suddenly upon our hero , 'are you ready to join the great cause which will make England what it was when the learned Alfred reigned in the land ?
Zounds , man , speak out , and pick not your phrases . '
`` 'I am ready to do aught which may become a knight and a gentleman , ' said the soldier stoutly .
`` We want a touch of your own style , man , '' he said .
`` The animal-magnetico-electro-hysterical-biological-mysterious sort of story is all your own , but at present you are just a poor copy of myself , and nothing more . ''
`` Perhaps you will think that this is an imitation also , '' said Lytton bitterly , and leaning back in his chair with a morose countenance , he continued the narrative in this way : --
`` Gad zooks , master , '' cried Smollett , who had been sniggering for some time back .
`` It seems to me that there is little danger of any one venturing to dispute that style with you . ''
I shall therefore merely state the circumstances which led up to this sad event as concisely and as plainly as I can , and leave every reader to draw his own deductions .
Perhaps there may be some one who can throw light upon what is dark to me .
Cowles ' father was the colonel of a Sikh regiment and had remained in India for many years .
He allowed his son a handsome income , but seldom gave any other sign of parental affection -- writing irregularly and briefly .
How well I can recollect the first time we met her !
Often and often I have recalled the circumstances , and tried to remember what the exact impression was which she produced on my mind at the time .
`` I do n't know her personally , '' I replied .
`` But I have no doubt I could find out all about her , for I believe she is engaged to young Archie Reeves , and he and I have a lot of mutual friends . ''
`` Oh , yes -- it 's all off .
His brother told me so .
Deucedly mean of Reeves , you know , if he has backed out of it , for she was an uncommonly nice girl . ''
He muttered some incoherent apology for his condition , and took my arm .
As I supported him towards his lodgings I could see that he was not only suffering from the effects of a recent debauch , but that a long course of intemperance had affected his nerves and his brain .
His hand when I touched it was dry and feverish , and he started from every shadow which fell upon the pavement .
He rambled in his speech , too , in a manner which suggested the delirium of disease rather than the talk of a drunkard .
When I got him to his lodgings I partially undressed him and laid him upon his bed .
His pulse at this time was very high , and he was evidently extremely feverish .
He seemed to have sunk into a doze ; and I was about to steal out of the room to warn his landlady of his condition , when he started up and caught me by the sleeve of my coat .
He repeated this question several times , rolling his feverish head from side to side , and then he dropped into a troubled sleep .
I crept out of the room , and , having seen that he would be properly cared for , left the house .
His words , however , rang in my ears for days afterwards , and assumed a deeper significance when taken with what was to come .
I cried , with a vague feeling of apprehension at my heart .
`` You do n't mean to say that you are engaged to her ? ''
When I spoke to her she started and looked up at me with a scared look on her face .
Then I saw in a moment what the expression was which I had observed there .
It was one of fear -- intense and overpowering fear .
It was so marked that I could have staked my life on the woman before me having at some period of her life been subjected to some terrible experience or dreadful misfortune .
`` Do n't talk to me any more , please .
She does not like it , and I shall suffer for it afterwards .
Please , do n't do it . ''
`` There is your prototype in your family , Miss Northcott . ''
`` Do you think so ? ''
`` I am afraid you are paying me a very bad compliment .
Uncle Anthony was always considered the black sheep of the family . ''
`` Come , Jack , you are not going to die any sort of death yet , '' she said , tenderly taking his hand in hers .
`` Well , really , '' I answered , `` I have hardly had time to form an opinion . ''
We then walked on for some time in silence .
I got an answer from Leicester , where the Colonel resided , within two days .
I have it before me as I write , and copy it verbatim .
We had secured one of the side boxes , and did not arrive until after the performance had begun .
I had hardly taken my seat before I recognised Barrington Cowles , with his fiancee and old Mrs. Merton , sitting in the third or fourth row of the stalls .
They caught sight of me at almost the same moment , and we bowed to each other .
The first portion of the lecture was somewhat commonplace , the lecturer giving tricks of pure legerdemain , with one or two manifestations of mesmerism , performed upon a subject whom he had brought with him .
He gave us an exhibition of clairvoyance too , throwing his subject into a trance , and then demanding particulars as to the movements of absent friends , and the whereabouts of hidden objects all of which appeared to be answered satisfactorily .
I had seen all this before , however .
What I wanted to see now was the effect of the lecturer 's will when exerted upon some independent member of the audience .
I waited outside the hall until my friend and the ladies came out .
Cowles was laughing over his recent experience .
`` It took me all my time , though , '' my friend said seriously .
`` You can't conceive what a strange feeling I had once or twice .
All the strength seemed to have gone out of me -- especially just before he collapsed himself . ''
`` You did that , Miss Northcott . ''
There was something in the way she spoke which gave an indescribable air of a threat to these few words .
He pondered for some minutes , and then he cried out for some more brandy .
There was a small bottle of laudanum upon the table , and I managed , by insisting upon helping him myself , to mix about half a drachm with the spirits .
He drank it off , and sank his head once more upon the pillow .
`` Anything better than that , '' he groaned .
`` Death is better than that .
Crime and cruelty ; cruelty and crime .
Anything is better than that , '' and so on , with the monotonous refrain , until at last the words became indistinct , his eyelids closed over his weary eyes , and he sank into a profound slumber .
I carried him into his bedroom without arousing him ; and making a couch for myself out of the chairs , I remained by his side all night .
I cried , straining my eyes into the darkness .
The fishermen and I walked round the island all that night with lanterns , and examined every nook and corner without seeing a trace of my poor lost friend .
The direction in which he had been running terminated in a rugged line of jagged cliffs overhanging the sea .
At one place here the edge was somewhat crumbled , and there appeared marks upon the turf which might have been left by human feet .
We lay upon our faces at this spot , and peered with our lanterns over the edge , looking down on the boiling surge two hundred feet below .
As we lay there , suddenly , above the beating of the waves and the howling of the wind , there rose a strange wild screech from the abyss below .
The fishermen -- a naturally superstitious race -- averred that it was the sound of a woman 's laughter , and I could hardly persuade them to continue the search .
For my own part I think it may have been the cry of some sea-fowl startled from its nest by the flash of the lantern .
However that may be , I never wish to hear such a sound again .
And now I have come to the end of the painful duty which I have undertaken .
I have told as plainly and as accurately as I could the story of the death of John Barrington Cowles , and the train of events which preceded it .
I am aware that to others the sad episode seemed commonplace enough .
Here is the prosaic account which appeared in the Scotsman a couple of days afterwards : --
`` There 's sixty pound screw , '' Jimmy answers thoughtfully ; `` and you mind , master , last March , when the brindled bull broke out o ' the paddock .
Two pound you promised me then .
And a pound at the dipping .
And a pound when Millar 's sheep got mixed with ourn ; '' and so he goes on , for bushmen can seldom write , but they have memories which nothing escapes .
`` What is it ? ''
`` Not a taste , '' says Jimmy .
`` Well , well , mate , do n't turn rusty , '' says Jim .
`` Give us one drink an' I 'm off . ''
`` Look here , '' he says somewhat huskily , taking his cheque out of his pouch .
`` You take this , mate .
Whoever comes along this road , ask 'em what they 'll have , and tell them it 's my shout .
Let me know when the money's done . ''
For more than a month Elias B. Hopkins carried on this campaign .
There he would sit , night after night , with the open book upon his knee , and at the slightest provocation off he would go , like a musical box when the spring is touched .
The monotonous drawl became unendurable , but it could only be avoided by conforming to the parson 's code .
A chronic swearer came to be looked upon with disfavour by the community , since the punishment of his transgression fell upon all .
At the end of a fortnight the reader was silent more than half the time , and at the end of the month his position was a sinecure .
Never was a moral revolution brought about more rapidly and more completely .
Our parson carried his principle into private life .
I have seen him , on hearing an unguarded word from some worker in the gulches , rush across , Bible in hand , and perching himself upon the heap of red clay which surmounted the offender 's claim , drawl through the genealogical tree at the commencement of the New Testament in a most earnest and impressive manner , as though it were especially appropriate to the occasion .
In time , an oath became a rare thing amongst us .
Drunkenness was on the wane too .
Casual travellers passing through the Gulch used to marvel at our state of grace , and rumours of it went as far as Ballarat , and excited much comment therein .
`` We 'd have a blessing on the camp , boys , '' he said , `` if we only had a service o ' some sort on the Lord 's day .
It 's a temptin ' o ' Providence to go on in this way without takin ' any notice of it , except that maybe there 's more whisky drunk and more card playin ' than on any other day . ''
`` We hai n't got no church ! ''
urged the same dissentient .
`` Have it in the open air , '' one suggested .
`` Or in Adams ' saloon . ''
The student had a large amount of petty vanity in his composition which manifested itself by an ostentatious and overdone disregard of all personal considerations .
He straightened his lips and looked rigidly at the roll of papyrus , while his heart filled with bitterness against the whole race of travelling Britons .
`` C'est la , '' replied the man brusquely , nodding his head at the other side of the room .
Tired out by his journey , he slept so soundly in his lonely post behind the door that neither the clanking civil guard , nor the footsteps of sightseers , nor even the loud hoarse bell which gives the signal for closing , were sufficient to arouse him .
It was clear to John Vansittart Smith that this mummy had never been unswathed before .
The operation interested him keenly .
He thrilled all over with curiosity , and his birdlike head protruded further and further from behind the door .
When , however , the last roll had been removed from the four-thousand-year-old head , it was all that he could do to stifle an outcry of amazement .
First , a cascade of long , black , glossy tresses poured over the workman 's hands and arms .
A second turn of the bandage revealed a low , white forehead , with a pair of delicately arched eyebrows .
A third uncovered a pair of bright , deeply fringed eyes , and a straight , well-cut nose , while a fourth and last showed a sweet , full , sensitive mouth , and a beautifully curved chin .
The whole face was one of extraordinary loveliness , save for the one blemish that in the centre of the forehead there was a single irregular , coffee-coloured splotch .
It was a triumph of the embalmer 's art .
Vansittart Smith 's eyes grew larger and larger as he gazed upon it , and he chirruped in his throat with satisfaction .
`` And you have been watching me ? ''
the other asked in English , with a most venomous look on his corpse-like face .
`` I have no wish to interfere with you , '' the student answered .
`` My presence here is entirely accidental .
All I ask is that you will have the extreme kindness to show me out through some side door . ''
He spoke with great suavity , for the man was still pressing the tip of his dagger against the palm of his left hand , as though to assure himself of its sharpness , while his face preserved its malignant expression .
The strange man turned and flashed his light upon the dead woman , uttering a long doleful cry as he did so .
The action of the air had already undone all the art of the embalmer .
The skin had fallen away , the eyes had sunk inwards , the discoloured lips had writhed away from the yellow teeth , and the brown mark upon the forehead alone showed that it was indeed the same face which had shown such youth and beauty a few short minutes before .
`` Time presses , and I must go , '' continued the other .
`` The moment is at hand for which I have waited this weary time .
But I must show you out first .
Come with me . ''
Taking up the lamp , he turned from the disordered chamber , and led the student swiftly through the long series of the Egyptian , Assyrian , and Persian apartments .
At the end of the latter he pushed open a small door let into the wall and descended a winding stone stair .
The Englishman felt the cold fresh air of the night upon his brow .
There was a door opposite him which appeared to communicate with the street .
To the right of this another door stood ajar , throwing a spurt of yellow light across the passage .
`` Come in here ! ''
said the attendant shortly .
He had hoped that he had come to the end of his adventure .
Yet his curiosity was strong within him .
He could not leave the matter unsolved , so he followed his strange companion into the lighted chamber .
`` My name was Sosra .
My father had been the chief priest of Osiris in the great temple of Abaris , which stood in those days upon the Bubastic branch of the Nile .
I was brought up in the temple and was trained in all those mystic arts which are spoken of in your own Bible .
I was an apt pupil .
Before I was sixteen I had learned all which the wisest priest could teach me .
From that time on I studied Nature 's secrets for myself , and shared my knowledge with no man .
`` 'You may say that , ' he cried with a wild laugh ; 'the words come well from your lips .
For me they have no meaning . '
`` 'To die ! '
he shrieked , 'to die !
I am not bound by earthen fetters . '
`` 'I can defy it , ' said he ; 'I have found a stronger principle which will destroy it .
It is working in my veins at this moment , and in an hour I shall be a dead man .
I shall join her , and you shall remain behind . '
`` I have travelled in all lands and I have dwelt with all nations .
Every tongue is the same to me .
I learned them all to help pass the weary time .
I need not tell you how slowly they drifted by , the long dawn of modern civilisation , the dreary middle years , the dark times of barbarism .
They are all behind me now , I have never looked with the eyes of love upon another woman .
Atma knows that I have been constant to her .
A chieftain reined his horse back , and thrust a blood-smeared sword into its sheath .
Beside him two Egyptian artillerymen with their throats cut were sobbing out their lives upon the ground .
`` Who lays the gun this time ? ''
asked the fierce chief , glaring at the frightened gunners . ''
Here , thou black-browed child of Shaitan , aim , and aim for thy life . ''
The left front of the square was formed by four companies of the Royal Wessex , and the right by four of the Royal Mallows .
On either side the other halves of the same regiments marched in quarter column of companies .
Behind them , on the right was a battalion of Guards , and on the left one of Marines , while the rear was closed in by a Rifle battalion .
Two Royal Artillery 7 lb .
screw-guns kept pace with the square , and a dozen white-bloused sailors , under their blue-coated , tight-waisted officers , trailed their Gardner in front , turning every now and then to spit up at the draggled banners which waved over the cragged ridge .
Hussars and Lancers scouted in the scrub at each side , and within moved the clump of camels , with humorous eyes and supercilious lips , their comic faces a contrast to the blood-stained men who already lay huddled in the cacolets on either side .
`` The divils have hurrooshed us , Ted , '' said his brother subaltern , cocking his revolver .
`` This damned vertical feed ! ''
`` If you raise your pistol , Captin , your brains will be over your coat , '' said a low voice at his side .
`` A black curse on the Impire ! ''
shouted Private McQuire , throwing down his rifle .
`` 'T was the Impire that backed the man that druv me onto the roadside .
May me hand stiffen before I draw trigger for it .
`` What 's the Impire to us , Captain Foley , and what 's the Widdy to us ayther ? ''
`` Bhoys , will ye stand for this ? ''
It was so ringing , so strenuous , that the breaking Mallows glanced backwards .
They were held by what they saw .
Private Conolly had planted his rifle-stock downwards in a mimosa bush .
From the fixed bayonet there fluttered a little green flag with the crownless harp .
God knows for what black mutiny , for what signal of revolt , that flag had been treasured up within the corporal 's tunic !
Now its green wisp stood amid the rush , while three proud regimental colours were reeling slowly backwards .
It was a good half-hour before the square , having disentangled itself from its difficulties and dressed its ranks , began to slowly move forwards over the ground , across which in its labour and anguish it had been driven .
The long trail of Wessex men and Arabs showed but too clearly the path they had come .
`` Colonel Flanagan reports , sir , that the company took the whole brunt of the attack , and gave the square time to re-form . ''
They were the more to be dreaded because they had none of that discipline and restraint which made their predecessors , the Buccaneers , both formidable and respectable .
These Ishmaels of the sea rendered an account to no man , and treated their prisoners according to the drunken whim of the moment .
Flashes of grotesque generosity alternated with longer stretches of inconceivable ferocity , and the skipper who fell into their hands might find himself dismissed with his cargo , after serving as boon companion in some hideous debauch , or might sit at his cabin table with his own nose and his lips served up with pepper and salt in front of him .
It took a stout seaman in those days to ply his calling in the Caribbean Gulf .
`` Why , as to that , he became more than his own comrades could abide , and they took such a horror of him that they would not have him on the ship .
So they marooned him upon the Little Mangles to the south of the Mysteriosa Bank , and there he was found by a Portobello trader , who brought him in .
There was talk of sending him to Jamaica to be tried , but our good little Governor , Sir Charles Ewan , would not hear of it .
'He 's my meat , ' said he , 'and I claim the cooking of it . '
If you can stay till to-morrow morning at ten , you 'll see the joint swinging . ''
`` The early morning tide , then . ''
`` Have you wine aboard ? ''
`` I am honoured in enjoying your Excellency 's society , '' said the captain .
`` But I am sorry that your eyes should be so afflicted . ''
`` Yes , indeed .
It is the cursed glare of the sun on the white streets of Basseterre which has gone far to burn them out . ''
`` Yes ; I have had a pyrexy , which has reduced me much . ''
It was a cheering omen for their start across the Western Ocean , and the invalid Governor found himself a popular man on board , for it was generally understood that but for his insistence upon an immediate trial and sentence , the villain might have played upon some more venal judge and so escaped .
At dinner that day Sir Charles gave many anecdotes of the deceased pirate ; and so affable was he , and so skilful in adapting his conversation to men of lower degree , that captain , mate , and Governor smoked their long pipes , and drank their claret as three good comrades should .
The idea seemed to amuse the Governor , for he broke suddenly into a high , neighing laugh , and the two seamen laughed also , but not so heartily , for they remembered that Sharkey was not the last pirate who sailed the western seas , and that as grotesque a fate might come to be their own .
Another bottle was broached to drink to a pleasant voyage , and the Governor would drink just one other on the top of it , so that the seamen were glad at last to stagger off -- the one to his watch , and the other to his bunk .
But when , after his four hours ' spell , the mate came down again , he was amazed to see the Governor , in his Ramillies wig , his glasses , and his powdering-gown , still seated sedately at the lonely table with his reeking pipe and six black bottles by his side .
`` Heh , Sir Charles , not so fast ! ''
cried Captain Scarrow ; `` you have not played out the hand , and we are not the losers . ''
`` Good God ! ''
`` It 's Sharkey ! ''
`` There 's a man of spirit , and one of my own kidney , and he 's going to make a very pretty death of it ! ''
`` There 's no one aft save the man at the wheel , so you may keep your breath , for you 'll need it soon .
Is the dinghy astern , Ned ? ''
`` I believe you 're the devil himself ! ''
`` Where is the Governor of St .
yelled the mate ; but the butt of the pirate's pistol crashed down on his head , and he dropped like a pithed ox .
Scarrow rushed for the door , but the sentinel clapped his hand over his mouth , and threw his other arm round his waist .
`` Sink me , but I like his spirit ! ''
`` Put your knife in your pocket , Ned .
You 've saved your skin , Scarrow , and it 's a pity so stout a man should not take to the only trade where a pretty fellow can pick up a living .
You must be born for no common death , Scarrow , since you have lain at my mercy and lived to tell the story .
Tie him up , Ned . ''
`` Nay , I thought you meant to roast him ! ''
`` You surely do not mean to let him go ? ''
`` Nay , nay , Captain Sharkey , not so hot , sir ! ''
said the quartermaster , and , lifting Scarrow like a child , he laid him on the table .
With the quick dexterity of a seaman , he tied his spread-eagled hands and feet with a rope which was passed underneath , and gagged him securely with the long cravat which used to adorn the chin of the Governor of St. Kitt 's .
THE DEALINGS OF CAPTAIN SHARKEY WITH STEPHEN CRADDOCK
During the weeks which were thus occupied the ship was , of course , defenceless ; but , on the other hand , she was unapproachable by anything heavier than an empty hull , and the place for careening was chosen with an eye to secrecy , so that there was no great danger .
So secure did the captains feel , that it was not uncommon for them , at such times , to leave their ships under a sufficient guard , and to start off in the long-boat , either upon a sporting expedition or , more frequently , upon a visit to some outlying town , where they burned the heads of the women by their swaggering gallantry , or broached pipes of wine in the market square , with a threat to pistol all who would not drink with them .
Afterwards , as a slaver , and even , as it was hinted , as a pirate , he had left an evil name behind him in the Bight of Benin .
Finally he had returned to Jamaica with a considerable fortune , and had settled down to a life of sombre dissipation .
This was the man , gaunt , austere , and dangerous , who now waited upon the Governor with a plan for the extirpation of Sharkey .
Sir Edward received him with little enthusiasm , for in spite of some rumours of conversion and reformation , he had always regarded him as an infected sheep who might taint the whole of his little flock .
Craddock saw the Governor 's mistrust under his thin veil of formal and restrained courtesy .
`` You 've no call to fear me , sir , '' said he ; `` I 'm a changed man from what you 've known .
I 've seen the light again of late , after losing sight of it for many a black year .
It was through the ministration of the Rev .
John Simons , of our own people .
Sir , if your spirit should be in need of quickening , you would find a very sweet savour in his discourse . ''
`` By the help of it this man shall be delivered into our hands . ''
That night they spent under the trees , and pushed on again with the earliest light .
About noon they came to the huts of bark , which , the Carib told them , were the camp of the hunters , but they were silent and deserted .
No doubt their occupants were away at the hunt and would return in the evening , so Craddock and his men lay in ambush in the brushwood around them .
But no one came , and another night was spent in the forest .
Nothing more could be done , and it seemed to Craddock that after the two days ' absence it was time that he returned to his ship once more .
The blood flushed to Craddock 's gaunt face .
`` How is this , Master Hird ? ''
he cried , springing up the side .
`` What mean you by giving orders to my boat 's crew ? ''
It was not the pain of the wounds , but it was the contempt in Sharkey's voice which turned Craddock into a savage madman .
He flew at the pirate , roaring with rage , striking , kicking , writhing , foaming .
It took six men to drag him down on to the floor amidst the splintered remains of the table -- and not one of the six who did not bear the prisoner 's mark upon him .
But Sharkey still surveyed him with the same contemptuous eye .
From outside there came the crash of breaking wood and the clamour of startled voices .
`` Hock him and heave him over , '' said Sharkey .
`` It was you who trapped me and caught me as in a snare ! ''
`` How shall you answer for what you have done ? ''
`` Have you heard what they mean to do with me ? ''
`` I have not heard .
If you would but sign the articles -- ''
And then suddenly there was a burst of hearty cheering from the deck , and then the crash of a gun above his head , and then the answering booming of guns from far over the water .
Craddock sat up and strained his ears .
Was the ship in action ?
Only the one gun had been fired , and though many had answered , there were none of the crashings which told of a shot coming home .
Then , if it was not an action , it must be a salute .
But who would salute Sharkey , the pirate ?
It could only be another pirate ship which would do so .
So Craddock lay back again with a groan , and continued to work at the manacle which still held his right wrist .
But suddenly there came the shuffling of steps outside , and he had hardly time to wrap the loose links round his free hand , when the door was unbolted and two pirates came in .
`` What are you going to do with me ? ''
For an instant Craddock stopped in amazement , but a brutal push from the pirates behind drove him up the companion ladder .
As he stepped out upon deck , his eyes turned up to the main , and there again were the British colours flying above the red pennant , and all the shrouds and rigging were garlanded with streamers .
`` They are edging away , '' said the boatswain .
`` I think they smell us . ''
The Buccaneers were something higher than a mere band of marauders .
They were a floating republic , with laws , usages , and discipline of their own .
In their endless and remorseless quarrel with the Spaniards they had some semblance of right upon their side .
Their bloody harryings of the cities of the Main were not more barbarous than the inroads of Spain upon the Netherlands -- or upon the Caribs in these same American lands .
But there came a day when the fleets of the Buccaneers no longer mustered at the Tortugas , and the solitary and outlawed pirate took their place .
Yet even with him the tradition of restraint and of discipline still lingered ; and among the early pirates , the Avorys , the Englands , and the Robertses , there remained some respect for human sentiment .
They were more dangerous to the merchant than to the seaman .
But they in turn were replaced by more savage and desperate men , who frankly recognised that they would get no quarter in their war with the human race , and who swore that they would give as little as they got .
Of their histories we know little that is trustworthy .
They wrote no memoirs and left no trace , save an occasional blackened and blood-stained derelict adrift upon the face of the Atlantic .
Their deeds could only be surmised from the long roll of ships who never made their port .
`` Good morning , Mr .
`` I suspect , '' said the soldier , `` that it is Stede Bonnet over again . ''
Now , Stede Bonnet was a planter of high reputation and religious character who , from some sudden and overpowering freshet of wildness in his blood , had given up everything in order to start off pirating in the Caribbean Sea .
The example was a recent one , and it had caused the utmost consternation in the islands .
Governors had before now been accused of being in league with pirates , and of receiving commissions upon their plunder , so that any want of vigilance was open to a sinister construction .
All should share and share alike , save only the captain , quartermaster , boatswain , carpenter , and master-gunner , who had from a quarter to a whole share extra .
He who saw a prize first should have the best weapon taken out of her .
He who boarded her first should have the richest suit of clothes aboard of her .
Every man might treat his own prisoner , be it man or woman , after his own fashion .
If a man flinched from his gun , the quartermaster should pistol him .
These were some of the rules which the crew of the _Ruffling Harry_ subscribed by putting forty-two crosses at the foot of the paper upon which they had been drawn .
Copley Banks looked at him , and his eyes were like those of a traveller who sees his home at last .
`` I am glad that we are of one mind , '' said he , `` for I am myself of opinion that the seas are not large enough for the two of us .
But if you will take your sword and pistols and come upon a sand-bank with me , then the world will be rid of a damned villain , whichever way it goes . ''
`` Now , this is talking ! ''
said Sharkey , jumping off the gun and holding out his hand .
`` I have not met many who could look John Sharkey in the eyes and speak with a full breath .
May the devil seize me if I do not choose you as a consort !
But if you play me false , then I will come aboard of you and gut you upon your own poop . ''
`` Captain Sharkey , '' said Copley Banks , `` do you remember the _Duchess of Cornwall_ , hailing from London , which you took and sank three years ago off the Statira Shoal ? ''
But the three men were far too deeply sunk in their swinish sleep for any voice to wake them .
Round and round went the rope , until Sharkey was swathed like a mummy from ankle to neck .
They propped him stiff and helpless against a powder barrel , and they gagged him with a handkerchief , but his filmy , red-rimmed eyes still looked curses at them .
The dumb man chattered in his exultation , and Sharkey winced for the first time when he saw the empty mouth before him .
He understood that vengeance , slow and patient , had dogged him long , and clutched him at last .
To the dying pirate the jovial words and rollicking tune made his own fate seem the harsher , but there was no softening in those venomous blue eyes .
Copley Banks had brushed away the priming of the gun , and had sprinkled fresh powder over the touch-hole .
Then he had taken up the candle and cut it to the length of about an inch .
This he placed upon the loose powder at the breach of the gun .
Thin he scattered powder thickly over the floor beneath , so that when the candle fell at the recoil it must explode the huge pile in which the three drunkards were wallowing .
Then Copley Banks , his heart singing within him , touched his companion upon the shoulder , and they plunged together into the lonely jungle of the Caicos .
`` Yes , Mr .
A pleasant sense of relief thrilled softly through him .
What blessed safety-valve was this through which his jangled nerves might find some outlet .
The provocation was so gross , the insult so unprovoked , that he could have none of those qualms which take the edge off a man 's mettle .
He finished sealing the bottle upon which he was occupied , and he addressed it and placed it carefully in the rack .
`` Look here ! ''
said he , turning round to the miner , `` your medicine will be made up in its turn and sent down to you .
I do n't allow folk in the surgery .
Wait outside in the waiting-room if you wish to wait at all . ''
They were a very singular trio .
Each was known to him by sight ; but what on earth the three could be doing together , and , above all , what they could expect from _him_ , was a most inexplicable problem .
The first was Sorley Wilson , the son of the owner of the Nonpareil Coalpit .
He was a young blood of twenty , heir to a fortune , a keen sportsman , and down for the Easter Vacation from Magdalene College .
He sat now upon the edge of the surgery table , looking in thoughtful silence at Montgomery and twisting the ends of his small , black , waxed moustache .
The second was Purvis , the publican , owner of the chief beer-shop , and well known as the local bookmaker .
He was a coarse , clean-shaven man , whose fiery face made a singular contrast with his ivory-white bald head .
He had shrewd , light-blue eyes with foxy lashes , and he also leaned forward in silence from his chair , a fat , red hand upon either knee , and stared critically at the young assistant .
So did the third visitor , Fawcett , the horse-breaker , who leaned back , his long , thin legs , with their boxcloth riding-gaiters , thrust out in front of him , tapping his protruding teeth with his riding-whip , with anxious thought in every line of his rugged , bony face .
Publican , exquisite , and horse-breaker were all three equally silent , equally earnest , and equally critical .
Montgomery seated in the midst of them , looked from one to the other .
`` Oh , that be hanged for a yarn ! ''
said the young Cantab .
`` You can drop out if you like , Fawcett , but I 'll see this thing through , if I have to do it alone .
I do n't hedge a penny .
I like the cut of him a great deal better than I liked Ted Barton . ''
`` A hundred and thirty . ''
`` Well , the Master does n't scale much more than that . ''
`` In a manner of speakin ' , no doubt , he _is_ always in trainin ' , '' remarked the horse-breaker .
`` But trainin ' for everyday work ai n't the same as trainin ' with a trainer ; and I dare bet , with all respec ' to your opinion , Mr. Wilson , that there 's half a stone of tallow on him at this minute . ''
`` For goodness ' sake , gentlemen , tell me what it is you want me to do ! ''
`` Eh , lad , but thou art ! ''
`` We 've got it down in writin ' , and it 's clear enough 'Anyone connected with the coal-pits . '
Doctor Oldacre is the coal-pit club doctor ; thou art his assistant .
What more can they want ? ''
`` Yes , that 's right enough , '' said the Cantab .
`` It would be a very sporting thing of you , Mr. Montgomery , if you would come to our help when we are in such a hole .
Of course , you might not like to take the hundred pounds ; but I have no doubt that , in the case of your winning , we could arrange that it should take the form of a watch or piece of plate , or any other shape which might suggest itself to you .
You see , you are responsible for our having lost our champion , so we really feel that we have a claim upon you . ''
`` Eh , mon , but if thou yark him , thou 'll rise in one day from being just a common doctor to the best-known mon 'twixt here and Bradford .
Thou art a witherin ' tyke , thou art , and no mistake ; and if thou beat the Master of Croxley , thou 'll find all the beer thou want for the rest of thy life waiting for thee at the 'Four Sacks . '
`` Next the road ? ''
I turned it into a gymnasium for Ted Barton .
You 'll find all you want there : clubs , punching ball , bars , dumb-bells , everything .
Then you 'll want a sparring partner .
Ogilvy has been acting for Barton , but we do n't think that he is class enough .
Barton bears you no grudge .
He 's a good-hearted fellow , though cross-grained with strangers .
He looked upon you as a stranger this morning , but he says he knows you now .
He is quite ready to spar with you for practice , and he will come any hour you will name . ''
`` Thank you ; I will let you know the hour , '' said Montgomery ; and so the committee departed jubilant upon their way .
The doctor 's sermon would have had more effect if the assistant had not once or twice had occasion to test his highest , and come upon it at unexpectedly humble elevations .
It is always so particularly easy to `` compound for sins we 're most inclined to by damning those we have no mind to . ''
In any case , Montgomery felt that of all the men concerned in such a fight -- promoters , backers , spectators -- it is the actual fighter who holds the strongest and most honourable position .
His conscience gave him no concern upon the subject .
Endurance and courage are virtues , not vices , and brutality is , at least , better than effeminacy .
`` Thou 'll find all about him there , sir , '' said the tobacconist .
`` He 's a witherin ' tyke , he is , and we 're proud to have him in the county .
If he had n't broke his leg he 'd have been champion of England . ''
`` These causeless whims and fancies are very much to be deprecated , Mr. Montgomery .
Consider how many there are to whom these very potatoes and this very beer would be most acceptable . ''
`` Yes , sir . ''
`` But there 's some of that which he 'd like well to pull off and leave behind wi ' his shirt , '' said Purvis .
`` I hear they 've had a rare job to get him to drop his beer , and if it had not been for that great red-headed wench of his they 'd never ha ' done it .
She fair scratted the face off a potman that had brought him a gallon from t ' 'Chequers . '
They say the hussy is his sparrin ' partner , as well as his sweetheart , and that his poor wife is just breakin ' her heart over it .
Hullo , young 'un , what do you want ? ''
The door of the gymnasium had opened and a lad , about sixteen , grimy and black with soot and iron , stepped into the yellow glare of the oil lamp .
Ted Barton seized him by the collar .
The young Cantab stepped forward .
The doctor saw that it would be useless to argue , and departed in the worst of bad tempers upon mission .
Montgomery felt easier now that he was gone .
He went up to his room , and packed his running-shoes , his fighting-drawers , and his cricket sash into a hand-bag .
When he came down , Mr. Wilson was waiting for him in the surgery .
`` I hear the doctor has gone . ''
So they flashed at each other as the one side waited and the other passed .
Then there came a rolling murmur swelling into a shout , and a great brake with four horses came clattering along , all streaming with salmon-pink ribbons .
The driver wore a white hat with pink rosette , and beside him , on the high seat , were a man and a woman-she with her arm round his waist .
Montgomery had one glimpse of them as they flashed past ; he with a furry cap drawn low over his brow , a great frieze coat and a pink comforter round his throat ; she brazen , red-headed , bright-coloured , laughing excitedly .
The Master , for it was he , turned as he passed , gazed hard at Montgomery , and gave him a menacing , gap-toothed grin .
It was a hard , wicked face , blue-jowled and craggy , with long , obstinate cheeks and inexorable eyes .
The brake behind was full of patrons of the sport-flushed iron-foremen , heads of departments , managers .
One was drinking from a metal flask , and raised it to Montgomery as he passed ; and then the crowd thinned , and the Wilson cortege with their dragoons swept in at the rear of the others .
`` That 's the old Arrowsmith 's factory .
That 's where the fight is to be , '' said Wilson .
`` How are you feeling now ? ''
`` Thank you , I was never better in my life , '' Montgomery answered .
`` By Gad , I like your nerve ! ''
said Wilson , who was himself flushed and uneasy .
`` You 'll give us a fight for our money , come what may .
That place on the right is the office , and that has been set aside as the dressing and weighing room . ''
The carriage drove up to it amidst the shouts of the folk upon the hillside .
Lines of empty carriages and traps curved down upon the winding road , and a black crowd surged round the door of the ruined factory .
The seats , as a huge placard announced , were five shillings , three shillings , and a shilling , with half-price for dogs .
The takings , deducting expenses , were to go to the winner , and it was already evident that a larger stake than a hundred pounds was in question .
A babel of voices rose from the door , The workers wished to bring their dogs in free .
The crowd was a whirling , eddying pool surging with a roar up to the narrow cleft which was its only outlet .
She glanced contemptuously at the young athlete .
`` It 's but a poor kindness thou dost him to put a thread-paper yoong gentleman like yon against a mon as is a mon .
Why , my Jock would throttle him wi ' one bond lashed behind him . ''
`` How do ? ''
The Master grinned again , and his three jagged front teeth gleamed for an instant .
The rest had been beaten out of him in twenty years of battle .
He spat upon the floor .
`` We have a rare fine day for't . ''
`` That 's the good feelin ' I like , '' wheezed the fat butcher .
`` Good lads , both of them !
-- hard meat an ' good bone .
There 's no ill-feelin ' . ''
`` I do , '' said the woman .
`` Yes , you can stare , but it 's my job , and no one else 's .
Anastasia 's the name -- four a 's . ''
Mr. Stapleton had stopped to examine the gloves which wore to be used , and entered the building after the combatants .
He had started to come down that narrow lane with the human walls which led to the ring .
But already it had gone abroad that the Wilson champion was a gentleman , and that another gentleman had been appointed as referee .
A wave of suspicion passed through the Croxley folk .
They would have one of their own people for a referee .
They would not have a stranger .
His path was stopped as he made for the ring .
Excited men flung themselves in front of him ; they waved their fists in his face and cursed him .
A woman howled vile names in his ear .
Somebody struck at him with an umbrella .
`` Go thou back to Lunnon .
We want noan o ' thee .
Go thou back ! ''
`` In two minutes I declare the fight off . ''
Mr. Armitage , the portly butcher , made his way into the ring and held up two fat hands , sparkling with rings , as a signal for silence .
`` Ay ; but t'other 's a likely lad .
Happen we 'll see some sport yet .
He can joomp rarely . ''
`` Do n't talk -- fight ! ''
said the referee , angrily .
`` Where 's thot seven to one ? ''
shouted Purvis , the publican .
`` I 'll take six to one ! ''
But the Master was crafty .
He had fought so many battles with his maimed limb that he knew how to make the best of it .
Warily and slowly he manoeuvred round Montgomery , stepping forward and yet again forward until he had imperceptibly backed him into his corner .
The student suddenly saw a flash of triumph upon the grim face , and a gleam in the dull , malignant eyes .
The Master was upon him .
He sprang aside and was on the ropes .
The Master smashed in one of his terrible upper-cuts , and Montgomery half broke it with his guard .
The student sprang the other way and was against the other converging rope .
He was trapped in the angle .
The Master sent in another with a hoggish grunt which spoke of the energy behind it .
Montgomery ducked , but got a jab from the left upon the mark .
He closed with his man .
cried the laughing crowd , and the angry Master shook his glove at her , as she flapped her towel in front of him .
Montgomery was weary and a little sore , but not depressed .
He had learned something .
He would not again be tempted into danger .
Stand right back ! ''
shrieked the referee , for the Master was standing over his man ready to give him the _coup-de-grace_ as he rose .
`` One -- two -- three -- four -- five -- six -- ''
The Croxley Master sprang eagerly off his stool .
Montgomery stood half dazed , looking down at the huge , prostrate figure .
He could hardly realise that it was indeed all over .
He saw the referee motion towards him with his hand .
He heard his name bellowed in triumph from every side .
And then he was aware of someone rushing towards him ; he caught a glimpse of a flushed face and an aureole of flying red hair , a gloveless fist struck him between the eyes , and he was on his back in the ring beside his antagonist , while a dozen of his supporters were endeavouring to secure the frantic Anastasia .
He heard the angry shouting of the referee , the screaming of the furious woman , and the cries of the mob .
Then something seemed to break like an over-stretched banjo string , and he sank into the deep , deep , mist-girt abyss of unconsciousness .
The dressing was like a thing in a dream , and so was a vision of the Master with the grin of a bulldog upon his face , and his three teeth amiably protruded .
He shook Montgomery heartily by the hand .
`` So am I , '' cried Fawcett ; `` middle-weight champion of the world , that's what he is -- here , in the same carriage with us . ''
`` And what may that be ? ''
`` I 'll use this money to get my medical degree . ''
`` It is nothing , sir , '' said he .
Perhaps you interfered with him ? ''
`` Well , to tell the truth , I did a little . ''
`` Mr. Montgomery , in such a practice as mine , intimately associated as it is with the highest and most progressive elements of our small community , it is impossible -- ''
`` Yes , colonel . ''
The peasant shrugged his shoulders .
`` It is evident to me that you do not know the count .
It is this way , colonel .
What I tell you is the truth , and I am not afraid that you should test it .
The Count of Chateau Noir is a hard man , even at the best time he was a hard man .
But of late he has been terrible .
It was his son 's death , you know .
His son was under Douay , and he was taken , and then in escaping from Germany he met his death .
It was the count 's only child , and indeed we all think that it has driven him mad .
With his peasants he follows the German armies .
I do not know how many he has killed , but it is he who cut the cross upon the foreheads , for it is the badge of his house . ''
`` I might march north , colonel , as if to join General Goeben .
Then I could turn down this road which I see upon your map , and get to Chateau Noir before they could hear of us .
In that case , with twenty men -- ''
`` Very good , captain .
I hope to see you with your prisoner to-morrow morning . ''
The captain whispered his orders to his men .
Some were to creep to the front door , some to the back .
Some were to watch the east , and some the west .
He and the sergeant stole on tiptoe to the lighted window .
It was long , however , before Captain Baumgarten had satisfied himself upon the point .
It was a difficult house to search .
Thin stairs , which only one man could ascend at a time , connected lines of tortuous corridors .
The walls were so thick that each room was cut off from its neighbour .
Huge fireplaces yawned in each , while the windows were 6ft .
deep in the wall .
Captain Baumgarten stamped with his feet , tore down curtains , and struck with the pommel of his sword .
If there were secret hiding-places , he was not fortunate enough to find them .
He blew a call upon a whistle which hung from his shooting-jacket .
The old manservant was in the room in an instant .
`` Eustace was taken at Weissenburg on the 4th of August .
The prisoners were broken up into parties , and sent back into Germany by different routes .
Eustace was taken upon the 5th to a village called Lauterburg , where he met with kindness from the German officer in command .
This good colonel had the hungry lad to supper , offered him the best he had , opened a bottle of good wine , as I have tried to do for you , and gave him a cigar from his own case .
Might I entreat you to take one from mine ? ''
The German writhed and struggled .
He was helpless in the hands of this huge giant whose blows were raining upon him .
When at last , blinded and half-senseless , he staggered to his feet , it was only to be hurled back again into the great oaken chair .
He sobbed in his impotent anger and shame .
And so it was that Captain Baumgarten , disfigured , blinded , and bleeding , staggered out into the wind and the rain of that wild December dawn .
My second mate was standing beside me upon the poop , with his short , thick legs astretch , for the gale had left a considerable swell behind it , and our two quarter-boats nearly touched the water with every roll .
He steadied his glass against the mizzen-shrouds , and he looked long and hard at this disconsolate stranger every time she came reeling up on to the crest of a roller and hung balanced for a few seconds before swooping down upon the other side .
She lay so low in the water that I could only catch an occasional glimpse of a pea-green line of bulwark .
She was a brig , but her mainmast had been snapped short off some 10ft .
above the deck , and no effort seemed to have been made to cut away the wreckage , which floated , sails and yards , like the broken wing of a wounded gull upon the water beside her .
The foremast was still standing , but the foretopsail was flying loose , and the headsails were streaming out in long , white pennons in front of her .
Never have I seen a vessel which appeared to have gone through rougher handling .
But we could not be surprised at that , for there had been times during the last three days when it was a question whether our own barque would ever see land again .
For thirty-six hours we had kept her nose to it , and if the _Mary Sinclair_ had not been as good a seaboat as ever left the Clyde , we could not have gone through .
And yet here we were at the end of it with the loss only of our gig and of part of the starboard bulwark .
It did not astonish us , however , when the smother had cleared away , to find that others had been less lucky , and that this mutilated brig staggering about upon a blue sea and under a cloudless sky , had been left , like a blinded man after a lightning flash , to tell of the terror which is past .
Allardyce , who was a slow and methodical Scotchman , stared long and hard at the little craft , while our seamen lined the bulwark or clustered upon the fore shrouds to have a view of the stranger .
In latitude 20 degrees and longitude 10 degrees , which were about our bearings , one becomes a little curious as to whom one meets , for one has left the main lines of Atlantic commerce to the north .
For ten days we had been sailing over a solitary sea .
`` What 's her flag ? ''
`` Drop one of the quarter-boats , '' said I .
`` Take four men , Mr. Allardyce , and see what you can learn of her . ''
The bills of lading , and some notes and letters which lay upon the desk , sufficed to inform me that the Brazilian brig _Nossa Sehnora da Vittoria_ had cleared from Bahia a month before .
The name of the captain was Texeira , but there was no record as to the number of the crew .
She was bound for London , and a glance at the bills of lading was sufficient to show me that we were not likely to profit much in the way of salvage .
Her cargo consisted of nuts , ginger , and wood , the latter in the shape of great logs of valuable tropical growths .
It was these , no doubt , which had prevented the ill-fated vessel from going to the bottom , but they were of such a size as to make it impossible for us to extract them .
Besides these , there were a few fancy goods , such as a number of ornamental birds for millinery purposes , and a hundred cases of preserved fruits .
And then , as I turned over the papers , I came upon a short note in English , which arrested my attention .
The treasure-chest of Don Ramirez !
Unique and valuable articles !
Here was a chance of salvage after all .
I had risen to my feet with the paper in my hand when my Scotch mate appeared in the doorway .
`` Where is he , then ? ''
`` The wood is oak , '' said he , `` and it has shrunk a little with age .
If I had a chisel or a strong-bladed knife I could force the lock back without doing any damage at all . ''
The mention of a strong-bladed knife made me think of the dead seaman upon the brig .
`` Allardyce , '' I whispered , `` what _could_ have happened to him ? ''
The second mate put his hand upon my sleeve and drew me into his cabin .
`` The more reason why we should revenge him . ''
`` Well , sir , at least let me call the carpenter .
Three are better than two , and he is a good stout man . ''
`` There 's no doubt about it , '' said Allardyce , picking up the screwdriver and setting his jaw like a man who needs to brace his courage .
`` I 'll drive the lock back if you will both stand by .
If he rises let him have it on the head with your hammer , carpenter .
Shoot at once , sir , if he raises his hand .
`` You 've saved my life , Captain Barclay ! ''
So we did not even wait for the three sailors , but we carried it out , the mate , the carpenter , and I , and we pushed it with our own hands over the bulwarks .
There was a white spout of water , and it was gone .
There it lies , the striped chest , a thousand fathoms deep , and if , as they say , the sea will some day be dry land , I grieve for the man who finds that old box and tries to penetrate into its secret .
As he opened it , tearing it open with a feverish haste , Dodds could perceive that it was as bulky as the first one .
He observed also , from the delay in reading it , that it was also in some sort of cipher .
The gentleman did not write down any translation of it , but he sat for some time with his nervous , thin fingers twitching amongst the hairs of his white beard , and his shaggy brows bent in the deepest and most absorbed attention whilst he mastered the meaning of it .
Then he sprang suddenly to his feet , his eyes flashed , his cheeks flushed , and in his excitement he crumpled the message up in his hand .
With an effort he mastered his emotion , put the paper into his pocket , and walked out of the room .
When breakfast was over he sauntered out into the market square , where the horse sale was already in progress .
The yearlings were being sold first -- tall , long-legged , skittish , wild-eyed creatures , who had run free upon the upland pastures , with ragged hair and towsie manes , but hardy , inured to all weathers , and with the makings of splendid hunters and steeplechasers when corn and time had brought them to maturity .
They were largely of thoroughbred blood , and were being bought by English dealers , who would invest a few pounds now on what they might sell for fifty guineas in a year , if all went well .
It was legitimate speculation , for the horse is a delicate creature , he is afflicted with many ailments , the least accident may destroy his value , he is a certain expense and an uncertain profit , and for one who comes safely to maturity several may bring no return at all .
So the English horse-dealers took their risks as they bought up the shaggy Irish yearlings .
One man with a ruddy face and a yellow overcoat took them by the dozen , with as much _sang froid_ as if they had been oranges , entering each bargain in a bloated note-book .
He bought forty or fifty during the time that Dodds was watching him .
`` You 'll see a fight now between the first seller and the first buyer in the country , '' said Dodds 's acquaintance .
`` They are a beautiful string , anyhow .
I should n't be surprised if he did n't average five-and-thirty pound apiece for the lot as they stand . ''
`` Come , Mr. Holloway , '' said he , at last .
`` You did n't come over here for the sake of the scenery .
You may travel the country and not see such another string of horses .
Give us a starting bid . ''
`` Strellenhaus -- Mr. Strellenhaus of Liverpool . ''
`` The bid now stands at thirty pounds a head , '' said the salesman .
`` The word lies with you , Mr .
`` Thirty-two , '' said Strellenhaus , promptly .
Holloway grew angry at this persistent opposition .
His red face flushed redder still .
cried a high , thin , clear voice .
A buzz rose from the crowd , and they were all on tiptoe again , trying to catch a glimpse of this reckless buyer .
Being a tall man , Dodds could see over the others , and there , at the side of Holloway , he saw the masterful nose and aristocratic beard of the second stranger in the coffee-room .
A sudden personal interest added itself to the scene .
He felt that he was on the verge of something -- something dimly seen -- which he could himself turn to account .
The two men with strange names , the telegrams , the horses -- what was underlying it all ?
The salesman was all animation again , and Mr. Jack Flynn was sitting up with his white whiskers bristling and his eyes twinkling .
It was the best deal which he had ever made in his fifty years of experience .
`` How much ? ''
asked Strellenhaus , briefly .
`` And you , Mr .
`` Seventy bid , sir . ''
`` I am buying for another , and I have reached his limit , '' said he .
`` If you will permit me to send for instructions -- ''
`` I hope so , '' said Mr. Mancune ; and his white , waxed moustache gave a feline upward bristle .
Mr. Warner , who was the partner of Mr. Worlington Dodds , and who was suffering from the same eclipse , had gone down to the Stock Exchange , but had found little consolation there , for the European system was in a ferment , and rumours of peace and of war were succeeding each other with such rapidity and assurance that it was impossible to know which to trust .
It was obvious that a fortune lay either way , for every rumour set the funds fluctuating ; but without special information it was impossible to act , and no one dared to plunge heavily upon the strength of newspaper surmise and the gossip of the street .
Warner knew that an hour 's work might resuscitate the fallen fortunes of himself and his partner , and yet he could not afford to make a mistake .
He returned to his office in the afternoon , half inclined to back the chances of peace , for of all war scares not one in ten comes to pass .
As he entered the office a telegram lay upon the table .
It was from Dunsloe , a place of which he had never heard , and was signed by his absent partner .
The message was in cipher , but he soon translated it , for it was short and crisp .
`` 'Do you think I am going to get anything of the sort ? '
`` 'What symptoms may I expect ? '
`` 'I see specks floating all about . '
`` 'And if I see anything of the kind ? '
`` And then suddenly there came one long-drawn yell from one of them , and it was taken up by another , and another , until within a few seconds the whole pack was giving tongue together and running on a hot scent .
Danbury saw them stream across one of the drives and disappear upon the other side , and an instant later the three red coats of the hunt servants flashed after them upon the same line .
He might have made a shorter cut down one of the other drives , but he was afraid of heading the fox , so he followed the lead of the huntsman .
Right through the wood they went in a bee-line , galloping with their faces brushed by their horses ' manes as they stooped under the branches .
`` Joe Clarke , the huntsman , was a famous old rider , known for five counties round ; but he reckoned upon his second horse , and the second horses had all been left many miles behind .
However , the one he was riding was good enough for anything with such a horseman upon his back , and he was going as well as when he started .
As to Wat Danbury , he was going better .
With every stride his own feelings improved , and the mind of the rider had its influence upon the mind of the horse .
The stout little roan was gathering its muscular limbs under it , and stretching to the gallop as if it were steel and whale-bone instead of flesh and blood .
Wat had never come to the end of its powers yet , and to-day he had such a chance of testing them as he had never had before .
`` 'We have it all to ourselves , ' said he .
`` 'Never a drop again if I only come safely through this , ' cried Wat Danbury .
`` 'Well , I think we may guess the cause from an item which has been inserted just as the paper went to press : --
`` Precisely , '' said Scott .
`` But you are not asked to ride twenty miles in a Turkish bath with a field-glass and a revolver , and a water-bottle and a whole Christmas-treeful of things dangling from you .
The hot-house at Kew is excellent as a conservatory , but not adapted for exhibitions upon the horizontal bar .
I vote for a camp in the palm-grove and a halt until evening . ''
`` It 's palm trees or nothing , '' said Scott .
`` Well , I suppose we must ; and yet I grudge every hour until we catch the force up .
What _would_ our editors say if we were late for the action ? ''
`` My dear chap , an old bird like you does n't need to be told that no sane modern general would ever attack until the Press is up . ''
`` You do n't mean that ? ''
`` I thought we were looked upon as an unmitigated nuisance . ''
The third man was Anerley , of the _Gazette_ -- young , inexperienced , and rather simple-looking .
He had a droop of the lip , which some of his more intimate friends regarded as a libel upon his character , and his eyes were so slow and so sleepy that they suggested an affectation .
A leaning towards soldiering had sent him twice to autumn manoeuvres , and a touch of colour in his descriptions had induced the proprietors of the _Gazette_ to give him a trial as a war-special .
There was a pleasing diffidence about his bearing which recommended him to his experienced companions , and if they had a smile sometimes at his guileless ways , it was soothing to them to have a comrade from whom nothing was to be feared .
From the day that they left the telegraph-wire behind them at Sarras , the man who was mounted upon a 15-guinea 13-4 Syrian was delivered over into the hands of the owners of the two fastest polo-ponies that ever shot down the Ghezireh ground .
The three had dismounted and led their beasts under the welcome shade .
In the brassy , yellow glare every branch above threw so black and solid a shadow that the men involuntarily raised their feet to step over them .
`` Like the banyan in India . ''
The engineer , a small , compact man with a pointed red beard , had made as though he would ride past their camp without word or halt .
Now he swerved , and easing his pony down to a canter , he headed her to-wards them .
`` Deuced serious , '' cried Scott .
`` The ham and eggs are burned !
No -- it's all right -- saved , and done to a turn !
Pull the box up , Anerley .
Come on , Mortimer , stow that notebook !
The fork is mightier than the pen just at present .
What 's the matter with you , Anerley ? ''
`` This is very condensed , '' said Anerley , with wrinkled brows .
He has to-day been compelled to make a journey of forty miles to the front , in order to confer with the general upon the steps which are necessary in order to facilitate the work .
Further particulars of the exact nature of the difficulties met with will be made public at a later date .
All is quiet upon the line of communications , though the usual persistent rumours of the presence of dervishes in the Eastern desert continue to circulate.
-- _Our own correspondent_ .
`` It 's very kind of you to teach me all this . ''
`` Do you mean to say that was legitimate ? ''
`` Well , _I_ think I should do a little horse-stealing and lying if I could have a column to myself in a London daily .
What do you say , Scott ? ''
`` No , no , the real high-bred trotter -- the kind of beast the dervishes ride when they make their lightning raids . ''
It was a broiling afternoon , and those thin frills of foam round the black , glistening necks of the Nile boulders looked delightfully cool and alluring .
But it would not be safe to bathe for some hours to come .
The air shimmered and vibrated over the baking stretch of sand and rock .
There was not a breath of wind , and the droning and piping of the insects inclined one for sleep .
Somewhere above a hoopoe was calling .
Anerley knocked out his ashes , and was turning towards his couch , when his eye caught something moving in the desert to the south .
It was a horseman riding towards them as swiftly as the broken ground would permit .
A messenger from the army , thought Anerley ; and then , as he watched , the sun suddenly struck the man on the side of the head , and his chin flamed into gold .
There could not be two horsemen with beards of such a colour .
It was Merryweather , the engineer , and he was returning .
What on earth was he returning for ?
He had been so keen to see the general , and yet he was coming back with his mission unaccomplished .
Was it that his pony was hopelessly foundered ?
It seemed to be moving well .
Anerley picked up Mortimer 's binoculars , and a foam-bespattered horse and a weary koorbash-cracking man came cantering up the centre of the field .
But there was nothing in his appearance to explain the mystery of his return .
Then as he watched them they dipped into a hollow and disappeared .
He could see that it was one of those narrow khors which led to the river , and he waited , glass in hand , for their immediate reappearance .
But minute passed after minute and there was no sign of them .
That narrow gully appeared to have swallowed them up .
And then with a curious gulp and start he saw a little grey cloud wreathe itself slowly from among the rocks and drift in a long , hazy shred over the desert .
In an instant he had torn Scott and Mortimer from their slumbers .
`` You heard nothing ? ''
`` I 've fought against Arabs before . ''
Anerley stared in astonishment at the absolutely impersonal way in which these men regarded the situation .
In their zeal for news it had apparently never struck them that they , their camp , and their servants were all in the lion 's mouth .
But even as they talked there came the harsh , importunate rat-tat-tat of an irregular volley from among the rocks , and the high , keening whistle of bullets over their heads .
A palm spray fluttered down amongst them .
At the same instant the six frightened servants came running wildly in for protection .
`` Love and poverty and war , they are all experiences necessary to make a complete life .
Pass over those cartridges .
This is a very mild baptism that you are undergoing , for behind these camels you are as safe as if you were sitting in the back room of the Authors ' Club . ''
`` As safe , but hardly as comfortable , '' said Scott .
`` A long glass of hock and seltzer would be exceedingly acceptable .
But oh , Mortimer , what a chance !
Think of the general 's feelings when he hears that the first action of the war has been fought by the Press column .
Think of Reuter , who has been stewing at the front for a week !
Think of the evening pennies just too late for the fun .
By George , that slug brushed a mosquito off me ! ''
`` 'Our Special Wounded ' ! ''
cried Scott , rolling over on to his back .
`` No harm done , '' he added , gathering himself up again ; `` only a chip off my knee .
This is getting sultry .
I confess that the idea of that back room at the Authors ' Club begins to grow upon me . ''
`` They 're coming nearer . ''
`` The time , '' said Scott , snapping up his watch , `` being exactly seventeen minutes past four . ''
`` I 'll explain with this pistol when he comes a little nearer .
Now sit tight , Anerley .
They 're off ! ''
`` We 'll put in our wire that you have been hurt , so your people will know why they do n't hear from you .
If Reuter or the evening pennies come up , do n't give the thing away .
Abbas will look after you , and we 'll be back to-morrow afternoon .
Anerley groaned at the disgrace of it .
He had lost his head so completely that he had forgotten to cock his gun ; and yet he knew that it was not fear but interest which had so absorbed him .
He put his hand up to his head and felt that a wet handkerchief was bound round his forehead .
`` Effendi got cut on head .
Effendi catch bad man by arms , and Scott effendi shot him .
Face burn very bad . ''
The beasts the dervishes ride !
What had these dead dervishes ridden ?
In an instant he was clambering up the rocks , with Abbas protesting at his heels .
Had the two fugitives carried away all the camels , or had they been content to save themselves ?
The brass gleam from a litter of empty Remington cases caught his eye , and showed where the enemy had been crouching .
And then he could have shouted for joy , for there , in the hollow , some little distance off , rose the high , graceful white neck and the elegant head of such a camel as he had never set eyes upon before -- a swanlike , beautiful creature , as far from the rough , clumsy baggles as the cart-horse is from the racer .
Of a very different type was his companion , Julius Burger .
He came of a curious blend , a German father and an Italian mother , with the robust qualities of the North mingling strangely with the softer graces of the South .
Blue Teutonic eyes lightened his sun-browned face , and above them rose a square , massive forehead , with a fringe of close yellow curls lying round it .
His strong , firm jaw was clean-shaven , and his companion had frequently remarked how much it suggested those old Roman busts which peered out from the shadows in the corners of his chamber .
Under its bluff German strength there lay always a suggestion of Italian subtlety , but the smile was so honest , and the eyes so frank , that one understood that this was only an indication of his ancestry , with no actual bearing upon his character .
Painfully , slowly , and doggedly , with extraordinary tenacity and singlemindedness , he had climbed from rung to rung of the ladder of fame , until now he was a member of the Berlin Academy , and there was every reason to believe that he would shortly be promoted to the Chair of the greatest of German Universities .
But the singleness of purpose which had brought him to the same high level as the rich and brilliant Englishman , had caused him in everything outside their work to stand infinitely below him .
He had never found a pause in his studies in which to cultivate the social graces .
It was only when he spoke of his own subject that his face was filled with life and soul .
At other times he was silent and embarrassed , too conscious of his own limitations in larger subjects , and impatient of that small talk which is the conventional refuge of those who have no thoughts to express .
On the rug stood a long , shallow fruit-basket of the light wicker-work which is used in the Campagna , and this was heaped with a litter of objects , inscribed tiles , broken inscriptions , cracked mosaics , torn papyri , rusty metal ornaments , which to the uninitiated might have seemed to have come straight from a dustman 's bin , but which a specialist would have speedily recognized as unique of their kind .
`` You have given yourself away , Burger ! ''
said he at last .
`` Your words can only apply to one thing .
You have discovered a new catacomb . ''
`` Ah , well , that was not a matter of much importance .
If I were to question you upon some intimate thing , would you give me an answer , I wonder !
This new catacomb is a very intimate thing to me , and I should certainly expect some sign of confidence in return . ''
The Englishman watched Burger cross the room , and he had his hand on the handle of the door before his host sprang up with the air of a man who is making the best of that which can not be helped .
`` Hold on , old fellow , '' said he .
`` I think you are behaving in a most ridiculous fashion , but still , if this is your condition , I suppose that I must submit to it .
I hate saying anything about a girl , but , as you say , it is all over Rome , and I do n't suppose I can tell you anything which you do not know already .
What was it you wanted to know ? ''
`` Then , my dear Kennedy , why did you do it ? ''
`` Where would the variety of life be without them ?
It was for an adventure that I first began to pay my attentions to her .
I 've chased a good deal of game in my time , but there 's no chase like that of a pretty woman .
There was the piquant difficulty of it also , for , as she was the companion of Lady Emily Rood it was almost impossible to see her alone .
On the top of all the other obstacles which attracted me , I learned from her own lips very early in the proceedings that she was engaged . ''
I think it would be best for us to meet at the Gate of the Appian Way at midnight .
I must go back to my lodgings for the matches and candles and things . ''
It was a long , empty building , with the mangers of the cows along one wall .
Burger put his lantern down on the ground , and shaded its light in all directions save one by draping his overcoat round it .
`` It might excite remark if anyone saw a light in this lonely place , '' said he .
`` Just help me to move this boarding . ''
The flooring was loose in the corner , and plank by plank the two savants raised it and leaned it against the wall .
Below there was a square aperture and a stair of old stone steps which led away down into the bowels of the earth .
Some two months afterwards the following paragraph made the round of the European Press : --
Napoleon had said , and Hilary Joyce had noted , that great reputations are only to be made in the East .
Here he was in the East with four tin cases of baggage , a Wilkinson sword , a Bond 's slug-throwing pistol , and a copy of `` Green 's Introduction to the Study of Arabic . ''
With such a start , and the blood of youth running hot in his veins , everything seemed easy .
He was a little frightened of the general ; he had heard stories of his sternness to young officers , but with tact and suavity he hoped for the best .
So , leaving his effects at `` Shepherd 's Hotel , '' he reported himself at headquarters .
It was not the general , but the head of the Intelligence Department who received him , the chief being still absent upon that business which had called him .
Hilary Joyce found himself in the presence of a short , thick-set officer , with a gentle voice and a placid expression which covered a remarkably acute and energetic spirit .
With that quiet smile and guileless manner he had undercut and outwitted the most cunning of Orientals .
He stood , a cigarette between his fingers , looking at the newcomer .
`` I heard that you had come .
Sorry the chief is n't here to see you .
Gone up to the frontier , you know . ''
`` I am learning , sir . ''
`` No clue of any kind ? ''
`` Oh , chuck the infernal thing away ! ''
cried Joyce , jumping up in a passion .
`` There 's no use trying to bluff the fellow .
He knows we won't do it .
But I _can_ and I _will_ flog him , and you can tell him from me that if he has n't found his tongue by to-morrow morning I 'll take the skin off his back as sure as my name 's Joyce .
Have you said all that ? ''
`` Yes , sir . ''
`` Yes , sir , and your own best riding camel as well .
There is a slit cut in the tent , and he got away unseen in the early morning . ''
`` No , sir . ''
`` He said nothing . ''
`` A long black beard , sir .
And a nervous way of twitching his face . ''
`` I have no doubt that your colonel will be glad to see you fulfilling your regimental duties again . ''
Hilary Joyce 's heart was too heavy for words .
`` I will let you know my final decision to-morrow morning . ''
Joyce saluted and turned upon his heel . ''
`` You can sleep upon that , you beauty , and a good night 's rest may it give you ! ''
Joyce turned in bewilderment .
Where had those words been used before ?
Who was it who had used them ?
The general was standing erect .
Both he and the Chief of the Intelligence were laughing .
Joyce stared at the tall figure , the erect bearing , the inscrutable grey eyes .
`` Well , we went round together in one of the Embassy 's carriages about half-past seven .
Monsieur Otto went in alone ; but presently , on excuse of getting his portfolio , he came out again , with his cheeks flushed with joy , to tell me that all was well .
`` 'Because until then no messenger shall interrupt you .
I give you my promise -- I , Alphonse Lacour . '
`` Our coach had rattled down Harley Street now , in accordance with my instruction , it turned and began to go up again .
`` The messenger sat quiet for a little , and I could see the glint of his eyes as he stared at me through the gloom .
He was partly stunned , I think , by the force with which I had hurled him into his seat .
And also he was pondering , perhaps , what he should do next .
Presently he got his mouth partly free from the cravat .
`` 'You shall have my watch and my purse if you will let me go , ' said he .
`` 'What do you want with me ? '
`` 'A despatch of great importance for Milord Hawkesbury ! '
`` 'It is certain .
It fell to Abercrombie last month . '
`` Next day , monsieur , what they call the Bow Street runners were after me , but they could not run across salt water , and Alphonse Lacour was receiving the congratulations of Monsieur Talleyrand and the First Consul before ever his pursuers had got as far as Dover . ''
AND OTHER STORIES BY ARTHUR CONAN DOYLE AUTHOR OF `` THE WHITE COMPANY , '' `` SIR NIGEL '' `` RODNEY STONE , '' ETC .
LONDON JOHN MURRAY , ALBEMARLE STREET , W. 1918 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED PREFACE The Title story of this volume was written about eighteen months before the outbreak of the war , and was intended to direct public attention to the great danger which threatened this country .
It is a matter of history how fully this warning has been justified and how , even down to the smallest details , the prediction has been fulfilled .
The writer must , however , most thankfully admit that what he did not foresee was the energy and ingenuity with which the navy has found means to meet the new conditions .
The great silent battle which has been fought beneath the waves has ended in the repulse of an armada far more dangerous than that of Spain .
It may be objected that the writer , feeling the danger so strongly , should have taken other means than fiction to put his views before the authorities .
The answer to this criticism is that he did indeed adopt every possible method , that he personally approached leading naval men and powerful editors , that he sent three separate minutes upon the danger to various public bodies , notably to the Committee for National Defence , and that he touched upon the matter in an article in _The Fortnightly Review_ .
In some unfortunate way subjects of national welfare are in this country continually subordinated to party politics , so that a self- evident proposition , such as the danger of a nation being fed from without , is waved aside and ignored , because it will not fit in with some general political shibboleth .
It is against this tendency that we have to guard in the future , and we have to bear in mind that the danger may recur , and that the remedies in the text ( the only remedies ever proposed ) have still to be adopted .
They are the sufficient encouragement of agriculture , the making of adequate Channel tunnels , and the provision of submarine merchantmen , which , on the estimate of Mr. Lake , the American designer , could be made up to 7,000 ton burden at an increased cost of about 25 per cent .
It is true that in this war the Channel tunnels would not have helped us much in the matter of food , but were France a neutral and supplies at liberty to come via Marseilles from the East , the difference would have been enormous .
Apart from food however , when one considers the transports we have needed , their convoys , the double handling of cargo , the interruptions of traffic from submarines or bad weather , the danger and suffering of the wounded , and all else that we owe to the insane opposition to the Channel tunnels , one questions whether there has ever been an example of national stupidity being so rapidly and heavily punished .
It is as clear as daylight even now , that it will take years to recover all our men and material from France , and that if the tunnel ( one will suffice for the time ) , were at once set in hand , it might be ready to help in this task and so free shipping for the return of the Americans .
One thing however , is clear .
It is far too big and responsible and lucrative an undertaking for a private company , and it should be carried out and controlled by Government , the proceeds being used towards the war debt .
_August_ 24_th_ , CROWBOROUGH .
{ 1 } BEING THE LOG OF CAPTAIN JOHN SIRIUS It is an amazing thing that the English , who have the reputation of being a practical nation , never saw the danger to which they were exposed .
For many years they had been spending nearly a hundred millions a year upon their army and their fleet .
Squadrons of Dreadnoughts costing two millions each had been launched .
They had spent enormous sums upon cruisers , and both their torpedo and their submarine squadrons were exceptionally strong .
They were also by no means weak in their aerial power , especially in the matter of seaplanes .
Besides all this , their army was very efficient , in spite of its limited numbers , and it was the most expensive in Europe .
Yet when the day of trial came , all this imposing force was of no use whatever , and might as well have not existed .
Their ruin could not have been more complete or more rapid if they had not possessed an ironclad or a regiment .
And all this was accomplished by me , Captain John Sirius , belonging to the navy of one of the smallest Powers in Europe , and having under my command a flotilla of eight vessels , the collective cost of which was eighteen hundred thousand pounds .
No one has a better right to tell the story than I. I will not trouble you about the dispute concerning the Colonial frontier , embittered , as it was , by the subsequent death of the two missionaries .
A naval officer has nothing to do with politics .
I only came upon the scene after the ultimatum had been actually received .
Admiral Horli had been summoned to the Presence , and he asked that I should be allowed to accompany him , because he happened to know that I had some clear ideas as to the weak points of England , and also some schemes as to how to take advantage of them .
There were only four of us present at this meeting -- the King , the Foreign Secretary , Admiral Horli , and myself .
The time allowed by the ultimatum expired in forty-eight hours .
I am not breaking any confidence when I say that both the King and the Minister were in favour of a surrender .
They saw no possibility of standing up against the colossal power of Great Britain .
The Minister had drawn up an acceptance of the British terms , and the King sat with it before him on the table .
I saw the tears of anger and humiliation run down his cheeks as he looked at it .
`` I fear that there is no possible alternative , Sire , '' said the Minister .
`` Our envoy in London has just sent this report , which shows that the public and the Press are more united than he has ever known them .
The feeling is intense , especially since the rash act of Malort in desecrating the flag .
We must give way . ''
The King looked sadly at Admiral Horli .
`` What is your effective fleet , Admiral ? ''
`` Two battleships , four cruisers , twenty torpedo-boats , and eight submarines , '' said the Admiral .
The King shook his head .
`` It would be madness to resist , '' said he .
`` And yet , Sire , '' said the Admiral , `` before you come to a decision I should wish you to hear Captain Sirius , who has a very definite plan of campaign against the English . ''
said the King , impatiently .
`` What is the use ?
Do you imagine that you could defeat their vast armada ? ''
`` Sire , '' I answered , `` I will stake my life that if you will follow my advice you will , within a month or six weeks at the utmost , bring proud England to her knees . ''
There was an assurance in my voice which arrested the attention of the King .
`` You seem self-confident , Captain Sirius . ''
`` I have no doubt at all , Sire . ''
`` What then would you advise ? ''
`` I would advise , Sire , that the whole fleet be gathered under the forts of Blankenberg and be protected from attack by booms and piles .
There they can stay till the war is over .
The eight submarines , however , you will leave in my charge to use as I think fit . ''
`` Ah , you would attack the English battleships with submarines ? ''
`` Sire , I would never go near an English battleship . ''
`` And why not ? ''
`` Because they might injure me , Sire . ''
`` What , a sailor and afraid ? ''
`` My life belongs to the country , Sire .
But these eight ships -- everything depends upon them .
I could not risk them .
Nothing would induce me to fight . ''
`` Then what will you do ? ''
`` I will tell you , Sire . ''
And I did so .
For half an hour I spoke .
I was clear and strong and definite , for many an hour on a lonely watch I had spent in thinking out every detail .
I held them enthralled .
The King never took his eyes from my face .
The Minister sat as if turned to stone .
`` Are you sure of all this ? ''
`` Perfectly , Sire . ''
The King rose from the table .
`` Send no answer to the ultimatum , '' said he .
`` Announce in both houses that we stand firm in the face of menace .
Admiral Horli , you will in all respects carry out that which Captain Sirius may demand in furtherance of his plan .
Captain Sirius , the field is clear .
Go forth and do as you have said .
A grateful King will know how to reward you . ''
I need not trouble you by telling you the measures which were taken at Blankenberg , since , as you are aware , the fortress and the entire fleet were destroyed by the British within a week of the declaration of war .
I will confine myself to my own plans , which had so glorious and final a result .
When I resumed my place in the conning-tower I saw in the periscope ( for we had dived ) that a lightship was within a few hundred yards of us upon the port bow .
Two men were sitting on her bulwarks , but neither of them cast an eye upon the little rod that clove the water so close to them .
It was an ideal day for submarine action , with enough ripple upon the surface to make us difficult to detect , and yet smooth enough to give me a clear view .
Each of my three periscopes had an angle of sixty degrees so that between them I commanded a complete semi-circle of the horizon .
Two British cruisers were steaming north from the Thames within half a mile of me .
I could easily have cut them off and attacked them had I allowed myself to be diverted from my great plan .
Farther south a destroyer was passing westwards to Sheerness .
A dozen small steamers were moving about .
None of these were worthy of my notice .
Great countries are not provisioned by small steamers .
I kept the engines running at the lowest pace which would hold our position under water , and , moving slowly across the estuary , I waited for what must assuredly come .
It is , as I have said , a shallow sandy coast , and submarine navigation is very difficult .
The worst mishap that can befall a boat is to bury its nose in the side of a sand-drift and be held there .
Such an accident might have been the end of our boat , though with our Fleuss cylinders and electric lamps we should have found no difficulty in getting out at the air-lock and in walking ashore across the bed of the ocean .
As it was , however , I was able , thanks to our excellent charts , to keep the channel and so to gain the open straits .
There we rose about midday , but , observing a hydroplane at no great distance , we sank again for half an hour .
When we came up for the second time , all was peaceful around us , and the English coast was lining the whole western horizon .
We kept outside the Goodwins and straight down Channel until we saw a line of black dots in front of us , which I knew to be the Dover-Calais torpedo- boat cordon .
When two miles distant we dived and came up again seven miles to the south-west , without one of them dreaming that we had been within thirty feet of their keels .
We were all trimmed and ready at the first break of day , for I expected to catch some ships which had tried to make the Thames in the darkness and had miscalculated their time .
Sure enough , there was a great steamer coming up Channel and flying the American flag .
It was all the same to me what flag she flew so long as she was engaged in conveying contraband of war to the British Isles .
There were no torpedo-boats about at the moment , so I ran out on the surface and fired a shot across her bows .
She seemed inclined to go on so I put a second one just above her water-line on her port bow .
She stopped then and a very angry man began to gesticulate from the bridge .
I ran the _Iota_ almost alongside .
TRAWLERS DESTROY MINE FIELD LOSS OF TWO BATTLESHIPS
That night ( Friday , April 16th ) I called up Stephan , but received no reply .
As I was within a few miles of our rendezvous , and as he would not be cruising after dark , I was puzzled to account for his silence .
I could only imagine that his wireless was deranged .
Such was the end of the _Kappa_ , and my gallant friend , Commander Stephan .
His best epitaph was in a corner of the same paper , and was headed `` Mark Lane . ''
Having assembled the _Delta_ and _Epsilon_ , one on each side of me , I received the report from Miriam and Var , the respective commanders .
Each had expended twelve torpedoes , and between them they had sunk twenty-two steamers .
One man had been killed by the machinery on board of the _Delta_ , and two had been burned by the ignition of some oil on the _Epsilon_ .
I took these injured men on board , and I gave each of the boats one of my crew .
I also divided my spare oil , my provisions , and my torpedoes among them , though we had the greatest possible difficulty in those crank vessels in transferring them from one to the other .
However , by ten o'clock it was done , and the two vessels were in condition to keep the sea for another ten days .
For my part , with only two torpedoes left , I headed north up the Irish Sea .
One of my torpedoes I expended that evening upon a cattle-ship making for Milford Haven .
Late at night , being abreast of Holyhead , I called upon my four northern boats , but without reply .
Their Marconi range is very limited .
About three in the afternoon of the next day I had a feeble answer .
It was a great relief to me to find that my telegraphic instructions had reached them and that they were on their station .
Before evening we all assembled in the lee of Sanda Island , in the Mull of Kintyre .
I felt an admiral indeed when I saw my five whale-backs all in a row .
Panza 's report was excellent .
They had come round by the Pentland Firth and reached their cruising ground on the fourth day .
Already they had destroyed twenty vessels without any mishap .
I ordered the _Beta_ to divide her oil and torpedoes among the other three , so that they were in good condition to continue their cruise .
Then the _Beta_ and I headed for home , reaching our base upon Sunday , April 25th .
Off Cape Wrath I picked up a paper from a small schooner .
`` Wheat , 84 ; Maize , 60 ; Barley , 62 . ''
What were battles and bombardments compared to that !
In the great towns starving crowds clamoured for bread before the municipal offices , and public officials everywhere were attacked and often murdered by frantic mobs , composed largely of desperate women who had seen their infants perish before their eyes .
In the country , roots , bark , and weeds of every sort were used as food .
In London the private mansions of Ministers were guarded by strong pickets of soldiers , while a battalion of Guards was camped permanently round the Houses of Parliament .
The lives of the Prime Minister and of the Foreign Secretary were continually threatened and occasionally attempted .
Yet the Government had entered upon the war with the full assent of every party in the State .
The true culprits were those , be they politicians or journalists , who had not the foresight to understand that unless Britain grew her own supplies , or unless by means of a tunnel she had some way of conveying them into the island , all her mighty expenditure upon her army and her fleet was a mere waste of money so long as her antagonists had a few submarines and men who could use them .
England has often been stupid , but has got off scot-free .
This time she was stupid and had to pay the price .
You ca n't expect Luck to be your saviour always .
The masked man ignored the impertinence .
`` Where do you live ? ''
`` My cards are in my purse .
`` Do n't give it away , Hilda , '' she whispered .
`` Do shut up , and do n't be such a silly .
It 's Bertie or one of the boys playing it on us . ''
The proceedings of the robber were indeed somewhat alarming .
Springing down from his car , he had pulled the chauffeur out of his seat by the scruff of his neck .
The sight of the Mauser had cut short all remonstrance , and under its compulsion the little man had pulled open the bonnet and extracted the sparking plugs .
Having thus secured the immobility of his capture , the masked man walked forward , lantern in hand , to the side of the car .
He had laid aside the gruff sternness with which he had treated Mr. Ronald Barker , and his voice and manner were gentle , though determined .
He even raised his hat as a prelude to his address .
`` Except just Billy 's necklace ! ''
cried Hilda , and snatched at a little rope of pearls .
The robber bowed , and released his hold of it .
The adventurer had no time to lose .
He darted from his bedraggled victim , sprang into his own seat , and with his foot on the accelerator shot swiftly off down the road .
Some way down there was a narrow side lane , and into this the fugitive turned , cracking on his high speed and leaving a good five miles between him and any pursuer before he ventured to stop .
Then , in a quiet corner , he counted over his booty of the evening -- the paltry plunder of Mr. Ronald Barker , the rather better-furnished purses of the actresses , which contained four pounds between them , and , finally , the gorgeous jewellery and well-filled note- book of the plutocrat upon the Daimler .
Five notes of fifty pounds , four of ten , fifteen sovereigns , and a number of valuable papers made up a most noble haul .
It was clearly enough for one night 's work .
The adventurer replaced all his ill-gotten gains in his pocket , and , lighting a cigarette , set forth upon his way with the air of a man who has no further care upon his mind .
`` Why do you say that I robbed you last night ? ''
`` See here , Hailworthy , '' said he , opening his hand and showing a small , jagged triangle of black cloth .
`` Do you see that ?
It was on the ground near the car of the young women .
You must have ripped it off as you jumped out from your seat .
Now send for that heavy black driving-coat of yours .
If you do n't ring the bell I 'll ring it myself , and we shall have it in .
I 'm going to see this thing through , and do n't you make any mistake about that . ''
He had half-opened one of the drawers in his desk as he spoke .
His visitor frowned in anger .
`` It is late to talk like that . ''
A telephone rang sharply upon the table , and the baronet put the receiver to his ear .
As he listened he smiled across at his companion .
`` You wrote it , sir , I fancy . ''
`` Yes , that 's you , '' he admitted .
`` Well , '' said the American , `` it 's not quite as we see it in America . ''
`` There I do n't 'old with you , sir . ''
A large footman entered with an outraged expression upon his face .
`` I can not have this uproar at the door , Perkins ! ''
But before the valet could move there came the swift patter of agile feet upon the stairs , and a handsome youth , dressed in the height of fashion , was standing framed in the open doorway .
The pose , the face , above all the curious , mischievous , dancing light in the large blue eyes , all spoke of the famous Tregellis blood .
Even such was Sir Charles when , twenty years before , he had , by virtue of his spirit and audacity , in one short season taken a place in London from which Brummell himself had afterwards vainly struggled to depose him .
The youth faced the angry features of his uncle with an air of debonair amusement , and he held towards him , upon his outstretched palms , the broken fragments of an amber cane .
`` You are my nephew , Vereker Tregellis ? ''
`` You were told that I was not receiving ? ''
`` Yes , sir . ''
Sir Charles was notoriously touchy in temper for the first hour after his morning chocolate .
He allowed himself to show it .
`` No , sir , I can not , '' his uncle answered , sharply .
`` I will put you out with my own hands . ''
`` Yes , sir ; an introduction to Mr. Brinsley Sheridan , whom I know to be your friend . ''
`` I think I may have mentioned to you that I had an interview yesterday with the Principal .
He ended it by remarking that the authorities of the University could tolerate me no more . ''
In spite of himself , Sir Charles began once more to relax in his severity towards this handsome young scapegrace .
His absolute frankness disarmed criticism .
It was in a more gracious voice that the older man continued the conversation .
`` I find you vastly entertaining , '' said he .
`` Pray continue your conversation .
Why do you think that I will give you so large a sum of money ? ''
`` Is this blackmail ? ''
`` No , sir .
I chanced to see the man himself last night , and I conceived an ill-will to him , and would do him a mischief . ''
`` My Lord Barrymore was there .
He was attended by one who was dressed as a clergyman , but who was , as I am told , none other than Hooper the Tinman , who acts as his bully and thrashes all who may offend him .
Together they passed down the central path , insulting the women and browbeating the men .
They actually hustled me .
I was offended , sir -- so much so that I nearly took the matter in hand then and there . ''
`` That , sir , I should prefer to keep to myself ; but my aim , as I say , would be to make Lord Barrymore a laughing-stock to all London . ''
`` You shall yourself be the judge , sir . ''
`` You are the judge , sir , and therefore must be present . ''
`` You will come to the Gardens to-night , uncle , at nine o'clock precisely .
You will walk down the centre path , and you will seat yourself upon one of the rustic seats which are beside the statue of Aphrodite .
You will wait and you will observe . ''
Close at his heels walked his hired attendant , whom , out of insolent caprice and with a desire to show his contempt for the prejudices of others , he had dressed as a rough country clergyman .
This fellow slouched along with frowning brows and surly , challenging eyes , like some faithful , hideous human bulldog , his knotted hands protruding from his rusty cassock , his great underhung jaw turning slowly from right to left as he menaced the crowd with his sinister gaze .
Already a close observer might have marked upon his face a heaviness and looseness of feature , the first signs of that physical decay which in a very few years was to stretch him , a helpless wreck , too weak to utter his own name , upon the causeway of the London streets .
At present , however , he was still an unbeaten man , the terror of the Ring , and as his ill-omened face was seen behind his infamous master many a half-raised cane was lowered and many a hot word was checked , while the whisper of `` Hooper !
'Ware Bully Hooper ! ''
warned all who were aggrieved that it might be best to pocket their injuries lest some even worse thing should befall them .
Many a maimed and disfigured man had carried away from Vauxhall the handiwork of the Tinman and his patron .
`` You vulgar fellow ! ''
`` Would you strike a helpless woman !
Oh , you rude and ill-bred man ! ''
With a growl of rage the circle closed in .
There was an eddy of furious , struggling men , with Lord Barrymore 's thin , flushed face and Hooper's bulldog jowl in the centre of it .
A moment after they were both upon the ground , and a dozen sticks were rising and falling above them .
`` You young rascals ! ''
he remarked , over his shoulder , as he gathered up his reins .
The two females tittered loudly .
The Joyce-Armstrong Fragment was found in the field which is called Lower Haycock , lying one mile to the westward of the village of Withyham , upon the Kent and Sussex border .
It was on the fifteenth of September last that an agricultural labourer , James Flynn , in the employment of Mathew Dodd , farmer , of the Chauntry Farm , Withyham , perceived a briar pipe lying near the footpath which skirts the hedge in Lower Haycock .
A few paces farther on he picked up a pair of broken binocular glasses .
Finally , among some nettles in the ditch , he caught sight of a flat , canvas-backed book , which proved to be a note-book with detachable leaves , some of which had come loose and were fluttering along the base of the hedge .
These he collected , but some , including the first , were never recovered , and leave a deplorable hiatus in this all-important statement .
The notebook was taken by the labourer to his master , who in turn showed it to Dr. J. H. Atherton , of Hartfield .
This gentleman at once recognised the need for an expert examination , and the manuscript was forwarded to the Aero Club in London , where it now lies .
And now a word as to the personality of the author of this epoch-making statement .
Joyce-Armstrong , according to the few friends who really knew something of the man , was a poet and a dreamer , as well as a mechanic and an inventor .
He was a man of considerable wealth , much of which he had spent in the pursuit of his aeronautical hobby .
He had four private aeroplanes in his hangars near Devizes , and is said to have made no fewer than one hundred and seventy ascents in the course of last year .
He was a retiring man with dark moods , in which he would avoid the society of his fellows .
Captain Dangerfield , who knew him better than any one , says that there were times when his eccentricity threatened to develop into something more serious .
His habit of carrying a shot-gun with him in his aeroplane was one manifestation of it .
Another was the morbid effect which the fall of Lieutenant Myrtle had upon his mind .
Myrtle , who was attempting the height record , fell from an altitude of something over thirty thousand feet .
Horrible to narrate , his head was entirely obliterated , though his body and limbs preserved their configuration .
At every gathering of airmen , Joyce-Armstrong , according to Dangerfield , would ask , with an enigmatic smile : `` And where , pray , is Myrtle 's head ? ''
`` The wind down beneath me whirled and swayed the broad cloud-plain .
Once a great eddy formed in it , a whirlpool of vapour , and through it , as down a funnel , I caught sight of the distant world .
A large white biplane was passing at a vast depth beneath me .
I fancy it was the morning mail service betwixt Bristol and London .
Then the drift swirled inwards again and the great solitude was unbroken .
`` As I fell over I blazed off both barrels of my gun , though , indeed , it was like attacking an elephant with a pea-shooter to imagine that any human weapon could cripple that mighty bulk .
And yet I aimed better than I knew , for , with a loud report , one of the great blisters upon the creature 's back exploded with the puncture of the buck-shot .
It was very clear that my conjecture was right , and that these vast clear bladders were distended with some lifting gas , for in an instant the huge cloud- like body turned sideways , writhing desperately to find its balance , while the white beak snapped and gaped in horrible fury .
But already I had shot away on the steepest glide that I dared to attempt , my engine still full on , the flying propeller and the force of gravity shooting me downwards like an aerolite .
Far behind me I saw a dull , purplish smudge growing swiftly smaller and merging into the blue sky behind it .
I was safe out of the deadly jungle of the outer air .
`` You should know by the rose , '' said I , `` which is the symbol of that Tudor- ap-Tudor , who , coming from the mountains of Wales , yet seated his posterity upon the English throne .
Tudor , '' I continued , getting between the stranger and the door of the inn , through which he appeared to be desirous of passing , `` was of the same blood as Owen Glendower , the famous chieftain , who is by no means to be confused with Owen Gwynedd , the father of Madoc of the Sea , of whom the bard made the famous cnylyn , which runs in the Welsh as follows : -- ''
`` The gentleman is joking , '' said the man with the shining coat .
`` Nothing , '' said he -- '' nothing . ''
There was something very strange in this man in the corner -- him to whom I had spoken of Dafydd-ap-Gwilyn .
`` Lest there should be inquiry for you , '' said the landlord .
`` Ah , who knows ? ''
said the landlord , musing .
And so I left him at the door of the Inn of the Rose and Crown , whence came , I observed , a great tumult of laughter .
`` Assuredly , '' thought I , `` Rome was not built in a day . ''
I had not moved from the stile , where I had been seized by the screaming horror , when I heard the sound of steps behind me , and turning round I perceived that a pathway led across the field upon the farther side of the stile .
A woman was coming towards me along this pathway , and it was evident to me that she was one of those gipsy Rias , of whom the master has said so much .
Looking beyond her , I could see the smoke of a fire from a small dingle , which showed where her tribe were camping .
The woman herself was of a moderate height , neither tall nor short , with a face which was much sunburned and freckled .
I must confess that she was not beautiful , but I do not think that anyone , save the master , has found very beautiful women walking about upon the high-roads of England .
Such as she was I must make the best of her , and well I knew how to address her , for many times had I admired the mixture of politeness and audacity which should be used in such a case .
Therefore , when the woman had come to the stile , I held out my hand and helped her over .
The woman blushed , but said nothing .
She turned her head away and was silent .
This seemed to please her , for she smiled .
`` My name ai n't Belle , '' she said at last .
I had got so far , and she was climbing the stile with some pretence of getting away from me , when there came a van along the road , belonging , as I discovered , to a baker in Swinehurst .
The horse , which was of a brown colour , was such as is bred in the New Forest , being somewhat under fifteen hands and of a hairy , ill-kempt variety .
As I know less than the master about horses , I will say no more of this horse , save to repeat that its colour was brown -- nor indeed had the horse or the horse 's colour anything to do with my narrative .
I might add , however , that it could either be taken as a small horse or as a large pony , being somewhat tall for the one , but undersized for the other .
I have now said enough about this horse , which has nothing to do with my story , and I will turn my attention to the driver .
`` It is a good old English custom , '' said I , `` by which we may determine which is the better man . ''
`` Nor I against you , '' I answered .
`` So that we will fight for love , which was an expression much used in olden days .
It is narrated by Harold Sygvynson that among the Danes it was usual to do so even with battle- axes , as is told in his second set of runes .
Therefore you will take off your coat and fight . ''
As I spoke , I stripped off my own .
The man 's face was less florid than before .
`` I 'm not going to fight , '' said he .
`` I 'll hold the thick 'un , '' said she .
The ragged man had reached us , where I stood talking to Henrietta by the stile .
I will not try to write his conversation as he said it , because I have observed that the master never condescends to dialect , but prefers by a word introduced here and there to show the fashion of a man's speech .
I will only say that the man from the dingle spoke as did the Anglo-Saxons , who were wont , as is clearly shown by the venerable Bede , to call their leaders 'Enjist and 'Orsa , two words which in their proper meaning signify a horse and a mare .
I assured the man from the dingle that I had meant no disrespect to his wife .
`` I had thought she was a mort , '' said I ; `` but the ria of a Romany chal is always sacred to me . ''
We ai n't gipsies .
I -- HOW THE WOMAN CAME TO KIRKBY-MALHOUSE
And yet it was destined that ere ever I reached this quiet harbour I should learn that I was still one of humankind , and that it is an ill thing to strive to break the bond which binds us to our fellows .
It was but two nights before the date I had fixed upon for my change of dwelling , when I was conscious of a bustle in the house beneath , with the bearing of heavy burdens up the creaking stair , and the harsh voice of my landlady , loud in welcome and protestations of joy .
From time to time , amid the whirl of words , I could hear a gentle and softly modulated voice , which struck pleasantly upon my ear after the long weeks during which I had listened only to the rude dialect of the dalesmen .
For an hour I could hear the dialogue beneath -- the high voice and the low , with clatter of cup and clink of spoon , until at last a light , quick step passed my study door , and I knew that my new fellow lodger had sought her room .
`` Eh , miss , but you are in a pickle , '' cried the landlady , as she gazed down at the bedraggled gown .
`` But you must be main weary and heavy for sleep . ''
`` Lord 'a mercy , miss , and where did you go ? ''
`` Ah , but that is _triste_ , '' she cried .
`` And where is it , then , this house which you have built ? ''
`` It is over yonder , '' I answered .
`` See that stream which lies like a silver band upon the distant moor ?
It is the Gaster Beck , and it runs through Gaster Fell . ''
She looked down and shrugged her shoulders .
`` Sickness may come in all places , '' said she .
`` If I were a man I do not think I would live alone on Gaster Fell . ''
`` I have braved worse dangers than that , '' said I , laughing ; `` but I fear that your picture will be spoiled , for the clouds are banking up , and already I feel a few raindrops . ''
`` You have read much , '' I remarked at last .
`` Women have opportunities now such as their mothers never knew .
Have you ever thought of going further -- or seeking a course of college or even a learned profession ? ''
`` It might take no prophet to do that , Miss Cameron , '' quoth I , with the fatherly manner which twoscore years may show toward one .
`` If I may read your life , I would venture to say that you were destined to fulfil the lot of women -- to make some good man happy , and to shed around , in some wider circle , the pleasure which your society has given me since first I knew you . ''
A strange look passed over her sensitive features , and she plucked nervously at the grass on the bank beside her .
Clearly , it was time that I should go .
I set my teeth and vowed that another day should not have passed before I should have snapped this newly formed tie and sought the lonely retreat which awaited me upon the moors .
Breakfast was hardly over in the morning before a peasant dragged up to the door the rude hand-cart which was to convey my few personal belongings to my new dwelling .
My fellow-lodger had kept her room ; and , steeled as my mind was against her influence , I was yet conscious of a little throb of disappointment that she should allow me to depart without a word of farewell .
My hand-cart with its load of books had already started , and I , having shaken hands with Mrs. Adams , was about to follow it , when there was a quick scurry of feet on the stair , and there she was beside me all panting with her own haste .
`` What is it ? ''
I asked , in surprise .
It was either on the fourth or the fifth day after I had taken possession of my cottage that I was astonished to hear footsteps upon the grass outside , quickly followed by a crack , as from a stick upon the door .
The explosion of an infernal machine would hardly have surprised or discomfited me more .
I had hoped to have shaken off all intrusion for ever , yet here was somebody beating at my door with as little ceremony as if it had been a village ale-house .
Hot with anger , I flung down my book and withdrew the bolt just as my visitor had raised his stick to renew his rough application for admittance .
He was a tall , powerful man , tawny- bearded and deep-chested , clad in a loose-fitting suit of tweed , cut for comfort rather than elegance .
As he stood in the shimmering sunlight , I took in every feature of his face .
The large , fleshy nose ; the steady blue eyes , with their thick thatch of overhanging brows ; the broad forehead , all knitted and lined with furrows , which were strangely at variance with his youthful bearing .
In spite of his weather-stained felt hat , and the coloured handkerchief slung round his muscular brown neck , I could see at a glance he was a man of breeding and education .
I had been prepared for some wandering shepherd or uncouth tramp , but this apparition fairly disconcerted me .
`` Up yonder , '' he answered , tossing his head backward .
`` I thought as we were neighbours , Mr. Upperton , that I could not do less than look in and see if I could assist you in any way . ''
`` I learned it from the masons who were at work here , '' he said .
`` As for me , I am a surgeon , the surgeon of Gaster Fell .
That is the name I have gone by in these parts , and it serves as well as another . ''
`` Not a soul except yourself for miles on either side . ''
`` That is nothing , '' he answered , curtly , turning his face half round to hide the mark .
`` I must get back , for I have a companion who is waiting for me .
If I can ever do anything for you , pray let me know .
You have only to follow the beck upward for a mile or so to find my place .
Have you a bolt on the inside of your door ? ''
All day I bent over the Egyptian papyrus upon which I was engaged ; but neither the subtle reasonings of the ancient philosopher of Memphis , nor the mystic meaning which lay in his pages , could raise my mind from the things of earth .
Evening was drawing in before I threw my work aside in despair .
My heart was bitter against this man for his intrusion .
Standing by the beck which purled past the door of my cabin , I cooled my heated brow , and thought the matter over .
Clearly it was the small mystery hanging over these neighbours of mine which had caused my mind to run so persistently on them .
That cleared up , they would no longer cause an obstacle to my studies .
What was to hinder me , then , from walking in the direction of their dwelling , and observing for myself , without permitting them to suspect my presence , what manner of men they might be ?
Doubtless , their mode of life would be found to admit of some simple and prosaic explanation .
In any case , the evening was fine , and a walk would be bracing for mind and body .
Lighting my pipe , I set off over the moors in the direction which they had taken .
About half-way down a wild glen there stood a small clump of gnarled and stunted oak trees .
From behind these , a thin dark column of smoke rose into the still evening air .
Clearly this marked the position of my neighbour 's house .
Trending away to the left , I was able to gain the shelter of a line of rocks , and so reach a spot from which I could command a view of the building without exposing myself to any risk of being observed .
It was a small , slate-covered cottage , hardly larger than the boulders among which it lay .
Like my own cabin , it showed signs of having been constructed for the use of some shepherd ; but , unlike mine , no pains had been taken by the tenants to improve and enlarge it .
Two little peeping windows , a cracked and weather-beaten door , and a discoloured barrel for catching the rain water , were the only external objects from which I might draw deductions as to the dwellers within .
Yet even in these there was food for thought , for as I drew nearer , still concealing myself behind the ridge , I saw that thick bars of iron covered the windows , while the old door was slashed and plated with the same metal .
These strange precautions , together with the wild surroundings and unbroken solitude , gave an indescribably ill omen and fearsome character to the solitary building .
Thrusting my pipe into my pocket , I crawled upon my hands and knees through the gorse and ferns until I was within a hundred yards of my neighbour 's door .
There , finding that I could not approach nearer without fear of detection , I crouched down , and set myself to watch .
Case hardened as I was by my varied life , the suddenness and violence of the thing made me shudder .
The man 's age , his feeble frame , his humble and deprecating manner , all cried shame against the deed .
So hot was my anger , that I was on the point of striding up to the cabin , unarmed as I was , when the sound of voices from within showed me that the victim had recovered .
The sun had sunk beneath the horizon , and all was grey , save a red feather in the cap of Pennigent .
Secure in the failing light , I approached near and strained my ears to catch what was passing .
I could hear the high , querulous voice of the elder man and the deep , rough monotone of his assailant , mixed with a strange metallic jangling and clanking .
Presently the surgeon came out , locked the door behind him and stamped up and down in the twilight , pulling at his hair and brandishing his arms , like a man demented .
Then he set off , walking rapidly up the valley , and I soon lost sight of him among the rocks .
Such doubts as I might have had as to whether I had indeed seen my former fellow-lodger upon the night of the thunderstorm were resolved the next morning .
Strolling along down the path which led to the fell , I saw in one spot where the ground was soft the impressions of a foot -- the small , dainty foot of a well-booted woman .
That tiny heel and high instep could have belonged to none other than my companion of Kirkby-Malhouse .
I followed her trail for some distance , till it still pointed , as far as I could discern it , to the lonely and ill-omened cottage .
What power could there be to draw this tender girl , through wind and rain and darkness , across the fearsome moors to that strange rendezvous ?
He started , and his features showed the most intense excitement .
`` I swear to you that I had no hand in it ! ''
`` I have never set foot in your house in my life .
Oh , sir , sir , if you will but believe me , there is a danger hanging over you , and you would do well to be careful . ''
Amid the thunder and the rain and the wind I could hear it -- a dull , stealthy footfall , now on the grass , now on the stones -- occasionally stopping entirely , then resumed , and ever drawing nearer .
I sat breathlessly , listening to the eerie sound .
It had stopped now at my very door , and was replaced by a panting and gasping , as of one who has travelled fast and far .
`` I need say no more , sir .
You will understand the terrible task which has fallen upon my poor sister and me in endeavouring to save my father from the asylum which in his sane moments filled him with horror .
I can only regret that your peace has been disturbed by our misfortunes , and I offer you in my sister 's name and my own our apologies . ''
`` I 'll stick it with you , sir , '' said he .
If it had been the old car I should have jammed the gear-lever into the reverse , and seen what would happen .
I expect she would have stripped her gears or smashed up somehow , but it would have been a chance .
As it was , I was helpless .
Perkins tried to climb across , but you could n't do it going at that pace .
The wheels were whirring like a high wind and the big body creaking and groaning with the strain .
But the lights were brilliant , and one could steer to an inch .
I remember thinking what an awful and yet majestic sight we should appear to any one who met us .
It was a narrow road , and we were just a great , roaring , golden death to any one who came in our path .
The circumstances , so far as they were known to the public , concerning the death of the beautiful Miss Ena Garnier , and the fact that Captain John Fowler , the accused officer , had refused to defend himself on the occasion of the proceedings at the police-court , had roused very general interest .
This was increased by the statement that , though he withheld his defence , it would be found to be of a very novel and convincing character .
The assertion of the prisoner 's lawyer at the police-court , to the effect that the answer to the charge was such that it could not yet be given , but would be available before the Assizes , also caused much speculation .
A final touch was given to the curiosity of the public when it was learned that the prisoner had refused all offers of legal assistance from counsel and was determined to conduct his own defence .
The case for the Crown was ably presented , and was generally considered to be a very damning one , since it showed very clearly that the accused was subject to fits of jealousy , and that he had already been guilty of some violence owing to this cause .
The prisoner listened to the evidence without emotion , and neither interrupted nor cross-questioned the witnesses .
Finally , on being informed that the time had come when he might address the jury , he stepped to the front of the dock .
He was a man of striking appearance , swarthy , black-moustached , nervous , and virile , with a quietly confident manner .
Taking a paper from his pocket he read the following statement , which made the deepest impression upon the crowded court : --
It will be remembered that at the trial at the police-court two months ago I refused to defend myself .
This has been referred to to-day as a proof of my guilt .
I said that it would be some days before I could open my mouth .
This was taken at the time as a subterfuge .
Well , the days are over , and I am now able to make clear to you not only what took place , but also why it was impossible for me to give any explanation .
I will tell you now exactly what I did and why it was that I did it .
If you , my fellow-countrymen , think that I did wrong , I will make no complaint , but will suffer in silence any penalty which you may impose upon me .
Then came the time for my leaving Radchurch .
I had been appointed to a junior but very responsible post at the War Office , which , of course , entailed my living in London .
Even my week-ends found me engrossed with my work , but at last I had a few days ' leave of absence .
It is those few days which have ruined my life , which have brought me the most horrible experience that ever a man had to undergo , and have finally placed me here in the dock , pleading as I plead to-day for my life and my honour .
`` But I understood you to say -- of course , women know nothing of such matters , but I understood you to say that it would be a joint advance . ''
`` Well , if the French advanced , we will say , at Verdun , and the British advanced at Ypres , even if they were hundreds of miles apart it would still be a joint advance . ''
Then suddenly a chill of doubt seized me .
I can remember how I sprang back from her and looked hard into her face .
`` I 've told you too much ! ''
`` Can I trust you ?
I have been mad to say so much . ''
I was stunned at first as I read this letter , and then a kind of cold , concentrated rage came over me .
So this woman was a German and a spy !
I thought of her hypocrisy and her treachery towards me , but , above all , I thought of the danger to the Army and the State .
A great defeat , the death of thousands of men , might spring from my misplaced confidence .
There was still time , by judgment and energy , to stop this frightful evil .
I heard her step upon the stairs outside , and an instant later she had come through the doorway .
She started , and her face was bloodless as she saw me seated there with the open letter in my hand .
He was a genial , elderly man , who had treated this woman with as much kindness as if she were his daughter .
He was horrified at what I said .
I could not show him the letter on account of the secret that it contained , but I made him understand that it was of desperate importance .
`` What are we to do ? ''
`` I never could have imagined anything so dreadful .
What would you advise us to do ? ''
`` You need not trouble , '' said she .
`` I give you my word that I will stay where I am .
I advise you to be careful , Captain Fowler .
You 've shown once before that you are liable to do things before you have thought of the consequence .
If I am arrested all the world will know that you have given away the secrets that were confided to you .
There is an end of your career , my friend .
You can punish me , no doubt .
What about yourself ? ''
`` Thank you , '' said he .
`` I have a stick here , and the gardener is within call .
Do you hurry off for the guard , and I will answer for the prisoner . ''
These little sketches are called `` Three of Them , '' but there are really five , on and off the stage .
There is Daddy , a lumpish person with some gift for playing Indian games when he is in the mood .
He is then known as `` The Great Chief of the Leatherskin Tribe . ''
Then there is my Lady Sunshine .
These are the grown-ups , and do n't really count .
There remain the three , who need some differentiating upon paper , though their little spirits are as different in reality as spirits could be -- all beautiful and all quite different .
The eldest is a boy of eight whom we shall call `` Laddie . ''
If ever there was a little cavalier sent down ready-made it is he .
His soul is the most gallant , unselfish , innocent thing that ever God sent out to get an extra polish upon earth .
It dwells in a tall , slight , well-formed body , graceful and agile , with a head and face as clean-cut as if an old Greek cameo had come to life , and a pair of innocent and yet wise grey eyes that read and win the heart .
He is shy and does not shine before strangers .
I have said that he is unselfish and brave .
When there is the usual wrangle about going to bed , up he gets in his sedate way .
`` I will go first , '' says he , and off he goes , the eldest , that the others may have the few extra minutes while he is in his bath .
As to his courage , he is absolutely lion-hearted where he can help or defend any one else .
On one occasion Daddy lost his temper with Dimples ( Boy Number 2 ) , and , not without very good provocation , gave him a tap on the side of the head .
Next instant he felt a butt down somewhere in the region of his waist-belt , and there was an angry little red face looking up at him , which turned suddenly to a brown mop of hair as the butt was repeated .
No one , not even Daddy , should hit his little brother .
Such was Laddie , the gentle and the fearless .
He has an advantage over Laddie , in that he suffers from no trace of shyness and is perfectly friendly in an instant with any one of every class of life , plunging straight into conversation with some such remark as `` Can your Daddy give a war-whoop ? ''
or `` Were you ever chased by a bear ? ''
He is a sunny creature but combative sometimes , when he draws down his brows , sets his eyes , his chubby cheeks flush , and his lips go back from his almond-white teeth .
`` I am Swankie the Berserker , '' says he , quoting out of his favourite `` Erling the Bold , '' which Daddy reads aloud at bed-time .
When he is in this fighting mood he can even drive back Laddie , chiefly because the elder is far too chivalrous to hurt him .
If you want to see what Laddie can really do , put the small gloves on him and let him go for Daddy .
Some of those hurricane rallies of his would stop Daddy grinning if they could get home , and he has to fall back off his stool in order to get away from them .
`` Beasts know us , '' said Laddie .
`` But them beasts run round and make noises .
Roses do n't make noises . ''
`` Daddy made soup out of a snake , '' said Laddie .
`` Tell us about that snake , Daddy . ''
`` Yes , we hung it on the hook that they put the porridge pot on in Scotland .
Then just as it was turning brown in came the farmer 's wife , and ran up to see what we were cooking .
When she saw the viper she thought we were going to eat it .
'Oh , you dirty divils ! '
she cried , and caught up the tin in her apron and threw it out of the window . ''
Fresh shrieks of laughter from the children , and Dimples repeated `` You dirty divil ! ''
until Daddy had to clump him playfully on the head .
`` Did you kill it ? ''
`` Which is the horridest , Daddy -- a snake or a shark ? ''
`` I did a silly thing , for I swam round the ship in water where there are many sharks .
As I was drying myself on the deck I saw the high fin of a shark above the water a little way off .
It had heard the splashing and come up to look for me . ''
`` Oh , yes , it could butt . ''
`` Do you think a zebu could fight a crocodile ? ''
`` That 's what the crocodile would say , '' cried Laddie , clapping his hands .
Supper was going on down below and all good children should have been long ago in the land of dreams .
Yet a curious noise came from above .
You get into bed ! ''
he said , with the best imitation he could manage .
`` Yes , Daddy .
But before I go , how is this ? ''
He sprang forward and the arm swung round again in a swift and graceful gesture .
`` Was it a big dog ? ''
`` But tell us about Spofforth , '' cried Laddie .
Dimples , with his imaginative mind , usually wandered , while the elder came eagerly back to the point .
`` Was he very fast ? ''
`` Spofforth taught us how to bowl and Blackham taught us how to keep wicket .
When I was young we always had another fielder , called the long- stop , who stood behind the wicket-keeper .
I used to be a thick , solid boy , so they put me as long-stop , and the balls used to bounce off me , I remember , as if I had been a mattress . ''
`` Was there no good bowler until Spofforth came ? ''
I 've fielded out for him and melted on a hot August day while he made a hundred and fifty .
There 's a pound or two of your Daddy somewhere on that field yet .
But I loved to see it , and I was always sorry when he got out for nothing , even if I were playing against him . ''
`` More than I can tell you , Dimples .
But I dare say he was right to be annoyed , for it was a left-handed bowler , bowling round the wicket , and it is very hard to get leg-before to that .
However , that 's all Greek to you . ''
`` But Bonner was five inches taller than I .
He was a giant , I tell you . ''
`` Did nobody kill him ? ''
`` No , no , Dimples .
Not a story-book giant .
But a great , strong man .
He had a splendid figure and blue eyes and a golden beard , and altogether he was the finest man I have ever seen -- except perhaps one . ''
`` Well , it was the Emperor Frederick of Germany . ''
from both boys : and then , `` Did it go into the next county , Daddy ? ''
`` Three , '' said the Lady , as she tucked up the little beds .
They generally laughed at what Baby said .
`` I 'll tell them it is a nice , clean , blue Wriggly , '' said Baby .
`` I love my Wriggly . ''
She cooed over it and hugged it .
`` It was jolly hard luck on Noah being swallowed by a fish after all his trouble , '' said Dimples .
`` A shark , then ? ''
`` Well , then , I wo n't lie down from twelve to one . ''
`` He did what He was told , my son -- I am sure of that .
He was a good man , so He must have been a good boy -- perfect in all He did . ''
`` Why , God rules everything , of course . ''
`` Then why does n't He kill the Devil ? ''
`` He could n't keep the shooting stars in their proper place , '' said Dimples .
`` I expect He meant them to shoot , '' said Laddie .
`` How do the sledge and the reindeer get across the sea ?
All the parcels must get wet . ''
`` God bless every one I love , '' said the high , clear child-voice .
`` And make me a good boy , and thank You so much for all the blessings of to- day .
And please take care of Alleyne , who is fighting the Germans , and Uncle Cosmo , who is fighting the Germans , and Uncle Woodie , who is fighting the Germans , and all the others who are fighting the Germans , and the men on the ships on the sea , and Grandma and Grandpa , and Uncle Pat , and do n't ever let Daddy and Mumty die .
That 's all . ''
Both boys were keenly interested .
Nature presented itself as some rival chief .
`` Here , '' said Baby .
`` Are all here ? ''
`` Let me look . ''
Daddy hunted about with a look of preternatural sagacity about him .
`` Before the snows fell a man passed here with a red head , grey clothes , and a squint in his left eye .
His trail shows that his brother has a grocer 's shop and his wife smokes cigarettes on the sly . ''
`` It 's easy enough , my son , when you get the knack of it .
But look here , we are Indians on the war-trail , and do n't you forget it if you value your scalp !
Aha , here is Humpty Dumpty 's trail ! ''
`` Shall we crawl up to them ? ''
`` What do you mean by killing our buffaloes ? ''
asked Daddy , severely .
`` Shall I shoot the green one ? ''
asked Dimples , presenting his wooden pistol .
Flame and smoke were rising outside .
It was excellently done and perfectly safe , but too much for the younger warriors .
The key turned , the door opened , and two tearful babes were in the arms of the kneeling Lady .
Red Buffalo and Black Bear were of sterner stuff .
{ 1 } The reader is referred to the Preface in connection with this story.
`` Dear me , I thought science had got further than that .
Of course I know nothing about the scientific side of it .
I only know what I can do .
You see the girl in red , for example , over near the Japanese jar .
I shall will that she come across to us . ''
I did not dare to tell him what I thought of it .
To me it was the most barefaced , shameless piece of imposture that I had ever witnessed .
The collusion and the signal had really been too obvious .
`` She is in the trance , '' said Miss Penclosa .
When I entered the room , she was standing on the hearth-rug facing me .
Something in her pose chilled me and checked the words which were rising to my lips .
Her veil was half down , but I could see that she was pale and that her expression was constrained .
I associated the idea with Miss Penclosa 's note .
It was lying before me on the table , and I tore it open .
It was scribbled in pencil in a peculiarly angular handwriting .
`` No , certainly not . ''
She laughed at my earnestness .
`` I merely had a vague impression that you came into it .
I can not recall any thing definite . ''
`` Really , Austin , I do not know what is the matter with you this morning .
One would almost think that you doubted my word .
If my boots are dusty , it must be , of course , that I have put on a pair which the maid had not cleaned . ''
But I am immensely impressed .
My horizon of scientific possibilities has suddenly been enormously extended .
I no longer wonder at Wilson's demonic energy and enthusiasm .
Who would not work hard who had a vast virgin field ready to his hand ?
Why , I have known the novel shape of a nucleolus , or a trifling peculiarity of striped muscular fibre seen under a 300-diameter lens , fill me with exultation .
How petty do such researches seem when compared with this one which strikes at the very roots of life and the nature of the soul !
I had always looked upon spirit as a product of matter .
The brain , I thought , secreted the mind , as the liver does the bile .
But how can this be when I see mind working from a distance and playing upon matter as a musician might upon a violin ?
The body does not give rise to the soul , then , but is rather the rough instrument by which the spirit manifests itself .
The windmill does not give rise to the wind , but only indicates it .
It was opposed to my whole habit of thought , and yet it was undeniably possible and worthy of investigation .
`` And if the suggestion had been to assassinate me ? ''
`` May I ask , '' said I , `` what you meant when you said that this matter of suggestion is only at the fringe of it ?
What do you consider the essential ? ''
I was surprised at the decision of her answer .
`` You understand , '' said I , `` that it is not out of curiosity I ask , but in the hope that I may find some scientific explanation for the facts with which you furnish me . ''
Of course I asked him why .
He could hardly expect me to be satisfied with that , and I tried hard to get something more definite out of him , but without success .
Is it conceivable that he could be jealous at my having superseded him ?
Or is he one of those men of science who feel personally injured when facts run counter to their preconceived opinions ?
He can not seriously suppose that because he has some vague grievance I am , therefore , to abandon a series of experiments which promise to be so fruitful of results .
He appeared to be annoyed at the light way in which I treated his shadowy warnings , and we parted with some little coldness on both sides .
11 P. M. God help me !
What is the matter with me ?
Am I going mad ?
Let me try and be calm and reason with myself .
First of all I shall set down exactly what occurred .
`` Why , it was only the other day that you were saying how interesting it all was , and how determined you were to finish your experiments . ''
All went very well last night .
I was amused at the gardener 's face when I had again to hail him this morning and to ask him to throw up my key .
I shall get a name among the servants if this sort of thing goes on .
But the great point is that I stayed in my room without the slightest inclination to leave it .
I do believe that I am shaking myself clear of this incredible bond -- or is it only that the woman 's power is in abeyance until she recovers her strength ?
I can but pray for the best .
`` I have abandoned them . ''
`` I do n't mean suggestion .
I mean where a sudden impulse comes from a person at a distance -- an uncontrollable impulse . ''
I do wish I could get away from the place altogether .
I shall fly to Agatha 's side the very day that the term closes .
I suppose it is pitiably weak of me , but this woman gets upon my nerves most terribly .
I have seen her again , and I have spoken with her .
`` Well , '' said she at last , `` are you still of the same mind as when I saw you last ? ''
`` Let us understand each other , Professor Gilroy , '' said she slowly .
`` I am not a very safe person to trifle with , as you should realize by now .
It was you who asked me to enter into a series of experiments with you , it was you who won my affections , it was you who professed your love for me , it was you who brought me your own photograph with words of affection upon it , and , finally , it was you who on the very same evening thought fit to insult me most outrageously , addressing me as no man has ever dared to speak to me yet .
Tell me that those words came from you in a moment of passion and I am prepared to forget and to forgive them .
You did not mean what you said , Austin ?
You do not really hate me ? ''
I was not conscious of any change during my lecture this morning save that for a minute or two I had a dizziness and swimminess which rapidly passed away .
On the contrary , I congratulated myself upon having made my subject ( the functions of the red corpuscles ) both interesting and clear .
I was surprised , therefore , when a student came into my laboratory immediately after the lecture , and complained of being puzzled by the discrepancy between my statements and those in the text books .
He showed me his note-book , in which I was reported as having in one portion of the lecture championed the most outrageous and unscientific heresies .
Of course I denied it , and declared that he had misunderstood me , but on comparing his notes with those of his companions , it became clear that he was right , and that I really had made some most preposterous statements .
Of course I shall explain it away as being the result of a moment of aberration , but I feel only too sure that it will be the first of a series .
It is but a month now to the end of the session , and I pray that I may be able to hold out until then .
Parkenson , the manager , is an intimate friend of mine , and I found him very much excited when I walked round there after breakfast .
Had the thieves broken into the counting-house , they would still have had the safes to reckon with , so that the defence was considerably stronger than the attack .
Indeed , the latter does not appear to have ever been very formidable .
Two of the lower windows have marks as if a chisel or some such instrument had been pushed under them to force them open .
The police should have a good clue , for the wood-work had been done with green paint only the day before , and from the smears it is evident that some of it has found its way on to the criminal 's hands or clothes .
This hell fiend is like a cat with a mouse .
She lets me loose only to pounce upon me again .
I am never so frightened as when every thing is still .
My physical state is deplorable -- perpetual hiccough and ptosis of the left eyelid .
Why did I break off in this way last night ?
I never went down stairs , after all -- at least , I have no recollection of doing so .
But , on the other hand , I can not remember going to bed .
One of my hands is greatly swollen this morning , and yet I have no remembrance of injuring it yesterday .
Otherwise , I am feeling all the better for last night's festivity .
But I can not understand how it is that I did not meet Charles Sadler when I so fully intended to do so .
Is it possible -- -- My God , it is only too probable !
Has she been leading me some devil's dance again ?
I will go down to Sadler and ask him .
I went to Sadler and found him , to my surprise , in bed .
As I entered he sat up and turned a face toward me which sickened me as I looked at it .
`` To stop it ! ''
`` I am perfectly desperate ; I shall give her fair warning to-day , and the next time will be the last . ''
5 P. M. Now , let me try to be accurate .
Let me try to say exactly how it occurred .
It is fresh in my mind , and I can set it down correctly , though it is not likely that the time will ever come when I shall forget the doings of to-day .
`` Why , what is the matter with you , Austin ? ''
she asked , holding my arm as I staggered up from the chair .
`` Why are you glad that the vicar stayed ?
And what is this little bottle in your hand ? ''
`` But you have not told me why you came . ''
With this sheaf of treaties in his portfolio the King of the Belgians now approached the Powers with high sentiments of humanitarianism , and with a definite request that the State which he was forming should receive some recognized status among the nations .
Was he at that time consciously hypocritical ?
Did he already foresee how widely his future actions would differ from his present professions ?
It is a problem which will interest the historian of the future , who may have more materials than we upon which to form a judgment .
On the one hand , there was a furtive secrecy about the evolution of his plans and the despatch of his expeditions which should have no place in a philanthropic enterprise .
On the other hand , there are limits to human powers of deception , and it is almost inconceivable that a man who was acting a part could so completely deceive the whole civilized world .
It is more probable , as it seems to me , that his ambitious mind discerned that it was possible for him to acquire a field of action which his small kingdom could not give , in mixing himself with the affairs of Africa .
He chose the obvious path , that of a civilizing and elevating mission , taking the line of least resistance without any definite idea whither it might lead him .
Once faced with the facts , his astute brain perceived the great material possibilities of the country ; his early dreams faded away to be replaced by unscrupulous cupidity , and step by step he was led downward until he , the man of holy aspirations in 1885 , stands now in 1909 with such a cloud of terrible direct personal responsibility resting upon him as no man in modern European history has had to bear .
`` The State , of which our King will be the Sovereign , will be a sort of international Colony .
There will be no monopolies , no privileges ... .
Quite the contrary : absolute freedom of commerce , freedom of property , freedom of navigation . ''
Having taken the country and secured labour for exploiting it in the way described , King Leopold proceeded to take further steps for its development , all of them exceedingly well devised for the object in view .
The great impediment to the navigation of the Congo had lain in the continuous rapids which made the river impassable from Stanley Pool for three hundred miles down to Boma at the mouth .
A company was now formed to find the capital by which a railway should be built between these two points .
The construction was begun in 1888 , and was completed in 1898 , after many financial vicissitudes , forming a work which deserves high credit as a piece of ingenious engineering and of sustained energy .
Other commercial companies , of which more will be said hereafter , were formed in order to exploit large districts of the country which the State was not yet strong enough to handle .
By this arrangement the companies found the capital for exploring , station building , etc.
, while the State -- that is , the King -- retained a certain portion , usually half , of the company's shares .
The plan itself is not necessarily a vicious one ; indeed , it closely resembles that under which the Chartered Company of Rhodesia grants mining and other leases .
The scandal arose from the methods by which these companies proceeded to carry out their ends -- those methods being the same as were used by the State , on whose pattern these smaller organizations were moulded .
The Berlin Conference of 1885 marks the first International session upon the affairs of the Congo .
The second was the Brussels Conference of 1889-90 .
It is amazing to find that after these years of experience the Powers were still ready to accept King Leopold 's professions at their face value .
It is true that none of the more sinister developments had been conspicuous , but the legislation of the State with regard to labour and trade was already such as to suggest the turn which affairs would take in future if not curbed by a strong hand .
One Power , and one only , Holland , had the sagacity to appreciate the true situation , and the independence to show its dissatisfaction .
The outcome of the sittings was various philanthropic resolutions intended to strengthen the new State in dealing with that slave trade it was destined to re-introduce in its most odious form .
We are too near to these events , and they are too painfully intimate , to permit us to see humour in them ; but the historian of the future , when he reads that the object of the European Concert was `` to protect effectually the aboriginal inhabitants of Africa , '' may find it difficult to suppress a smile .
This was the last European assembly to deal with the affairs of the Congo .
May the next be for the purpose of taking steps to truly carry out those high ends which have been forever spoken of and never reduced to practice .
Having shown in these two examples the way in which the Congo Free State has dared to treat the citizens of European States who have traded within her borders , I will now proceed to detail , in chronological order , some account of the dark story of that State 's relations to the subject races , for whose moral and material advantage we and other European Powers have answered .
For every case I chronicle there are a hundred which are known , but which can not here be dealt with .
For every one known , there are ten thousand , the story of which never came to Europe .
Consider how vast is the country , and how few the missionaries or consuls who alone would report such matters .
Consider also that every official of the Congo State is sworn neither at the time nor _afterward_ to reveal any matter that may have come to his knowledge .
Consider , lastly , that the missionary or consul acts as a deterrent , and that it is in the huge stretch of country where neither are to be found that the agent has his own unfettered way .
With all these considerations , is it not clear that all the terrible facts which we know are but the mere margin of that welter of violence and injustice which the Jesuit , Father Vermeersch , has summed up in the two words , `` Immeasurable Misery ! ''
With regard to the use of barbarous soldiers he says :
`` The natives are not lazy , good-for-nothing fellows .
Their fine powers are obtained by hard work , sobriety and frugal living . ''
Talking of the general unrest he says :
`` To-day I saw the dead body of a carrier lying on the trail .
There could have been no mistake about his being a sick man ; he was nothing but skin and bones .
These posts ought to give some care to the porters ; the heartless disregard for life is abominable ... .
Native life is considered of no value by the Belgians .
No wonder the State is hated . ''
`` Mr. Harvey heard from Clarke , who is at Lake Mantumba , that the State soldiers have been in the vicinity of his station recently fighting and taking prisoners ; and he himself had seen several men with bunches of hands signifying their individual skill .
These , I presume , they must produce to prove their success !
Among the hands were those of men and women , and also those of little children .
The missionaries are so much at the mercy of the State that they do not report these barbaric happenings to the people at home .
I have previously heard of hands , among them children 's , being brought to the stations , but I was not so satisfied of the truth of the former information as of the reports received just now by Mr. Harvey from Clarke .
Much of this sort of thing is going on at the Equateur Station .
The methods employed are not necessary .
Years ago , when I was on duty at the Equateur without soldiers , I never had any difficulty in getting what men I needed , nor did any other station in the old , humane days .
The stations and the boats then had no difficulty in finding men or labour , nor will the Belgians , if they introduce more reasonable methods . ''
So much for Mr. Glave 's testimony .
He was an English traveller .
Mr. Murphy , an American missionary , was working in another part of the country , the region where the Ubangi joins the Congo , during the same years .
Let us see how far his account , written entirely independently ( _Times_ , November 18 , 1895 ) , agrees with the other :
It was not merely for rubber that these horrors were done .
Much of the country is unsuited to rubber , and in those parts there were other imposts which were collected with equal brutality .
One village had to send food and was remiss one day in supplying it :
`` The people were quietly sleeping in their beds when they heard a shot fired , and ran out to see what was the matter .
Finding the soldiers had surrounded the town , their only thought was escape .
As they raced out of their homes , men , women and children , they were ruthlessly shot down .
Their town was utterly destroyed , and is a ruin to this day .
The only reason for this fight was that the people had failed to bring Kwanga ( food ) to the State upon that one day . ''
Here we get the system at its highest .
I think that picture of the child hacking off the hand of the dying man at the order of the monster who would have assuredly murdered him also had he hesitated to obey , is as diabolical a one as even the Congo could show .
A pretty commentary upon the doctrine of Christ which the missionary was there to preach !
No definite details might ever have reached Europe of those doings had not Lothaire made the capital mistake of quarrelling with his subordinates .
One of these , named Lacroix , sent a communication to the _Nieuw Gazet_ , of Antwerp , which , with the _Petit Bleu_ , acted an honourable and independent part at this epoch .
The Congo Press Bureau , which has stifled the voice of the more venal portion of the Belgian and Parisian Press , had not at that time attained the efficiency which it afterward reached .
This letter from Lacroix was published on April 10th , 1900 , and shed a lurid light upon what had been going on in the Mongalla District .
It was a confession , but a confession which involved his superiors as well as himself .
He told how he had been instructed by his chief to massacre all the natives of a certain village which had been slow in bringing its rubber .
He had carried out the order .
Later , his chief had put sixty women in irons , and allowed nearly all of them to die of hunger because the village -- Mummumbula -- had not brought enough rubber .
`` I am going to be tried , '' he wrote , `` for having murdered one hundred and fifty men , for having crucified women and children , and for having mutilated many men and hung the remains on the village fence . ''
At the same moment as this confession of Lacroix , _Le Petit Bleu_ published sworn affidavits of soldiers employed by the Trust , telling how they had put to death whole villages for being short with their rubber .
Moray , another agent , published a confession in _Le Petit Bleu_ , from which this is an extract :
In the face of these fresh revelations there was an outburst of feeling in Belgium , showing that it is only their ignorance of the true facts which prevents the inhabitants of that country from showing the same humanity as any other civilized nation would do .
They have not yet realized the foul things which have been done in their name .
Surely when they do realize it there will be a terrible reckoning !
Some were already very alive to the question .
Vandervelde and Lorand fought bravely in the Chamber .
The officials , with MM .
Liebrichts and De Cuvelier at their head , made the usual vague professions and general denials .
`` Ah , you can rest assured light will be forthcoming , complete , striking ! ''
Light was indeed forthcoming , though not so complete as might be wished , for some , at least , of the scoundrels implicated were tried and condemned .
In any other European colony they would have been hanged offhand , as the villainous murderers that they were .
But they do not hang white men in the Congoland , even with the blood of a hundred murders on their hands .
The only white man ever hanged there was the Englishman Stokes for competing in trade .
What is to be remarked , however , is that only subordinates were punished .
Van Eycken was acquitted ; Lacroix had imprisonment ; Mattheys , another agent accused of horrible practices , got twelve years -- which sounded well at the time , but he was liberated at the end of three .
In the sentence upon this man the Judge used the words , `` Seeing that it is just to take into account the example which his superiors gave him in showing no respect for the lives or rights of the natives . ''
Brave words , but how helpless is justice when such words can be said , and no result follow !
They referred , of course , to Captain Lothaire , who had , in the meanwhile , fled aboard a steamer at Matadi , and made his escape to Europe .
His flight was common knowledge , but who would dare to lay his hand upon the favourite of the King .
Lothaire has had occasion several times since to visit the Congo , but Justice has indeed sat with bandaged eyes where that man was concerned !
Indeed , there is something to be said for these unfortunate men , for it is a more awful thing to be driven to crime than to endure it .
Consider the sequence of events !
The man sees an advertisement offering a commercial situation in the tropics .
He applies to a bureau .
He is told that the salary is some seventy-five pounds a year , with a bonus on results .
He knows nothing of the country or conditions .
He is then asked if he has any money .
One hundred pounds is advanced to him for expenses and outfit , and he is pledged to work it off .
He goes out and finds the terrible nature of the task before him .
He must condone crime to get his results .
`` Certainly , '' say the authorities ; `` but you must remain there until you have worked off your debt ! ''
He can not possibly get down the river , for the steamers are all under Government control .
What can he do then ?
There is one thing which he very frequently does , and that is to blow out his brains .
The statistics of suicide are higher than in any service in the world .
But suppose he takes the line : `` Very well , I will stay if you make me do so , but I will expose these misdeeds to Europe . ''
The routine is a simple one .
An official charge is preferred against him of ill-treating the natives .
Ill-treating of some sort is always going forward , and there is no difficulty with the help of the sentries in proving that something for which the agent is responsible does not tally with the written law , however much it might be the recognized custom .
He is taken to Boma , tried and condemned .
Thus it comes about that the prison of Boma may at the same time contain the best men and the worst -- the men whose ideas were too humane for the authorities as well as those whose crimes could not be overlooked even by a Congolese administration .
Take warning , you who seek service in this dark country , for suicide , the Boma prison , or such deeds as will poison your memory forever are the only choice which will lie before you .
`` Irebo contains say 2,000 people .
Ikoko has at least 4,000 and there are other towns within easy reach , several as large as Irebo , and two probably as large as Ikoko .
The people are fine-looking , bold and active . ''
Probable population Lobwaka 250 Boboko 250 Bosungu 100 Kenzie 150 Bokaka 200 Mosenge 150 Ituta 80 Ngero 2,000 -- -- - Total 3,180
The following was written on May 3rd , 1895 :
Compare with this the following extracts from King Leopold 's _Officiel Bulletin_ , referring to this very tract of country :
`` There is a matter I want to report to you regarding the Nkake sentries .
You remember some time ago they took eleven canoes and shot some Ikoko people .
As a proof they went to you with some hands , of which three were the hands of little children .
We heard from one of their paddlers that one child was not dead when its hand was cut off , but did not believe the story .
Three days after we were told the child was still alive in the bush .
I sent four of my men to see , and they brought back a little girl whose right hand had been cut off , and she left to die from the wound .
The child had no other wound .
As I was going to see Dr. Reusens about my own sickness I took the child to him , and he has cut the arm and made it right and I think she will live .
But I think such awful cruelty should be punished . ''
Such is some of the evidence , a very small portion of the whole narrative furnished by Mr. Clark .
Remember that it is extracted from a long series of letters written to various people during a succession of years .
One could conceive a single statement being a concoction , but the most ingenious apologist for the Congo methods could not explain how such a document as this could be other than true .
So much for Mr. Clark , the American .
The evidence of Mr. Scrivener , the Englishman , covering roughly the same place and date , will follow .
But lest the view should seem too Anglo-Saxon , let me interpolate a paragraph from the travels of a Frenchman , M. Leon Berthier , whose diary was published by the Colonial Institute of Marseilles in 1902 :
So far Mr. Scrivener .
But perhaps the reader may think that there really was a missionary plot to decry the Free State .
Let us have some travellers , then .
Here is Mr. Grogan from his `` Cape to Cairo '' :
`` Our only programme , I am anxious to repeat , is the work of moral and material regeneration , and we must do this among a population whose degeneration in its inherited conditions it is difficult to measure .
The many horrors and atrocities which disgrace humanity give way little by little before our intervention . ''
The beginning of Mr. Casement 's report shows how willing he was to give praise where praise was possible , and to say all that could be said for the Administration .
He talks of `` energetic European intervention , '' and adds , `` that very much of this intervention has been called for no one who formerly knew the Upper Congo could doubt . ''
`` Admirably built and admirably kept stations greet the traveller at many points . ''
`` To-day the railway works most efficiently . ''
He attributes sleeping sickness as `` one cause of the seemingly wholesale diminution of human life which I everywhere observed in the regions re-visited ; a prominent place must be assigned to this malady .
The natives certainly attribute their alarming death-rate to this as one of the inducing causes , although they attribute , and I think principally , their rapid decrease in numbers to other causes as well . ''
In the lower reaches of the river above Stanley Pool Casement found no gross ill-usage .
The natives were hopeless and listless , being debarred from trade and heavily taxed in food , fish and other produce .
It was not until he began to approach the cursed rubber zones that terrible things began to dawn upon him .
Casement had travelled in 1887 in the Congo , and was surprised to note the timidity of the natives .
Soon he had his explanation :
The natives were broken in spirit by the treatment :
Another witness showed the exact ratio between cartridges and rubber :
Pretty good for the State which boasts that it has put down the slave trade .
The following extract must be my final quotation from Consul Casement's report :
`` _Q._ 'How much pay did you get for this ? '
`` _A._ ( Entire audience . )
'We got no pay !
We got nothing ! '
`` _Want of proper nourishment._ I have witnessed the collecting of the State imposition , and after this was set aside the natives had nothing but leaves to eat . ''
`` Next , the mutilation of the woman Boaji , because she wished to remain faithful to her husband , and refused to subject herself to the passions of the sentries .
The woman 's footless leg and hernia testify to the truth of her statement .
She appeared before the Commission and doctor .
`` After Mr. Stannard had been heard , sixteen Esanga witnesses were questioned one by one .
They gave clearly the details of how father , mother , brother , sister , son or daughter were killed in cold blood for rubber .
These sixteen represented over twenty murders in Esanga alone .
Then followed the big chief of all Bolima , who succeeded Isekifasu ( murdered by the A.B.I.R. )
What a sight for those who prate about lying missionaries !
He stood boldly before all , pointed to his twenty witnesses , placed on the table his one hundred and ten twigs , each twig representing a life for rubber .
'These are chiefs ' twigs , these are men 's , these shorter are women 's , these smaller still are children 's . '
He gives the names of scores , but begs for permission to call his son as a reminder .
The Commission , though , is satisfied with him , that he is telling the truth , and therefore say that it is unnecessary .
He tells how his beard of many years ' growth , and which nearly reached his feet , was cut off by a rubber agent , merely because he visited a friend in another town .
Asked if he had not killed A.B.I.R .
sentries , he denied it , but owned to his people spearing three of the sentry 's boys .
He tells how the white man fought him , and when the fight was over handed him his corpses , and said : 'Now you will bring rubber , wo n't you ? '
To which he replied : 'Yes . '
The corpses were cut up and eaten by Mons .
He also told how he had been chicotted and imprisoned by the A.B.I.R .
agent , and further put to the most menial labour by the agent .
The Report deals finally with the question of the punishments meted out by the State .
These it enumerates as `` the taking of hostages , the imprisonment of the chiefs , the institution of sentries or capitas , fines and military expeditions , '' the latter being a euphemism for cold-blooded massacres .
The State prohibits , but the State not only condones , but actually commands it by private circular .
Again the gap which lies betwixt law and fact where the interest of gain is concerned .
And all this has happened and all this has been tolerated in an age of progress .
The greatest , deepest , most wide-reaching crime of which there is any record , has been reserved for these latter years .
Some excuse there is for racial extermination where , as with Saxons and Celts , two peoples contend for the same land which will but hold one .
Some excuse , too , for religious massacre when , like Mahomet the Second at Constantinople , or Alva in the Lowlands , the bigoted murderers honestly conceived that their brutal work was in the interest of God .
But here the real doers have sat remote with cold blood in their veins , knowing well from day to day what they were doing , and with the sole object of adding more to wealth which was already enormous .
Consider this circumstance and consider also the professions of philanthropy with which the huge massacre was inaugurated , the cloud of lies with which it has been screened , the persecution and calumny of the few honest men who uncovered it , the turning of religion against religion and of nation against nation in the attempt to perpetuate it , and having weighed all this , tell me where in the course of history there is any such story .
Is it to run a little faster in a motor-car , to listen to gabble in a gramophone ?
-- these are the toys of life .
But if progress is a spiritual thing , then we do _not_ progress .
Such a horror as this of Belgium and the Congo would not have been possible fifty years ago .
No European nation would have done it , and if it had , no other one would have failed to raise its voice in protest .
There was more decorum and principle in life in those slower days .
We live in a time of rush , but do not call it progress .
The story of the Congo has made the idea a little absurd .
`` Last year , '' he says , `` or the year before , the young woman , Imenega , was tied to a forked tree and chopped in half with a hatchet , beginning at the left shoulder , chopping down through the chest and abdomen and out at the side . ''
Again , with every detail of name and place , he dwelt upon the horrible fact that public incest had been enforced by the sentries -- brother with sister , and father with daughter .
`` Oh , Inglesia , '' cried the chief in conclusion , `` do n't stay away long ; if you do , they will come , I am sure they will come , and then these enfeebled legs will not support me , I can not run away .
I am near my end ; try and see to it that they let me die in peace ; don't stay away . ''
M. Malfeyt 's visit had been held up as a step toward improvement .
The British Government had been assured that his visit would be of a nature to effect all necessary reforms .
On arriving in the country , however , he announced that he had no power to act , and only came to see and hear .
Thus a few more months were gained before any change could be effected .
The only small consolation which we can draw from all this succession of impotent ambassadors and reforming committees , which do not , and were never intended to , reform , is that the game has been played and exposed , and surely can not be played again .
A Government would deservedly be the laughing-stock of the world which again accepted assurances from the same source .
Lontulu was cross-examined by the Commission and his evidence was not shaken .
Here are some of the questions and answers :
`` Then followed names of women and children and ordinary men ( not chiefs ) .
`` President : 'Was Isekifasu killed at this time ? '
_Le Patriote_ , of Brussels ( Royalist and Catholic ) , in its issue of February 28th , 1907 , has an indignant editorial :
`` To sum up , we recognize it with much regret , the State's appropriation of so-called vacant land on the Congo confronts us with AN IMMENSE EXPROPRIATION . ''
Father Vermeersch then proceeds to deal with the Congo balance-sheets .
His criticism is most destructive .
He shows at considerable length , and with a fine grasp of his subject , that there is really no connection at all between the so-called estimate and the actual budget .
In the course of the State 's development there is an excess running to millions of pounds which has never been accounted for .
In this Father Vermeersch is in agreement with the equally elaborate calculations of Professor Cattier , of Brussels .
`` X -- -- , District Commissioner , commits every day dozens of offences against individual liberty .
What can be done ?
These violations of the law are necessitated by a great enterprise which must have workmen .
In such cases the intervention of the magistrate would be a ruinous imprudence , calculated to bring trouble into the region . ''
`` Oh , law in the Congo is not applicable ! ''
`` That is precisely what the State will not listen to .
It maintains that the enterprise must be carried out for nothing ! ''
Surely after such evidence from such a source there must be some heart-searchings among those higher members of the Catholic hierarchy , including both Cardinals and Bishops , who have done what they could to cripple the efforts of the reformers .
Misinformed through their own want of care in searching for the truth , they have stood before the whole world as the defenders of that which will be described by the historian as the greatest crime in history .
I shall now append some extracts from the reports of several British Vice-Consuls and Consuls sent in during the last few years .
These bear less upon outrages , which have admittedly greatly decreased , but mainly upon the general condition of the people , which is one of deplorable poverty and misery -- a slavery without that care which the owner was bound to exercise over the health and strength of the slave .
I shall give without comment some extracts from the reports of Vice-Consul Mitchell , which date from July , 1906 :
`` In all the Basenji villages through which I have passed on my two journeys , the natives assert that it _takes them three weeks every month to find and make their tale of rubber , besides taking it once every three months to the State post , from four to six days distant_ .
The following are extracts from Vice-Consul Armstrong 's report , dated October , 1906 :
`` No change in the existing system can be looked for until a more reasonable method of taxation is adopted .
The present system permits the rubber agents to extract the largest possible quantity of rubber from the native at the lowest possible wage , and allows the employment of armed sentries to enforce this deplorable system . ''
I shall pass straight on now to the most recent reports received from the Congo , to show that there is no difference at all in the general condition , so far as it is reported by the impartial men at the spot , save that the actual killings and maimings have decreased .
The great oppression and misery of the people seem to grow rather than abate .
The following extracts are from Consul Thesiger 's report of his experiences in the Kasai Company 's district .
This company , it may be worth remarking , has paid the enormous dividend of seven hundred per cent .
The first paragraph may be commended to the consideration of those British or American travellers who , on the strength of a flying visit , venture to contradict the experience of those white men who spend their lives in the country :
After showing that the Kasai Company , in their haste for wealth ( and , perhaps , in their foresight , as knowing that their occupancy may be brought to an end ) , are cutting down the rubber vines instead of tapping them ( illegal , of course , but what does that matter where Belgian Concessionnaires are in question ) , goes on to show the pressure on the people :
`` Once I had got outside the zone surrounding Ibanj , where the villages are not taxed in rubber , I found the capitas , with very few exceptions , were all armed with cap-guns .
I met them frequently , escorting the rubber caravans to the company post , or going from village to village collecting the rubber from the centres under their charge and distributing the trade goods for the coming month .
I noticed that they invariably carried their guns , and , in fact , I have seldom seen a capita stir outside his own home without his gun .
These are the men who are appointed by the Kasai Company agents to enforce the rubber tax .
Chosen always from a different race , they have no sympathy with the natives placed under them , and having the authority of the agent behind them they can do as they please , so long as they insure the rubber being brought at the proper times and in sufficient quantities .
In the villages they are absolute masters , and the villagers have to supply them gratis with a house , food , palm wine , and a woman .
They exercise freely the right of beating or imprisoning the villagers for any imaginary offences or for neglecting their work in any way , and even go as far as imposing fines in cowries on their own account , and confiscating for their own use the cowries paid over by the plaintiff or defendant 's family in the case of trial by poison , which , in spite of statements to the contrary recently made in the Belgian Chamber , are of frequent occurrence in this country .
The native can not complain or obtain satisfaction in any way , as the capita acts in the name of the company , and the company 's agent is always threatening them in the name of 'Bula-Matadi . '
If the authorities wish to act in the matter , they might profitably make inquiry into the doings of the capitas at Bungueh , Bolong , and into those of the Zappo Zap capita , who appears to exercise the chief control over the villages near Ibunge , though he does not live in the latter town .
These appear to me to be among the worst where most are bad .
The capitas , however , are scarcely to be blamed , as , if they do not extort enough rubber , they are liable in their turn to suffer at the hands of the agent .
Witness a case at Sangela , when it was reported that the capita had some time back been chicotted in the village itself by the agent for not bringing in rubber sufficient .
Endless cases could be quoted , but these will probably be sufficient to show the methods pursued under the auspices of the Kasai Company .
Yet in a letter dated the eighth of March , 1908 , we find Dr. Dreypondt writing reproachfully :
`` 'You know we have no armed sentries , but only tradesmen going , with goods of every kind , and unarmed , through the villages for the purchasing of rubber .
We use only one trading principle -- _l'offre et la demande_ . '
`` These cases can all be substantiated , and are typical of a certain class of agent which is unfortunately , although not general , far too common .
Numerous complaints were also made to me in different villages against an agent , not only that he beat and imprisoned the natives for shortage of rubber , but also that he obliged them to supply him with alcohol distilled from palm wine , and was in the habit of taking any of the village women that struck his fancy at the weekly market held on or near his own post .
The Company , I believe , promised the American mission last May that this man should be removed , but when I passed through he was still there .
Placed in the power of men like these the natives dare not complain to the authorities , and are entirely helpless . ''
`` After this extensive journey made through the district recently , and particularly the Bompona neighbourhood , I found the people working rubber in all the towns visited with the exception of those taxed in provisions .
`` It is difficult to know which 'tax , ' rubber or provisions , is hardest .
The rubber workers implored us to free them from rubber , and at one village upon our departure they followed us a considerable distance , and it was difficult to get away from them .
The amount of rubber collected is small compared with what was formerly demanded , but I have no doubt it requires one-third of the time of the people to collect it .
Many of the people of the villages behind Bompona were away collecting rubber .
We met many of the Ionji people in the forest , either actually engaged in their work or hunting for a district where the vines might have escaped other collectors .
We also met other villagers in the bush in quest of rubber .
Almost all the village migrates to the forest -- men , many women and children -- when rubber is required .
`` On his way to make the 'investiture , ' the Belgian official robbed some villages and killed two men .
Kingeleza 's people , who had gathered together to witness the investiture , hearing of the treatment meted out to the other villages , took fright and fled from their own villages , which the Belgians , upon arriving , found deserted .
Whereupon the soldiers proceeded to ferret the fugitives out of the woods , where they were hiding .
Twenty were seized , among whom was one of Kingeleza 's sisters , a young and attractive looking girl .
Four of the villagers were subsequently released , and the balance marched off with other spoils to Popocabacca .
The evangelist attached to the American mission , who was absent in the Lower Congo , had his house broken open and a tent and school materials carried off .
In July of the same year there occurred the famous three days ' debate in the Belgian House , which was really inaugurated by the British resolution .
In this debate the two brave Reformers , Vandervelde and Lorand , though crushed by the voting power of their opponents , bore off all the honours of war .
M. de Favereau , the Minister of Foreign Affairs , alternately explained that there was no connection at all between Belgium and the Congo State , and that it was a breach of Belgian patriotism to attack the latter .
The policy of the Congo State was upheld and defended by the Belgian Government in a way which must forever identify them with all the crimes which I have recounted .
No member of the Congo administration could ever have expressed the intimate spirit of Congo administration so concisely as M. de Smet de Naeyer , when he said , speaking of the natives : `` They are not entitled to anything .
What is given them is a pure gratuity . ''
Was there ever in the world such an utterance as that from a responsible statesman !
In 1885 a State is formed for the `` moral and material improvement of the native races . ''
In 1903 the native `` is not entitled to anything . ''
The two phrases mark the beginning and the end of King Leopold 's journey .
-- _That the Congo State deserves great credit for having prohibited the sale of alcohol to the natives._
I look at my statement of the facts and I wince at its many faults of omission .
How many specific examples have I left out , how many deductions have I missed , how many fresh sides to the matter have I neglected .
It is hurried and broken , as a man 's speech may be hurried and broken when he is driven to it by a sense of burning injustice and intolerable wrong .
But it is true -- and I defy any man to read it without rising with the conviction of its truth .
Consider the cloud of witnesses .
Consider the minute and specific detail in the evidence .
Consider the undenied system which must _prima facie_ produce such results .
Consider the admissions of the Belgian Commission .
Not one shadow of doubt can remain in the most sceptical mind that the accusations of the Reformers have been absolutely proved .
It is not a thing of the past .
It is going on at this hour .
The Belgian annexation has made no difference .
The machinery and the men who work it are the same .
There are fewer outrages it is true .
The spirit of the unhappy people is so broken that it is a waste of labour to destroy them further .
That their conditions have not improved is shown by the unanswerable fact that the export of rubber has not decreased .
That export is the exact measure of the terrorism employed .
Many of the old districts are worked out , but the new ones must be exploited with greater energy to atone .
The problem , I say , remains as ever .
But surely the answer is at hand .
Surely there is some limit to the silent complicity of the civilized world ?
Can a solution be found through Belgium ?
Let a large trading caravan start into the Congoland from Northern Rhodesia .
We claim that we have a right to free trade by the Berlin Treaty .
We will enforce our claim .
To do so would cut at the very roots of the Congo system .
If the caravan be opposed , then again Boma and a conference .
`` It seems to be a very delicate test , '' I remarked .
`` Very interesting reading it might be made , too , '' remarked Sherlock Holmes , sticking a small piece of plaster over the prick on his finger .
`` I have to be careful , '' he continued , turning to me with a smile , `` for I dabble with poisons a good deal . ''
He held out his hand as he spoke , and I noticed that it was all mottled over with similar pieces of plaster , and discoloured with strong acids .
Sherlock Holmes seemed delighted at the idea of sharing his rooms with me .
`` I have my eye on a suite in Baker Street , '' he said , `` which would suit us down to the ground .
You do n't mind the smell of strong tobacco , I hope ? ''
`` All right -- noon exactly , '' said I , shaking his hand .
As the weeks went by , my interest in him and my curiosity as to his aims in life , gradually deepened and increased .
His very person and appearance were such as to strike the attention of the most casual observer .
In height he was rather over six feet , and so excessively lean that he seemed to be considerably taller .
His eyes were sharp and piercing , save during those intervals of torpor to which I have alluded ; and his thin , hawk-like nose gave his whole expression an air of alertness and decision .
His chin , too , had the prominence and squareness which mark the man of determination .
His hands were invariably blotted with ink and stained with chemicals , yet he was possessed of extraordinary delicacy of touch , as I frequently had occasion to observe when I watched him manipulating his fragile philosophical instruments .
During the first week or so we had no callers , and I had begun to think that my companion was as friendless a man as I was myself .
Presently , however , I found that he had many acquaintances , and those in the most different classes of society .
There was one little sallow rat-faced , dark-eyed fellow who was introduced to me as Mr. Lestrade , and who came three or four times in a single week .
One morning a young girl called , fashionably dressed , and stayed for half an hour or more .
The same afternoon brought a grey-headed , seedy visitor , looking like a Jew pedlar , who appeared to me to be much excited , and who was closely followed by a slip-shod elderly woman .
On another occasion an old white-haired gentleman had an interview with my companion ; and on another a railway porter in his velveteen uniform .
When any of these nondescript individuals put in an appearance , Sherlock Holmes used to beg for the use of the sitting-room , and I would retire to my bed-room .
He always apologized to me for putting me to this inconvenience .
`` I have to use this room as a place of business , '' he said , `` and these people are my clients . ''
Again I had an opportunity of asking him a point blank question , and again my delicacy prevented me from forcing another man to confide in me .
I imagined at the time that he had some strong reason for not alluding to it , but he soon dispelled the idea by coming round to the subject of his own accord .
`` Well , I have a trade of my own .
I suppose I am the only one in the world .
I 'm a consulting detective , if you can understand what that is .
Here in London we have lots of Government detectives and lots of private ones .
When these fellows are at fault they come to me , and I manage to put them on the right scent .
They lay all the evidence before me , and I am generally able , by the help of my knowledge of the history of crime , to set them straight .
There is a strong family resemblance about misdeeds , and if you have all the details of a thousand at your finger ends , it is odd if you ca n't unravel the thousand and first .
Lestrade is a well-known detective .
He got himself into a fog recently over a forgery case , and that was what brought him here . ''
`` And these other people ? ''
`` But do you mean to say , '' I said , `` that without leaving your room you can unravel some knot which other men can make nothing of , although they have seen every detail for themselves ? ''
Sherlock Holmes sniffed sardonically .
`` Lecoq was a miserable bungler , '' he said , in an angry voice ; `` he had only one thing to recommend him , and that was his energy .
That book made me positively ill .
The question was how to identify an unknown prisoner .
I could have done it in twenty-four hours .
Lecoq took six months or so .
It might be made a text-book for detectives to teach them what to avoid . ''
`` Commissionaire , sir , '' he said , gruffly .
`` Uniform away for repairs . ''
`` No , indeed . ''
`` Commonplace , '' said Holmes , though I thought from his expression that he was pleased at my evident surprise and admiration .
`` I said just now that there were no criminals .
It appears that I am wrong -- look at this ! ''
He threw me over the note which the commissionaire had brought .
`` But he begs you to help him . ''
He knows that I am his superior , and acknowledges it to me ; but he would cut his tongue out before he would own it to any third person .
However , we may as well go and have a look .
I shall work it out on my own hook .
I may have a laugh at them if I have nothing else .
At the door of the house we were met by a tall , white-faced , flaxen-haired man , with a notebook in his hand , who rushed forward and wrung my companion 's hand with effusion .
`` It is indeed kind of you to come , '' he said , `` I have had everything left untouched . ''
`` Except that ! ''
my friend answered , pointing at the pathway .
`` If a herd of buffaloes had passed along there could not be a greater mess .
No doubt , however , you had drawn your own conclusions , Gregson , before you permitted this . ''
Holmes glanced at me and raised his eyebrows sardonically .
`` With two such men as yourself and Lestrade upon the ground , there will not be much for a third party to find out , '' he said .
Gregson rubbed his hands in a self-satisfied way .
`` I think we have done all that can be done , '' he answered ; `` it 's a queer case though , and I knew your taste for such things . ''
Lestrade , lean and ferret-like as ever , was standing by the doorway , and greeted my companion and myself .
As he spoke , his nimble fingers were flying here , there , and everywhere , feeling , pressing , unbuttoning , examining , while his eyes wore the same far-away expression which I have already remarked upon .
So swiftly was the examination made , that one would hardly have guessed the minuteness with which it was conducted .
Finally , he sniffed the dead man 's lips , and then glanced at the soles of his patent leather boots .
`` There 's been a woman here , '' he cried .
`` It 's a woman 's wedding-ring . ''
`` I have said all I have to say , '' said Gregson , in an offended voice .
`` Mr. Gregson , '' he said , `` I have just made a discovery of the highest importance , and one which would have been overlooked had I not made a careful examination of the walls . ''
He struck a match on his boot and held it up against the wall .
`` Look at that ! ''
he said , triumphantly .
`` And what does it mean now that you _have_ found it ? ''
asked Gregson in a depreciatory voice .
`` They say that genius is an infinite capacity for taking pains , '' he remarked with a smile .
`` It 's a very bad definition , but it does apply to detective work . ''
`` If this man was murdered , how was it done ? ''
WHAT JOHN RANCE HAD TO TELL .
`` That seems simple enough , '' said I ; `` but how about the other man's height ? ''
`` I 'll tell it ye from the beginning , '' he said .
`` My time is from ten at night to six in the morning .
At eleven there was a fight at the 'White Hart ' ; but bar that all was quiet enough on the beat .
At one o'clock it began to rain , and I met Harry Murcher -- him who has the Holland Grove beat -- and we stood together at the corner of Henrietta Street a-talkin ' .
Presently -- maybe about two or a little after -- I thought I would take a look round and see that all was right down the Brixton Road .
It was precious dirty and lonely .
Not a soul did I meet all the way down , though a cab or two went past me .
I was a strollin ' down , thinkin' between ourselves how uncommon handy a four of gin hot would be , when suddenly the glint of a light caught my eye in the window of that same house .
Now , I knew that them two houses in Lauriston Gardens was empty on account of him that owns them who wo n't have the drains seed to , though the very last tenant what lived in one of them died o ' typhoid fever .
I was knocked all in a heap therefore at seeing a light in the window , and I suspected as something was wrong .
When I got to the door -- -- ''
Rance gave a violent jump , and stared at Sherlock Holmes with the utmost amazement upon his features .
`` Not a livin ' soul , sir , nor as much as a dog .
Then I pulled myself together and went back and pushed the door open .
All was quiet inside , so I went into the room where the light was a-burnin ' .
There was a candle flickerin ' on the mantelpiece -- a red wax one -- and by its light I saw -- -- ''
`` Was the street empty then ? ''
`` Well , it was , as far as anybody that could be of any good goes . ''
John Rance appeared to be somewhat irritated at this digression .
`` He was an uncommon drunk sort o ' man , '' he said .
`` He 'd ha ' found hisself in the station if we had n't been so took up . ''
The more I thought of it the more extraordinary did my companion's hypothesis , that the man had been poisoned , appear .
I remembered how he had sniffed his lips , and had no doubt that he had detected something which had given rise to the idea .
Then , again , if not poison , what had caused the man 's death , since there was neither wound nor marks of strangulation ?
But , on the other hand , whose blood was that which lay so thickly upon the floor ?
There were no signs of a struggle , nor had the victim any weapon with which he might have wounded an antagonist .
As long as all these questions were unsolved , I felt that sleep would be no easy matter , either for Holmes or myself .
His quiet self-confident manner convinced me that he had already formed a theory which explained all the facts , though what it was I could not for an instant conjecture .
`` Look at this advertisement , '' he answered .
`` I had one sent to every paper this morning immediately after the affair . ''
`` Oh yes , you have , '' said he , handing me one .
`` This will do very well .
It is almost a facsimile . ''
`` The plot thickens , '' he said , as I entered ; `` I have just had an answer to my American telegram .
My view of the case is the correct one . ''
`` Come in , '' I cried .
`` 13 , Duncan Street , Houndsditch .
A weary way from here . ''
With many mumbled blessings and protestations of gratitude the old crone packed it away in her pocket , and shuffled off down the stairs .
Sherlock Holmes sprang to his feet the moment that she was gone and rushed into his room .
He returned in a few seconds enveloped in an ulster and a cravat .
`` I 'll follow her , '' he said , hurriedly ; `` she must be an accomplice , and will lead me to him .
Wait up for me . ''
The hall door had hardly slammed behind our visitor before Holmes had descended the stair .
Looking through the window I could see her walking feebly along the other side , while her pursuer dogged her some little distance behind .
`` Either his whole theory is incorrect , '' I thought to myself , `` or else he will be led now to the heart of the mystery . ''
There was no need for him to ask me to wait up for him , for I felt that sleep was impossible until I heard the result of his adventure .
`` I told you that , whatever happened , Lestrade and Gregson would be sure to score . ''
`` What on earth is this ? ''
I cried , for at this moment there came the pattering of many steps in the hall and on the stairs , accompanied by audible expressions of disgust upon the part of our landlady .
`` Do you mean that you are on the right track ? ''
`` Arthur Charpentier , sub-lieutenant in Her Majesty 's navy , '' cried Gregson , pompously , rubbing his fat hands and inflating his chest .
`` I do n't mind if I do , '' the detective answered .
`` The tremendous exertions which I have gone through during the last day or two have worn me out .
Not so much bodily exertion , you understand , as the strain upon the mind .
You will appreciate that , Mr. Sherlock Holmes , for we are both brain-workers . ''
`` Ah , I 'll tell you all about it .
Of course , Doctor Watson , this is strictly between ourselves .
The first difficulty which we had to contend with was the finding of this American 's antecedents .
Some people would have waited until their advertisements were answered , or until parties came forward and volunteered information .
That is not Tobias Gregson's way of going to work .
You remember the hat beside the dead man ? ''
`` I had no idea that you noticed that , '' he said .
`` Have you been there ? ''
`` Well , I went to Underwood , and asked him if he had sold a hat of that size and description .
He looked over his books , and came on it at once .
He had sent the hat to a Mr. Drebber , residing at Charpentier 's Boarding Establishment , Torquay Terrace .
Thus I got at his address . ''
Drebber has been with us nearly three weeks .
He and his secretary , Mr. Stangerson , had been travelling on the Continent .
I noticed a `` Copenhagen '' label upon each of their trunks , showing that that had been their last stopping place .
Stangerson was a quiet reserved man , but his employer , I am sorry to say , was far otherwise .
He was coarse in his habits and brutish in his ways .
The very night of his arrival he became very much the worse for drink , and , indeed , after twelve o'clock in the day he could hardly ever be said to be sober .
His manners towards the maid-servants were disgustingly free and familiar .
Worst of all , he speedily assumed the same attitude towards my daughter , Alice , and spoke to her more than once in a way which , fortunately , she is too innocent to understand .
On one occasion he actually seized her in his arms and embraced her -- an outrage which caused his own secretary to reproach him for his unmanly conduct . '
`` Mrs. Charpentier blushed at my pertinent question .
'Would to God that I had given him notice on the very day that he came , ' she said .
'But it was a sore temptation .
They were paying a pound a day each -- fourteen pounds a week , and this is the slack season .
I am a widow , and my boy in the Navy has cost me much .
I grudged to lose the money .
I acted for the best .
This last was too much , however , and I gave him notice to leave on account of it .
That was the reason of his going . '
`` 'Possibly four or five ? '
`` Ah , you find it so , Mr .
cried Gregson , triumphantly .
`` I thought you would come to that conclusion .
Have you managed to find the Secretary , Mr. Joseph Stangerson ? ''
THE intelligence with which Lestrade greeted us was so momentous and so unexpected , that we were all three fairly dumfoundered .
Gregson sprang out of his chair and upset the remainder of his whiskey and water .
I stared in silence at Sherlock Holmes , whose lips were compressed and his brows drawn down over his eyes .
`` And there was nothing else ? ''
`` I have now in my hands , '' my companion said , confidently , `` all the threads which have formed such a tangle .
There are , of course , details to be filled in , but I am as certain of all the main facts , from the time that Drebber parted from Stangerson at the station , up to the discovery of the body of the latter , as if I had seen them with my own eyes .
I will give you a proof of my knowledge .
Could you lay your hand upon those pills ? ''
`` Give them here , '' said Holmes .
`` Now , Doctor , '' turning to me , `` are those ordinary pills ? ''
`` I will now cut one of these pills in two , '' said Holmes , and drawing his penknife he suited the action to the word .
`` One half we return into the box for future purposes .
The other half I will place in this wine glass , in which is a teaspoonful of water .
You perceive that our friend , the Doctor , is right , and that it readily dissolves . ''
As he spoke he turned the contents of the wine glass into a saucer and placed it in front of the terrier , who speedily licked it dry .
Sherlock Holmes ' earnest demeanour had so far convinced us that we all sat in silence , watching the animal intently , and expecting some startling effect .
None such appeared , however .
The dog continued to lie stretched upon tho [ 16 ] cushion , breathing in a laboured way , but apparently neither the better nor the worse for its draught .
`` Please , sir , '' he said , touching his forelock , `` I have the cab downstairs . ''
The fellow came forward with a somewhat sullen , defiant air , and put down his hands to assist .
At that instant there was a sharp click , the jangling of metal , and Sherlock Holmes sprang to his feet again .
_The Country of the Saints._
He had toiled painfully down the ravine , and on to this little elevation , in the vain hope of seeing some signs of water .
Now the great salt plain stretched before his eyes , and the distant belt of savage mountains , without a sign anywhere of plant or tree , which might indicate the presence of moisture .
In all that broad landscape there was no gleam of hope .
North , and east , and west he looked with wild questioning eyes , and then he realised that his wanderings had come to an end , and that there , on that barren crag , he was about to die .
`` Why not here , as well as in a feather bed , twenty years hence , '' he muttered , as he seated himself in the shelter of a boulder .
cried the little girl enthusiastically , holding up two glittering fragments of mica .
`` When we goes back to home I 'll give them to brother Bob . ''
`` You 'll see prettier things than them soon , '' said the man confidently .
`` You just wait a bit .
I was going to tell you though -- you remember when we left the river ? ''
`` Do you mean that we are going to die too ? ''
asked the child , checking her sobs , and raising her tear-stained face .
`` I guess that 's about the size of it . ''
`` He made the country down in Illinois , and He made the Missouri , '' the little girl continued .
`` I guess somebody else made the country in these parts .
It 's not nearly so well done .
They forgot the water and the trees . ''
At the head of the column there rode a score or more of grave ironfaced men , clad in sombre homespun garments and armed with rifles .
On reaching the base of the bluff they halted , and held a short council among themselves .
`` There ca n't be any number of Injuns here , '' said the elderly man who appeared to be in command .
`` We have passed the Pawnees , and there are no other tribes until we cross the great mountains . ''
`` Leave your horses below and we will await you here , '' the Elder answered .
In a moment the young fellows had dismounted , fastened their horses , and were ascending the precipitous slope which led up to the object which had excited their curiosity .
They advanced rapidly and noiselessly , with the confidence and dexterity of practised scouts .
The watchers from the plain below could see them flit from rock to rock until their figures stood out against the skyline .
The young man who had first given the alarm was leading them .
Suddenly his followers saw him throw up his hands , as though overcome with astonishment , and on joining him they were affected in the same way by the sight which met their eyes .
`` We are the Mormons , '' answered his companions with one voice .
THE FLOWER OF UTAH .
THIS is not the place to commemorate the trials and privations endured by the immigrant Mormons before they came to their final haven .
From the shores of the Mississippi to the western slopes of the Rocky Mountains they had struggled on with a constancy almost unparalleled in history .
The savage man , and the savage beast , hunger , thirst , fatigue , and disease -- every impediment which Nature could place in the way , had all been overcome with Anglo-Saxon tenacity .
Yet the long journey and the accumulated terrors had shaken the hearts of the stoutest among them .
There was not one who did not sink upon his knees in heartfelt prayer when they saw the broad valley of Utah bathed in the sunlight beneath them , and learned from the lips of their leader that this was the promised land , and that these virgin acres were to be theirs for evermore .
Young speedily proved himself to be a skilful administrator as well as a resolute chief .
Maps were drawn and charts prepared , in which the future city was sketched out .
All around farms were apportioned and allotted in proportion to the standing of each individual .
The tradesman was put to his trade and the artisan to his calling .
In the town streets and squares sprang up , as if by magic .
In the country there was draining and hedging , planting and clearing , until the next summer saw the whole country golden with the wheat crop .
Everything prospered in the strange settlement .
Above all , the great temple which they had erected in the centre of the city grew ever taller and larger .
From the first blush of dawn until the closing of the twilight , the clatter of the hammer and the rasp of the saw was never absent from the monument which the immigrants erected to Him who had led them safe through many dangers .
`` Oh , well ; of course , if you and father have arranged it all , there's no more to be said , '' she whispered , with her cheek against his broad breast .
Yes , a dangerous matter -- so dangerous that even the most saintly dared only whisper their religious opinions with bated breath , lest something which fell from their lips might be misconstrued , and bring down a swift retribution upon them .
The victims of persecution had now turned persecutors on their own account , and persecutors of the most terrible description .
Not the Inquisition of Seville , nor the German Vehm-gericht , nor the Secret Societies of Italy , were ever able to put a more formidable machinery in motion than that which cast a cloud over the State of Utah .
`` In return for all this we asked but one condition : that was , that you should embrace the true faith , and conform in every way to its usages .
This you promised to do , and this , if common report says truly , you have neglected . ''
With a threatening gesture of his hand , he turned from the door , and Ferrier heard his heavy step scrunching along the shingly path .
`` Do n't you scare yourself , '' he answered , drawing her to him , and passing his broad , rough hand caressingly over her chestnut hair .
`` We 'll fix it up somehow or another .
You do n't find your fancy kind o ' lessening for this chap , do you ? ''
`` Let me know when you have settled which it is to be , '' he said , sardonically .
`` You shall smart for this ! ''
Stangerson cried , white with rage .
`` You have defied the Prophet and the Council of Four .
You shall rue it to the end of your days . ''
`` And so should I , father , '' she answered , with spirit ; `` but Jefferson will soon be here . ''
It was , indeed , high time that someone capable of giving advice and help should come to the aid of the sturdy old farmer and his adopted daughter .
In the whole history of the settlement there had never been such a case of rank disobedience to the authority of the Elders .
If minor errors were punished so sternly , what would be the fate of this arch rebel .
Ferrier knew that his wealth and position would be of no avail to him .
Others as well known and as rich as himself had been spirited away before now , and their goods given over to the Church .
He was a brave man , but he trembled at the vague , shadowy terrors which hung over him .
Any known danger he could face with a firm lip , but this suspense was unnerving .
He concealed his fears from his daughter , however , and affected to make light of the whole matter , though she , with the keen eye of love , saw plainly that he was ill at ease .
So unnerved was he at the sight that he leaned up against the wall with his hand to his throat to stifle his inclination to call out .
His first thought was that the prostrate figure was that of some wounded or dying man , but as he watched it he saw it writhe along the ground and into the hall with the rapidity and noiselessness of a serpent .
Once within the house the man sprang to his feet , closed the door , and revealed to the astonished farmer the fierce face and resolute expression of Jefferson Hope .
`` Give me food , '' the other said , hoarsely .
`` I have had no time for bite or sup for eight-and-forty hours . ''
He flung himself upon the [ 21 ] cold meat and bread which were still lying upon the table from his host's supper , and devoured it voraciously .
`` Does Lucy bear up well ? ''
he asked , when he had satisfied his hunger .
`` You 've hit it there , pard , '' the young hunter answered .
`` I have a respect for you , but if you were alone in this business I 'd think twice before I put my head into such a hornet 's nest .
It 's Lucy that brings me here , and before harm comes on her I guess there will be one less o ' the Hope family in Utah . ''
`` To-morrow at midnight , '' said the first who appeared to be in authority .
`` When the Whip-poor-Will calls three times . ''
It was a bewildering route for anyone who was not accustomed to face Nature in her wildest moods .
On the one side a great crag towered up a thousand feet or more , black , stern , and menacing , with long basaltic columns upon its rugged surface like the ribs of some petrified monster .
On the other hand a wild chaos of boulders and debris made all advance impossible .
Between the two ran the irregular track , so narrow in places that they had to travel in Indian file , and so rough that only practised riders could have traversed it at all .
Yet in spite of all dangers and difficulties , the hearts of the fugitives were light within them , for every step increased the distance between them and the terrible despotism from which they were flying .
ALL night their course lay through intricate defiles and over irregular and rock-strewn paths .
More than once they lost their way , but Hope's intimate knowledge of the mountains enabled them to regain the track once more .
When morning broke , a scene of marvellous though savage beauty lay before them .
In every direction the great snow-capped peaks hemmed them in , peeping over each other 's shoulders to the far horizon .
So steep were the rocky banks on either side of them , that the larch and the pine seemed to be suspended over their heads , and to need only a gust of wind to come hurtling down upon them .
Nor was the fear entirely an illusion , for the barren valley was thickly strewn with trees and boulders which had fallen in a similar manner .
Even as they passed , a great rock came thundering down with a hoarse rattle which woke the echoes in the silent gorges , and startled the weary horses into a gallop .
His intention had been to be absent a year at the most , but a combination of unforeseen circumstances prevented his leaving the mines for nearly five .
At the end of that time , however , his memory of his wrongs and his craving for revenge were quite as keen as on that memorable night when he had stood by John Ferrier 's grave .
Disguised , and under an assumed name , he returned to Salt Lake City , careless what became of his own life , as long as he obtained what he knew to be justice .
There he found evil tidings awaiting him .
There had been a schism among the Chosen People a few months before , some of the younger members of the Church having rebelled against the authority of the Elders , and the result had been the secession of a certain number of the malcontents , who had left Utah and become Gentiles .
Among these had been Drebber and Stangerson ; and no one knew whither they had gone .
Rumour reported that Drebber had managed to convert a large part of his property into money , and that he had departed a wealthy man , while his companion , Stangerson , was comparatively poor .
There was no clue at all , however , as to their whereabouts .
Many a man , however vindictive , would have abandoned all thought of revenge in the face of such a difficulty , but Jefferson Hope never faltered for a moment .
With the small competence he possessed , eked out by such employment as he could pick up , he travelled from town to town through the United States in quest of his enemies .
Year passed into year , his black hair turned grizzled , but still he wandered on , a human bloodhound , with his mind wholly set upon the one object upon which he had devoted his life .
At last his perseverance was rewarded .
It was but a glance of a face in a window , but that one glance told him that Cleveland in Ohio possessed the men whom he was in pursuit of .
He returned to his miserable lodgings with his plan of vengeance all arranged .
It chanced , however , that Drebber , looking from his window , had recognized the vagrant in the street , and had read murder in his eyes .
He hurried before a justice of the peace , accompanied by Stangerson , who had become his private secretary , and represented to him that they were in danger of their lives from the jealousy and hatred of an old rival .
That evening Jefferson Hope was taken into custody , and not being able to find sureties , was detained for some weeks .
When at last he was liberated , it was only to find that Drebber 's house was deserted , and that he and his secretary had departed for Europe .
Gregson and Lestrade exchanged glances as if they thought this proposition rather a bold one ; but Holmes at once took the prisoner at his word , and loosened the towel which we had bound round his ancles .
[ 23 ] He rose and stretched his legs , as though to assure himself that they were free once more .
I remember that I thought to myself , as I eyed him , that I had seldom seen a more powerfully built man ; and his dark sunburned face bore an expression of determination and energy which was as formidable as his personal strength .
`` If there 's a vacant place for a chief of the police , I reckon you are the man for it , '' he said , gazing with undisguised admiration at my fellow-lodger .
`` The way you kept on my trail was a caution . ''
I assented gladly , and we all descended together .
Our prisoner made no attempt at escape , but stepped calmly into the cab which had been his , and we followed him .
Lestrade mounted the box , whipped up the horse , and brought us in a very short time to our destination .
We were ushered into a small chamber where a police Inspector noted down our prisoner 's name and the names of the men with whose murder he had been charged .
The official was a white-faced unemotional man , who went through his duties in a dull mechanical way .
`` The prisoner will be put before the magistrates in the course of the week , '' he said ; `` in the mean time , Mr. Jefferson Hope , have you anything that you wish to say ?
I must warn you that your words will be taken down , and may be used against you . ''
`` It was some time before I found out where my two gentlemen were living ; but I inquired and inquired until at last I dropped across them .
They were at a boarding-house at Camberwell , over on the other side of the river .
When once I found them out I knew that I had them at my mercy .
I had grown my beard , and there was no chance of their recognizing me .
I would dog them and follow them until I saw my opportunity .
I was determined that they should not escape me again .
`` At last , one evening I was driving up and down Torquay Terrace , as the street was called in which they boarded , when I saw a cab drive up to their door .
Presently some luggage was brought out , and after a time Drebber and Stangerson followed it , and drove off .
I whipped up my horse and kept within sight of them , feeling very ill at ease , for I feared that they were going to shift their quarters .
At Euston Station they got out , and I left a boy to hold my horse , and followed them on to the platform .
I heard them ask for the Liverpool train , and the guard answer that one had just gone and there would not be another for some hours .
Stangerson seemed to be put out at that , but Drebber was rather pleased than otherwise .
I got so close to them in the bustle that I could hear every word that passed between them .
Drebber said that he had a little business of his own to do , and that if the other would wait for him he would soon rejoin him .
His companion remonstrated with him , and reminded him that they had resolved to stick together .
Drebber answered that the matter was a delicate one , and that he must go alone .
I could not catch what Stangerson said to that , but the other burst out swearing , and reminded him that he was nothing more than his paid servant , and that he must not presume to dictate to him .
On that the Secretary gave it up as a bad job , and simply bargained with him that if he missed the last train he should rejoin him at Halliday 's Private Hotel ; to which Drebber answered that he would be back on the platform before eleven , and made his way out of the station .
`` 'There is no murder , ' I answered .
'Who talks of murdering a mad dog ?
What mercy had you upon my poor darling , when you dragged her from her slaughtered father , and bore her away to your accursed and shameless harem . '
`` On entering the house this last inference was confirmed .
My well-booted man lay before me .
The tall one , then , had done the murder , if murder there was .
There was no wound upon the dead man 's person , but the agitated expression upon his face assured me that he had foreseen his fate before it came upon him .
Men who die from heart disease , or any sudden natural cause , never by any chance exhibit agitation upon their features .
Having sniffed the dead man 's lips I detected a slightly sour smell , and I came to the conclusion that he had had poison forced upon him .
Again , I argued that it had been forced upon him from the hatred and fear expressed upon his face .
By the method of exclusion , I had arrived at this result , for no other hypothesis would meet the facts .
Do not imagine that it was a very unheard of idea .
The forcible administration of poison is by no means a new thing in criminal annals .
The cases of Dolsky in Odessa , and of Leturier in Montpellier , will occur at once to any toxicologist .
As he spoke a cheery hail came from outside , with a sharp rat-tat at the window .
Robert stepped out and threw open the door to admit a tall young man , whose black frieze jacket was all mottled and glistening with snow crystals .
Laughing loudly he shook himself like a Newfoundland dog , and kicked the snow from his boots before entering the little lamplit room .
`` State your cases . ''
The young artist shut up his sketch-book , and rested his head upon his hands with a face of mock solemnity .
Go along Laura , though I think I know something of your adventure already . ''
The young man crackled the bank-note between his fingers and thumb , while he passed his other hand over his hair with the action of a man who strives to collect himself .
`` Good-morning , Mr .
`` I do n't know whether Laura has heard .
Have you been up to see the new comer ? ''
`` Yes ; I have just left him . ''
`` Is he a married man -- this Mr. Raffles Haw ? ''
`` I am delighted to hear it , '' he said .
`` May I ask what he has done ? ''
Robert picked up his Tam-o'-Shanter and strolled out to avoid the discussion between his father and sister , which he saw was about to be renewed .
His artistic nature revolted at these petty and sordid disputes , and he turned to the crisp air and the broad landscape to soothe his ruffled feelings .
Avarice had no place among his failings , and his father 's perpetual chatter about money inspired him with a positive loathing and disgust for the subject .
`` Indeed , I think that it is more than likely , '' the other answered , in a much more conciliatory voice .
It was a somewhat extraordinary request , but Robert rather prided himself upon his Bohemianism , and upon his happy facility for making friends with all sorts and conditions of men .
He readily exchanged a cordial grip with his chance acquaintance .
A HOUSE OF WONDERS .
The angle of the chamber in which they sat was painted for about six feet in each direction of a dark chocolate-brown , and was furnished with two red plush seats protruding from the walls , and in striking contrast with the simplicity of the rest of the apartment .
`` Yes , it is a Raphael , and I believe one of his best .
I had a very exciting bid for it with the French Government .
They wanted it for the Louvre , but of course at an auction the longest purse must win . ''
`` I do n't think that you would do for a valuer of precious stones , '' said Raffles Haw , laughing .
`` Why , the contents of that one little drawer of brilliants could not be bought for the sum which you name .
I have a memo .
here of what I have expended up to date on my collection , though I have agents at work who will probably make very considerable additions to it within the next few weeks .
As matters stand , however , I have spent -- let me see-pearls one forty thousand ; emeralds , seven fifty ; rubies , eight forty ; brilliants , nine twenty ; onyxes -- I have several very nice onyxes-two thirty .
Other gems , carbuncles , agates -- hum !
Yes , it figures out at just over four million seven hundred and forty thousand .
I dare say that we may say five millions , for I have not counted the odd money . ''
`` Good gracious ! ''
cried the young artist , with staring eyes .
`` It was rolled in Louisiana in the old slavery days .
There is nothing made like them now .
The man who had them did not know their value .
He let them go at merely a few shillings apiece .
Now I want you to do me a favour , Mr .
`` On the other hand , my experience of the world has been that it is the rarest thing to be able to form a friendship with a poorer man -- I mean with a man who is at all eager to increase his income .
They think much of your wealth , and little of yourself .
I have tried , you understand , and I know . ''
He paused and ran his fingers through his thin beard .
Robert McIntyre nodded to show that he appreciated his position .
The proposition filled his heart with joy , for it seemed to give him an almost official connection with this paradise of a house .
He could not have asked for anything more to his taste .
`` I know that dress pretty well , '' he said .
`` It is my sister Laura whom you describe . ''
`` Where I hope to have the pleasure of making their acquaintance .
You have finished your cigar ?
Have another , or try a pipe .
To the real smoker all is mere trifling save the pipe .
I have most brands of tobacco here .
The lockers are filled on the Monday , and on Saturday they are handed over to the old folk at the alms-houses , so I manage to keep it pretty fresh always .
Well , if you wo n't take anything else , perhaps you would care to see one or two of the other effects which I have devised .
On this side is the armoury , and beyond it the library .
My collection of books is a limited one ; there are just over the fifty thousand volumes .
But it is to some extent remarkable for quality .
I have a Visigoth Bible of the fifth century , which I rather fancy is unique ; there is a 'Biblia Pauperum ' of 1430 ; a MS. of Genesis done upon mulberry leaves , probably of the second century ; a 'Tristan and Iseult ' of the eighth century ; and some hundred black-letters , with five very fine specimens of Schoffer and Fust .
But those you may turn over any wet afternoon when you have nothing better to do .
Meanwhile , I have a little device connected with this smoking-room which may amuse you .
Light this other cigar .
Now sit with me upon this lounge which stands at the further end of the room . ''
`` It only came this evening .
I have not opened it yet .
To tell the truth , I have been so interested in your story that I had forgotten all about it .
It is from Madeira . ''
She glanced rapidly over the four pages of straggling writing in the young sailor 's bold schoolboyish hand .
`` Oh , he is all right , '' she said .
`` They had a gale on the way out , and that sort of thing , but he is all right now .
He thinks he may be back by March .
I wonder whether your new friend will come to-morrow -- your knight of the enchanted Castle . ''
`` If I had not thought of such things where would your education have been , miss ? ''
retorted the angry old man ; and Robert stole quietly away to his room , whence amid his canvases he could still hear the hoarse voice and the clear in their never-ending family jangle .
More and more sordid seemed the surroundings of his life , and more and more to be valued the peace which money can buy .
`` I am afraid that I am a very early visitor , '' he said apologetically ; `` but I often take a walk after breakfast . ''
He had no traces of work upon him now , but was trim and neat with a dark suit , and carefully brushed hair .
`` You spoke yesterday of your work .
Perhaps , early as it is , you would allow me the privilege of looking over your studio ? ''
`` Oh , they could run it along the line and dump it anywhere .
It is not much of a hill .
A few thousand men with proper machinery , and a line of rails brought right up to them could easily dispose of it in a few months . ''
Leaving Laura and Mr. McIntyre , they went up together to the workroom .
Mr. Haw stood long in front of the `` Signing of Magna Charta , '' and the `` Murder of Thomas a Becket , '' screwing up his eyes and twitching nervously at his beard , while Robert stood by in anxious expectancy .
`` I think that he is no more fit to be trusted with all that money than a child , '' cried the old man .
`` It made me positively sick to hear him talk of moving hills and buying tigers , and such-like nonsense , when there are honest men without a business , and great businesses starving for a little capital .
It 's unchristian -- that 's what I call it . ''
That night Robert McIntyre had gone to bed , and was dozing off when a hand plucked at his shoulder , and he started up to find his sister in some white drapery , with a shawl thrown over her shoulders , standing beside him in the moonlight .
`` No ; not unless you wish it . ''
Robert , with his teacup in his hand , allowed his attention to be diverted from their strange visitor while he gazed at his beautiful sister .
`` What a dear , sweet creature it is , '' cried Laura .
`` How sleek and how graceful !
I can not understand how people could be afraid of anything so beautiful . ''
`` No wish of yours , you mean , '' broke in her father .
`` It 's different when he is dealing with a wrinkled old man who has spent himself in working for his children .
A plainer case of love at first sight I never saw . ''
`` For heaven 's sake , be careful , Laura ! ''
`` It had not struck me before , but really it does look rather like it .
You know how you stand .
Raffles Haw is not a man to play with . ''
`` If the run continues you must send me a wire , and I shall make a small addition to my account .
You will send me a receipt by post .
Good-morning , gentlemen ! ''
He bowed himself out ere the astounded partners could realise what had befallen them , or raise their eyes from the huge black bag and the visiting card which lay upon their table .
There was no great failure in Birmingham that day , and the house of Garraweg still survives to enjoy the success which it deserves .
But if the recluse 's wealth was a lure which drew the beggars from far and near , as the lamp draws the moths , it had the same power of attraction upon another and much more dangerous class .
Strange hard faces were seen in the village street , prowling figures were marked at night stealing about among the fir plantations , and warning messages arrived from city police and county constabulary to say that evil visitors were known to have taken train to Tamfield .
But if , as Raffles Haw held , there were few limits to the power of immense wealth , it possessed , among other things , the power of self-preservation , as one or two people were to learn to their cost .
`` I have caught them in my patent burglar trap , '' said Haw .
`` They are my first birds , but I have no doubt that they will not be the last .
I will show you how it works .
It is quite a new thing .
This flooring is now as strong as possible , but every night I disconnect it .
It is done simultaneously by a central machine for every room on the ground-floor .
When the floor is disconnected one may advance three or four steps , either from the window or door , and then that whole part turns on a hinge and slides you into a padded strong-room beneath , where you may kick your heels until you are released .
There is a central oasis between the hinges , where the furniture is grouped for the night .
The flooring flies into position again when the weight of the intruder is removed , and there he must bide , while I can always take a peep at him by this simple little optical arrangement .
I thought it might amuse you to have a look at my prisoners before I handed them over to the head-constable , who I see is now coming up the avenue . ''
`` The poor burglars ! ''
`` It is no wonder that they look bewildered , for I suppose , Mr. Haw , that they neither know where they are , nor how they came there .
I am so glad to know that you guard yourself in this way , for I have often thought that you ran a danger . ''
`` Have you so ? ''
said he , smiling round at her .
`` I think that my house is fairly burglar-proof .
I have one window which may be used as an entrance , the centre one of the three of my laboratory .
I keep it so because , to tell the truth , I am somewhat of a night prowler myself , and when I treat myself to a ramble under the stars I like to slip in and out without ceremony .
It would , however , be a fortunate rogue who picked the only safe entrance out of a hundred , and even then he might find pitfalls .
Here is the constable , but you must not go , for Miss McIntyre has still something to see in my little place .
If you will step into the billiard-room I shall be with you in a very few moments . ''
`` Do you , indeed ? ''
said Raffles Haw , raising his eyebrows .
`` I had no idea of that ; it is very seldom that the artistic and the scientific faculties go together . ''
`` A note , sir . ''
The butler handed it in upon a silver salver .
Haw broke the seal and ran his eye over it .
`` I have sometimes feared that you were , '' said the other sympathetically .
`` But how strange it seems , you who are yet young , healthy , with every faculty for enjoyment , and a millionaire . ''
`` No , Robert ; I am a billionaire -- perhaps the only one in the world .
That is what is on my mind , and why I am unhappy sometimes .
I feel that I should spend this money -- that I should put it in circulation -- and yet it is so hard to do it without failing to do good -- without doing positive harm .
I feel my responsibility deeply .
It weighs me down .
Am I justified in continuing to live this quiet life when there are so many millions whom I might save and comfort if I could but reach them ? ''
`` Now I will submit a few schemes to you , and you may give me your opinion on them .
Supposing that such a man were to buy ten square miles of ground here in Staffordshire , and were to build upon it a neat city , consisting entirely of clean , comfortable little four-roomed houses , furnished in a simple style , with shops and so forth , but no public-houses .
Supposing , too , that he were to offer a house free to all the homeless folk , all the tramps , and broken men , and out-of-workers in Great Britain .
Then , having collected them together , let him employ them , under fitting superintendence , upon some colossal piece of work which would last for many years , and perhaps be of permanent value to humanity .
Give them a good rate of pay , and let their hours of labour be reasonable , and those of recreation be pleasant .
Might you not benefit them and benefit humanity at one stroke ? ''
Then for the first time it flashed into Robert McIntyre 's head that his father 's chance words were correct , and that he was in the presence of a madman .
His great wealth had clearly turned his brain , and made him a monomaniac .
He nodded indulgently , as when one humours a child .
`` I have had estimates and calculations from the first living engineers -- French , English , and American .
The point of exit of the tunnel could be calculated to the yard .
That portfolio in the corner is full of sections , plans , and diagrams .
I have agents employed in buying up land , and if all goes well , we may get to work in the autumn .
That is one device which may produce results .
Another is canal-cutting . ''
`` And we will have a little cutting here .
It will run from Uleaborg to Kem , and will connect the White Sea with the Gulf of Bothnia .
We must not allow our sympathies to be insular , must we ?
Our little charities should be cosmopolitan .
We will try and give the good people of Archangel a better outlet for their furs and their tallow . ''
`` It would certainly be an oversight , '' said Robert , who was keenly alive to the comical side of the question .
Raffles Haw , however , in deadly earnest , sat scratching away at his map with his blue pencil .
`` Your plans are certainly stupendous , '' said Robert , uncertain whether to laugh or to be awe-struck .
`` You will cease to be a man , and become one of the great forces of Nature , altering , moulding , and improving . ''
`` I suppose that you still do n't know where your friend gets his money ? ''
he remarked to Robert one morning , as they walked together through the village .
`` Just you wait here , '' old McIntyre cried , plucking at his son 's sleeve with his thin bony hand .
`` Wait here and see it pass .
Then we will watch what becomes of it . ''
`` I have watched it , Robert -- I have watched it every Saturday , and I had my chance of looking a little deeper into it .
You remember the day when the elm blew down , and the road was blocked until they could saw it in two .
That was on a Saturday , and the waggon came to a stand until they could clear a way for it .
I was there , Robert , and I saw my chance .
I strolled behind the waggon , and I placed my hands upon one of those packets .
They look small , do they not ?
It would take a strong man to lift one .
They are heavy , Robert , heavy , and hard with the hardness of metal .
I tell you , boy , that that waggon is loaded with gold . ''
`` Well , '' said the young man thoughtfully , `` maybe you are right .
It is possible that you are right . ''
But what those thoughts were did not long remain in doubt .
Dimmer and dimmer grew the vision of the distant sailor face , clearer and clearer the image of the vast palace , of the queenly power , of the diamonds , the gold , the ambitious future .
It all lay at her feet , waiting to be picked up .
How could she have hesitated , even for a moment ?
She rose , and , walking over to her desk , she took out a sheet of paper and an envelope .
The latter she addressed to Lieutenant Spurling , H.M.S .
The note cost some little trouble , but at last she got it worded to her mind .
She had hardly sealed her letter before her father and Robert returned .
She closed the door behind them , and made them a little curtsey .
`` The deuce he did ! ''
cried the old man .
`` And you said -- ? ''
`` You were always a good girl , Laura , '' said old McIntyre , standing on his tiptoes to kiss her .
`` Oh , I have written to him , '' his sister answered carelessly .
`` I wish you would be good enough to post the letter . ''
`` No , no , father , '' cried Robert , catching him by the sleeve .
`` You had better leave the matter alone .
Mr. Haw is a very sensitive man .
He would not like to be examined upon such a point .
It might lead to a serious quarrel .
I beg that you will not go . ''
`` Besides , '' said Robert , `` I have not the slightest doubt that Raffles Haw will see the necessity for giving us some sort of explanation before matters go further .
He must understand that we have some claim now to be taken into his confidence . ''
`` But I know that you are a quick worker .
You must be nearly at the end of it . ''
`` I have a small addition there to the gem collection , '' he remarked as he passed .
`` They only arrived last night , and I have not opened them yet , but I am given to understand from the letters and invoices that there are some fine specimens .
We might arrange them this afternoon , if you care to assist me .
Let us go into the smoking-room now . ''
`` My dear boy , I do not blame you .
It was the most natural thing in the world .
I should have looked upon anyone as a madman who had talked to me as I have talked to you .
But for all that , Robert , you were wrong , and I have never yet in our conversations proposed any scheme which it was not well within my power to carry out .
I tell you in all sober earnest that the amount of my income is limited only by my desire , and that all the bankers and financiers combined could not furnish the sums which I can put forward without an effort . ''
`` Well , it was to such a chance that my own great discovery -- perhaps the greatest that the world has seen -- was due , though I may claim the credit of having originated the line of thought which led up to it .
I had frequently speculated as to the effect which powerful currents of electricity exercise upon any substance through which they are poured for a considerable time .
I did not here mean such feeble currents as are passed along a telegraph wire , but I mean the very highest possible developments .
Well , I tried a series of experiments upon this point .
I found that in liquids , and in compounds , the force had a disintegrating effect .
The well-known experiment of the electrolysis of water will , of course , occur to you .
But I found that in the case of elemental solids the effect was a remarkable one .
The element slowly decreased in weight , without perceptibly altering in composition .
I hope that I make myself clear to you ? ''
`` I had one Saturday night fastened a bar of bismuth in a clamp , and had attached it on either side to an electric wire , in order to observe what effect the current would have upon it .
I had been testing each metal in turn , exposing them to the influence for from one to two hours .
I had just got everything in position , and had completed my connection , when I received a telegram to say that John Stillingfleet , an old chemist in London with whom I had been on terms of intimacy , was dangerously ill , and had expressed a wish to see me .
The last train was due to leave in twenty minutes , and I lived a good mile from the station , I thrust a few things into a bag , locked my laboratory , and ran as hard as I could to catch it .
`` There is my raw material , '' said Raffles Haw carelessly , nodding at the heap .
`` Every Saturday I have a waggon-load sent up , which serves me for a week , but we shall need to work double tides when Laura and I are married , and we get our great schemes under way .
I have to be very careful about the quality of the lead , for , of course , every impurity is reproduced in the gold . ''
`` It used in the early days to be a slow process , '' he remarked ; `` but now that I have immense facilities for my work it takes a very short time .
I have now only to complete the connection in order to begin . ''
His eyes flashed as he spoke , and his voice quivered with emotion .
Standing , pale and lanky , amid his electrodes and his retorts , there was still something majestic about this man , who , amid all his stupendous good fortune , could still keep his moral sense undazzled by the glitter of his gold .
Robert 's weak nature had never before realised the strength which lay in those thin , firm lips and earnest eyes .
`` Inside this , '' he said , `` I have left a paper which makes clear anything which is still hidden from you .
Should anything happen to me you will always be able to inherit my powers , and to continue my plans by following the directions which are there expressed .
And now , '' he continued , throwing his casket back again into the box , `` I shall frequently require your help , but I do not think it will be necessary this morning .
I have already taken up too much of your time .
If you are going back to Elmdene I wish that you would tell Laura that I shall be with her in the afternoon . ''
`` Do you know , Robert , '' she said , glancing up at him from under her long black lashes , `` Papa grows unendurable .
I have had to speak very plainly to him , and to make him understand that I am marrying for my own benefit and not for his . ''
`` Where is he , then ? ''
`` I am bound over to secrecy .
He will tell you himself . ''
`` Much better , Robert .
Would it not be dreadful if Hector came back first and there was a scene ?
If I were once married I should not mind .
But of course Raffles knows nothing about him , and it would be terrible if they came together . ''
`` Oh , I can not bear even to think of it .
And yet what could I do , Robert ?
You know that it was only a boy and girl affair .
And how could I refuse such an offer as this ?
It was a duty to my family , was it not ? ''
Old McIntyre burst into a hoarse laugh .
It was late before they ceased building their air-castles and retired to their rooms .
But Robert 's brain was excited , and he could not sleep .
The events of the day had been enough to shake a stronger man .
There had been the revelation of the morning , the strange sights which he had witnessed in the laboratory , and the immense secret which had been confided to his keeping .
Then there had been his conversation with his father in the afternoon , their disagreement , and the sudden intrusion of Raffles Haw .
Finally the talk with his sister had excited his imagination , and driven sleep from his eyelids .
In vain he turned and twisted in his bed , or paced the floor of his chamber .
He was not only awake , but abnormally awake , with every nerve highly strung , and every sense at the keenest .
What was he to do to gain a little sleep ?
It flashed across him that there was brandy in the decanter downstairs , and that a glass might act as a sedative .
He had opened the door of his room , when suddenly his ear caught the sound of slow and stealthy footsteps upon the stairs .
His own lamp was unlit , but a dim glimmer came from a moving taper , and a long black shadow travelled down the wall .
He stood motionless , listening intently .
The steps were in the hall now , and he heard a gentle creaking as the key was cautiously turned in the door .
The next instant there came a gust of cold air , the taper was extinguished , and a sharp snap announced that the door had been closed from without .
For five minutes or more Robert stood in the darkness amid the rain , looking in at this strange sight , while his father hardly moved save to cuddle closer to the gold , and to pat it with his thin hands .
Robert was still uncertain what he should do , when his eyes wandered from the central figure and fell on something else which made him give a little cry of astonishment -- a cry which was drowned amid the howling of the gale .
`` Prut , tut ! ''
`` This is very bad -- very bad indeed !
Mind unhinged , you say , and not likely to get over it !
I have noticed a change in him these last few weeks .
He looked like a man who had something upon his mind .
And how is Mr. Robert McIntyre ? ''
`` I have sometimes feared so . ''
`` We may pass over old Mr. McIntyre .
It would hardly be just , perhaps , to mention him in this connection .
But there is Robert .
He used to take such an interest in his profession .
He was so keen about art .
If you met him , the first words he said were usually some reference to his plans , or the progress he was making in his latest picture .
He was ambitious , pushing , self-reliant .
Now he does nothing .
I know for a fact that it is two months since he put brush to canvas .
He has turned from a student into an idler , and , what is worse , I fear into a parasite .
You will forgive me for speaking so plainly ? ''
The storm had died away , but a soft wind was blowing , and the smack of the coming spring was in the air .
He drew in the aromatic scent of the fir-trees as he passed down the curving drive .
Before him lay the long sloping countryside , all dotted over with the farmsteadings and little red cottages , with the morning sun striking slantwise upon their grey roofs and glimmering windows .
His heart yearned over all these people with their manifold troubles , their little sordid miseries , their strivings and hopings and petty soul-killing cares .
How could he get at them ?
How could he manage to lift the burden from them , and yet not hinder them in their life aim ?
For more and more could he see that all refinement is through sorrow , and that the life which does not refine is the life without an aim .
`` Oh , Raffles ! ''
she cried , `` I knew that you would come .
Is it not dreadful about papa ? ''
`` Oh , he has a lazy fit on him .
He has not touched it for ever so long .
But why do you ask that ?
You have that furrow on your brow again .
Put it away , sir ! ''
Raffles Haw still stood cold and motionless .
He was stunned , benumbed , by what he saw and heard .
Laura drew away from Hector , and tried to free her hand from his grasp .
He was as white as paper , and his hand was pressed close to his side as though some sudden pain had shot through him .
For a moment he tottered there like a stricken man , and then , with a hoarse cry , he turned and fled out through the open door .
`` Then , good-bye .
I shall see the Dad , and go straight back to Plymouth . ''
He waited an instant , in hopes of an answer , and then walked sadly from the room .
Robert caught up his hat and started at a run , the frightened butler trotting heavily beside him .
It had been a day of excitement and disaster .
The young artist 's heart was heavy within him , and the shadow of some crowning trouble seemed to have fallen upon his soul .
The Government of the Transvaal after the war was left in the hands of a triumvirate , but after one year Kruger became President , an office which he continued to hold for eighteen years .
His career as ruler vindicates the wisdom of that wise but unwritten provision of the American Constitution by which there is a limit to the tenure of this office .
Continued rule for half a generation must turn a man into an autocrat .
The old President has said himself , in his homely but shrewd way , that when one gets a good ox to lead the team it is a pity to change him .
If a good ox , however , is left to choose his own direction without guidance , he may draw his wagon into trouble .
Such a discovery produced the inevitable effect .
A great number of adventurers flocked into the country , some desirable and some very much the reverse .
There were circumstances , however , which kept away the rowdy and desperado element who usually make for a newly opened goldfield .
It was not a class of mining which encouraged the individual adventurer .
There were none of those nuggets which gleamed through the mud of the dollies at Ballarat , or recompensed the forty-niners in California for all their travels and their toils .
It was a field for elaborate machinery , which could only be provided by capital .
Managers , engineers , miners , technical experts , and the tradesmen and middlemen who live upon them , these were the Uitlanders , drawn from all the races under the sun , but with the Anglo-Celtic vastly predominant .
The best engineers were American , the best miners were Cornish , the best managers were English , the money to run the mines was largely subscribed in England .
As time went on , however , the German and French interests became more extensive , until their joint holdings are now probably as heavy as those of the British .
Soon the population of the mining centres became greater than that of the whole Boer community , and consisted mainly of men in the prime of life -- men , too , of exceptional intelligence and energy .
But it is a poor cause which can not bear to fairly state and honestly consider the case of its opponents .
The Boers had made , as has been briefly shown , great efforts to establish a country of their own .
They had travelled far , worked hard , and fought bravely .
After all their efforts they were fated to see an influx of strangers into their country , some of them men of questionable character , who outnumbered the original inhabitants .
If the franchise were granted to these , there could be no doubt that though at first the Boers might control a majority of the votes , it was only a question of time before the newcomers would dominate the Raad and elect their own President , who might adopt a policy abhorrent to the original owners of the land .
Were the Boers to lose by the ballot-box the victory which they had won by their rifles ?
Was it fair to expect it ?
These newcomers came for gold .
They got their gold .
Their companies paid a hundred per cent .
Was not that enough to satisfy them ?
If they did not like the country why did they not leave it ?
No one compelled them to stay there .
But if they stayed , let them be thankful that they were tolerated at all , and not presume to interfere with the laws of those by whose courtesy they were allowed to enter the country .
And again , the whole argument is based upon the narrow racial supposition that every naturalised citizen not of Boer extraction must necessarily be unpatriotic .
This is not borne out by the examples of history .
The newcomer soon becomes as proud of his country and as jealous of her liberty as the old .
Had President Kruger given the franchise generously to the Uitlander , his pyramid would have been firm upon its base and not balanced upon its apex .
It is true that the corrupt oligarchy would have vanished , and the spirit of a broader more tolerant freedom influenced the counsels of the State .
But the republic would have become stronger and more permanent , with a population who , if they differed in details , were united in essentials .
Whether such a solution would have been to the advantage of British interests in South Africa is quite another question .
In more ways than one President Kruger has been a good friend to the empire .
So much upon the general question of the reason why the Uitlander should agitate and why the Boer was obdurate .
The details of the long struggle between the seekers for the franchise and the refusers of it may be quickly sketched , but they can not be entirely ignored by any one who desires to understand the inception of that great contest which was the outcome of the dispute .
At the time of the Convention of Pretoria ( 1881 ) the rights of burghership might be obtained by one year 's residence .
In 1882 it was raised to five years , the reasonable limit which obtains both in Great Britain and in the United States .
Had it remained so , it is safe to say that there would never have been either an Uitlander question or a great Boer war .
Grievances would have been righted from the inside without external interference .
The events which followed at the beginning of 1896 have been so thrashed out that there is , perhaps , nothing left to tell -- except the truth .
So far as the Uitlanders themselves are concerned , their action was most natural and justifiable , and they have no reason to exculpate themselves for rising against such oppression as no men of our race have ever been submitted to .
Had they trusted only to themselves and the justice of their cause , their moral and even their material position would have been infinitely stronger .
But unfortunately there were forces behind them which were more questionable , the nature and extent of which have never yet , in spite of two commissions of investigation , been properly revealed .
That there should have been any attempt at misleading inquiry , or suppressing documents in order to shelter individuals , is deplorable , for the impression left -- I believe an entirely false one -- must be that the British Government connived at an expedition which was as immoral as it was disastrous .
A commission appointed by the State was sent to examine into the condition of the mining industry and the grievances from which the newcomers suffered .
The chairman was Mr. Schalk Burger , one of the most liberal of the Boers , and the proceedings were thorough and impartial .
The result was a report which amply vindicated the reformers , and suggested remedies which would have gone a long way towards satisfying the Uitlanders .
With such enlightened legislation their motives for seeking the franchise would have been less pressing .
But the President and his Raad would have none of the recommendations of the commission .
The rugged old autocrat declared that Schalk Burger was a traitor to his country for having signed such a document , and a new reactionary committee was chosen to report upon the report .
Words and papers were the only outcome of the affair .
No amelioration came to the newcomers .
But at least they had again put their case publicly upon record , and it had been endorsed by the most respected of the burghers .
Gradually in the press of the English-speaking countries the raid was ceasing to obscure the issue .
More and more clearly it was coming out that no permanent settlement was possible where the majority of the population was oppressed by the minority .
They had tried peaceful means and failed .
They had tried warlike means and failed .
What was there left for them to do ?
Their own country , the paramount power of South Africa , had never helped them .
Perhaps if it were directly appealed to it might do so .
It could not , if only for the sake of its own imperial prestige , leave its children for ever in a state of subjection .
The Uitlanders determined upon a petition to the Queen , and in doing so they brought their grievances out of the limits of a local controversy into the broader field of international politics .
Great Britain must either protect them or acknowledge that their protection was beyond her power .
A direct petition to the Queen praying for protection was signed in April 1899 by twenty-one thousand Uitlanders .
From that time events moved inevitably towards the one end .
Sometimes the surface was troubled and sometimes smooth , but the stream always ran swiftly and the roar of the fall sounded ever louder in the ears .
The suggestion of this joint commission has been criticised as an unwarrantable intrusion into the internal affairs of another country .
But then the whole question from the beginning was about the internal affairs of another country , since the internal equality of the white inhabitants was the condition upon which self-government was restored to the Transvaal .
It is futile to suggest analogies , and to imagine what France would do if Germany were to interfere in a question of French franchise .
Supposing that France contained as many Germans as Frenchmen , and that they were ill-treated , Germany would interfere quickly enough and continue to do so until some fair modus vivendi was established .
The fact is that the case of the Transvaal stands alone , that such a condition of things has never been known , and that no previous precedent can apply to it , save the general rule that a minority of white men can not continue indefinitely to tax and govern a majority .
Sentiment inclines to the smaller nation , but reason and justice are all on the side of England .
'Her Majesty 's Government are increasingly impressed with the danger of further delay in relieving the strain which has already caused so much injury to the interests of South Africa , and they earnestly press for an immediate and definite reply to the present proposal .
If it is acceded to they will be ready to make immediate arrangements ... to settle all details of the proposed tribunal of arbitration ...
If , however , as they most anxiously hope will not be the case , the reply of the South African Republic should be negative or inconclusive , I am to state that her Majesty 's Government must reserve to themselves the right to reconsider the situation de novo , and to formulate their own proposals for a final settlement . '
For purposes of comparison we may give some idea of the forces which Mr. Kruger and Mr. Steyn could put in the field , for by this time it was evident that the Orange Free State , with which we had had no shadow of a dispute , was going , in a way which some would call wanton and some chivalrous , to throw in its weight against us .
The general press estimate of the forces of the two republics varied from 25,000 to 35,000 men .
B. Robinson , a personal friend of President Kruger 's and a man who had spent much of his life among the Boers , considered the latter estimate to be too high .
The calculation had no assured basis to start from .
A very scattered and isolated population , among whom large families were the rule , is a most difficult thing to estimate .
Some reckoned from the supposed natural increase during eighteen years , but the figure given at that date was itself an assumption .
Others took their calculation from the number of voters in the last presidential election : but no one could tell how many abstentions there had been , and the fighting age is five years earlier than the voting age in the republics .
We recognise now that all calculations were far below the true figure .
It is probable , however , that the information of the British Intelligence Department was not far wrong .
According to this the fighting strength of the Transvaal alone was 32,000 men , and of the Orange Free State 22,000 .
With mercenaries and rebels from the colonies they would amount to 60 , 000 , while a considerable rising of the Cape Dutch would bring them up to 100,000 .
In artillery they were known to have about a hundred guns , many of them ( and the fact will need much explaining ) more modern and powerful than any which we could bring against them .
Of the quality of this large force there is no need to speak .
The men were brave , hardy , and fired with a strange religious enthusiasm .
They were all of the seventeenth century , except their rifles .
Mounted upon their hardy little ponies , they possessed a mobility which practically doubled their numbers and made it an impossibility ever to outflank them .
As marksmen they were supreme .
Add to this that they had the advantage of acting upon internal lines with shorter and safer communications , and one gathers how formidable a task lay before the soldiers of the empire .
When we turn from such an enumeration of their strength to contemplate the 12,000 men , split into two detachments , who awaited them in Natal , we may recognise that , far from bewailing our disasters , we should rather congratulate ourselves upon our escape from losing that great province which , situated as it is between Britain , India , and Australia , must be regarded as the very keystone of the imperial arch .
In the very nature of things a huge conspiracy of this sort to substitute Dutch for British rule in South Africa is not a matter which can be easily and definitely proved .
Such questions are not discussed in public documents , and men are sounded before being taken into the confidence of the conspirators .
But there is plenty of evidence of the individual ambition of prominent and representative men in this direction , and it is hard to believe that what many wanted individually was not striven for collectively , especially when we see how the course of events did actually work towards the end which they indicated .
Mr. J.P. FitzPatrick , in 'The Transvaal from Within ' -- a book to which all subsequent writers upon the subject must acknowledge their obligations -- narrates how in 1896 he was approached by Mr. D.P .
Graaff , formerly a member of the Cape Legislative Council and a very prominent Afrikander Bondsman , with the proposition that Great Britain should be pushed out of South Africa .
The same politician made the same proposal to Mr. Beit .
Compare with this the following statement of Mr. Theodore Schreiner , the brother of the Prime Minister of the Cape :
'MYSELF : Yes , it is ; but I seem to see plainly here between the lines of this constitution much more ultimately aimed at than that .
-- Her Majesty 's Government have received with great regret the peremptory demands of the Government of the South African Republic , conveyed in your telegram of the 9th October .
You will inform the Government of the South African Republic in reply that the conditions demanded by the Government of the South African Republic are such as her Majesty 's Government deem it impossible to discuss . '
Besides this northern army there were two other bodies of burghers converging upon Natal .
One , consisting of the commandoes from Utrecht and the Swaziland districts , had gathered at Vryheid on the flank of the British position at Dundee .
The other , much larger , not less probably than six or seven thousand men , were the contingent from the Free State and a Transvaal corps , together with Schiel 's Germans , who were making their way through the various passes , the Tintwa Pass , and Van Reenen's Pass , which lead through the grim range of the Drakensberg and open out upon the more fertile plains of Western Natal .
The total force may have been something between twenty and thirty thousand men .
By all accounts they were of an astonishingly high heart , convinced that a path of easy victory lay before them , and that nothing could bar their way to the sea .
If the British commanders underrated their opponents , there is ample evidence that the mistake was reciprocal .
Two days later , on the early morning of October 20th , the forces came at last into collision .
At half-past three in the morning , well before daylight , the mounted infantry picket at the junction of the roads from Landmans and Vants Drifts was fired into by the Doornberg commando , and retired upon its supports .
Two companies of the Dublin Fusiliers were sent out , and at five o'clock on a fine but misty morning the whole of Symons 's force was under arms with the knowledge that the Boers were pushing boldly towards them .
The khaki-clad lines of fighting men stood in their long thin ranks staring up at the curves of the saddle-back hills to the north and east of them , and straining their eyes to catch a glimpse of the enemy .
Why these same saddle-back hills were not occupied by our own people is , it must be confessed , an insoluble mystery .
In a hollow on one flank were the 18th Hussars and the mounted infantry .
On the other were the eighteen motionless guns , limbered up and ready , the horses fidgeting and stamping in the raw morning air .
The first thousand yards of the advance were over open grassland , where the range was long , and the yellow brown of the khaki blended with the withered veld .
There were few casualties until the wood was reached , which lay halfway up the long slope of the hill .
It was a plantation of larches , some hundreds of yards across and nearly as many deep .
On the left side of this wood -- that is , the left side to the advancing troops -- there stretched a long nullah or hollow , which ran perpendicularly to the hill , and served rather as a conductor of bullets than as a cover .
So severe was the fire at this point that both in the wood and in the nullah the troops lay down to avoid it .
An officer of Irish Fusiliers has narrated how in trying to cut the straps from a fallen private a razor lent him for that purpose by a wounded sergeant was instantly shot out of his hand .
The gallant Symons , who had refused to dismount , was shot through the stomach and fell from his horse mortally wounded .
With an excessive gallantry , he had not only attracted the enemy 's fire by retaining his horse , but he had been accompanied throughout the action by an orderly bearing a red pennon .
'Have they got the hill ?
Have they got the hill ? '
was his one eternal question as they carried him dripping to the rear .
It was at the edge of the wood that Colonel Sherston met his end .
From now onwards it was as much a soldiers ' battle as Inkermann .
In the shelter of the wood the more eager of the three battalions had pressed to the front until the fringe of the trees was lined by men from all of them .
The difficulty of distinguishing particular regiments where all were clad alike made it impossible in the heat of action to keep any sort of formation .
So hot was the fire that for the time the advance was brought to a standstill , but the 69th battery , firing shrapnel at a range of 1400 yards , subdued the rifle fire , and about half-past eleven the infantry were able to push on once more .
Above the wood there was an open space some hundreds of yards across , bounded by a rough stone wall built for herding cattle .
A second wall ran at right angles to this down towards the wood .
An enfilading rifle fire had been sweeping across this open space , but the wall in front does not appear to have been occupied by the enemy , who held the kopje above it .
To avoid the cross fire the soldiers ran in single file under the shelter of the wall , which covered them to the right , and so reached the other wall across their front .
Here there was a second long delay , the men dribbling up from below , and firing over the top of the wall and between the chinks of the stones .
The Dublin Fusiliers , through being in a more difficult position , had been unable to get up as quickly as the others , and most of the hard-breathing excited men who crowded under the wall were of the Rifles and of the Irish Fusiliers .
The air was so full of bullets that it seemed impossible to live upon the other side of this shelter .
Two hundred yards intervened between the wall and the crest of the kopje .
And yet the kopje had to be cleared if the battle were to be won .
While the Glencoe force had struck furiously at the army of Lucas Meyer , and had afterwards by hard marching disengaged itself from the numerous dangers which threatened it , its comrades at Ladysmith had loyally co-operated in drawing off the attention of the enemy and keeping the line of retreat open .
It was late after noon before the advance began .
It was hard , among those billowing hills , to make out the exact limits of the enemy's position .
All that was certain was that they were there , and that we meant having them out if it were humanly possible .
'The enemy are there , ' said Ian Hamilton to his infantry ; 'I hope you will shift them out before sunset -- in fact I know you will . '
The men cheered and laughed .
In long open lines they advanced across the veld , while the thunder of the two batteries behind them told the Boer gunners that it was their turn now to know what it was to be outmatched .
The idea was to take the position by a front and a flank attack , but there seems to have been some difficulty in determining which was the front and which the flank .
In fact , it was only by trying that one could know .
General White with his staff had arrived from Ladysmith , but refused to take the command out of French 's hands .
It is typical of White 's chivalrous spirit that within ten days he refused to identify himself with a victory when it was within his right to do so , and took the whole responsibility for a disaster at which he was not present .
Now he rode amid the shells and watched the able dispositions of his lieutenant .
The scheme was that the Devonshires should hold the enemy in front while the main attack from the left flank was carried out by the Gordons , the Manchesters , and the Imperial Light Horse .
The words 'front ' and 'flank , ' however , cease to have any meaning with so mobile and elastic a force , and the attack which was intended to come from the left became really a frontal one , while the Devons found themselves upon the right flank of the Boers .
At the moment of the final advance the great black cloud had burst , and a torrent of rain lashed into the faces of the men .
Slipping and sliding upon the wet grass , they advanced to the assault .
The enemy were found to be in possession of a line of hills within seven miles of Ladysmith , the most conspicuous of which is called Tinta Inyoni .
It was no part of General White 's plan to attempt to drive him from this position -- it is not wise generalship to fight always upon ground of the enemy 's choosing -- but it was important to hold him where he was , and to engage his attention during this last day of the march of the retreating column .
For this purpose , since no direct attack was intended , the guns were of more importance than the infantry -- and indeed the infantry should , one might imagine , have been used solely as an escort for the artillery .
A desultory and inconclusive action ensued which continued from nine in the morning until half-past one in the afternoon .
A well-directed fire of the Boer guns from the hills was dominated and controlled by our field artillery , while the advance of their riflemen was restrained by shrapnel .
The enemy 's guns were more easily marked down than at Elandslaagte , as they used black powder .
The ranges varied from three to four thousand yards .
Our losses in the whole action would have been insignificant had it not happened that the Gloucester Regiment advanced somewhat incautiously into the open and was caught in a cross fire of musketry which struck down Colonel Wilford and fifty of his officers and men .
Within four days Colonel Dick-Cunyngham , of the Gordons , Colonel Chisholm , of the Light Horse , Colonel Gunning , of the Rifles , and now Colonel Wilford , of the Gloucesters , had all fallen at the head of their regiments .
In the afternoon General White , having accomplished his purpose and secured the safety of the Dundee column while traversing the dangerous Biggarsberg passes , withdrew his force to Ladysmith .
We have no means of ascertaining the losses of the Boers , but they were probably slight .
On our side we lost 109 killed and wounded , of which only 13 cases were fatal .
Of this total 64 belonged to the Gloucesters and 25 to the troops raised in Natal .
Next day , as already narrated , the whole British army was re-assembled once more at Ladysmith , and the campaign was to enter upon a new phase .
Sir George White has so nobly and frankly taken upon himself the blame of Nicholson 's Nek that an impartial historian must rather regard his self-condemnation as having been excessive .
The immediate causes of the failure were undoubtedly the results of pure ill-fortune , and depended on things outside his control .
But it is evident that the strategic plan which would justify the presence of this column at Nicholson 's Nek was based upon the supposition that the main army won their action at Lombard 's Kop .
In that case White might swing round his right and pin the Boers between himself and Nicholson 's Nek .
In any case he could then re-unite with his isolated wing .
But if he should lose his battle -- what then ?
What was to become of this detachment five miles up in the air ?
How was it to be extricated ?
The gallant Irishman seems to have waved aside the very idea of defeat .
An assurance was , it is reported , given to the leaders of the column that by eleven o'clock next morning they would be relieved .
So they would if White had won his action .
The force chosen to operate independently consisted of four and a half companies of the Gloucester regiment , six companies of the Royal Irish Fusiliers , and No .
10 Mountain Battery of six seven-pounder screw-guns .
They were both old soldier regiments from India , and the Fusiliers had shown only ten days before at Talana Hill the stuff of which they were made .
Colonel Carleton , of the Fusiliers , to whose exertions much of the success of the retreat from Dundee was due , commanded the column , with Major Adye as staff officer .
On the night of Sunday , October 29th , they tramped out of Ladysmith , a thousand men , none better in the army .
Little they thought , as they exchanged a jest or two with the outlying pickets , that they were seeing the last of their own armed countrymen for many a weary month .
The road was irregular and the night was moonless .
On either side the black loom of the hills bulked vaguely through the darkness .
The column tramped stolidly along , the Fusiliers in front , the guns and Gloucesters behind .
Several times a short halt was called to make sure of the bearings .
At last , in the black cold hours which come between midnight and morning , the column swung to the left out of the road .
In front of them , hardly visible , stretched a long black kopje .
It was the very Nicholson 's Nek which they had come to occupy .
Carleton and Adye must have heaved a sigh of relief as they realised that they had actually struck it .
The force was but two hundred yards from the position , and all had gone without a hitch .
And yet in those two hundred yards there came an incident which decided the fate both of their enterprise and of themselves .
On the declaration of war two important movements had been made by the Boers upon the west .
One was the advance of a considerable body under the formidable Cronje to attack Mafeking , an enterprise which demands a chapter of its own .
The other was the investment of Kimberley by a force which consisted principally of Freestaters under the command of Wessels and Botha .
The place was defended by Colonel Kekewich , aided by the advice and help of Mr. Cecil Rhodes , who had gallantly thrown himself into the town by one of the last trains which reached it .
As the founder and director of the great De Beers diamond mines he desired to be with his people in the hour of their need , and it was through his initiative that the town had been provided with the rifles and cannon with which to sustain the siege .
The troops which Colonel Kekewich had at his disposal consisted of four companies of the Loyal North Lancashire Regiment ( his own regiment ) , with some Royal Engineers , a mountain battery , and two machine guns .
In addition there were the extremely spirited and capable local forces , a hundred and twenty men of the Cape Police , two thousand Volunteers , a body of Kimberley Light Horse , and a battery of light seven-pounder guns .
There were also eight Maxims which were mounted upon the huge mounds of debris which surrounded the mines and formed most efficient fortresses .
On November 12th Lord Methuen arrived at Orange River and proceeded to organise the column which was to advance to the relief of Kimberley .
General Methuen had had some previous South African experience when in 1885 he had commanded a large body of irregular horse in Bechuanaland .
His reputation was that of a gallant fearless soldier .
He was not yet fifty-five years of age .
Extreme mobility was aimed at in the column , and neither tents nor comforts of any sort were permitted to officers or men -- no light matter in a climate where a tropical day is followed by an arctic night .
At daybreak on November 22nd the force , numbering about eight thousand men , set off upon its eventful journey .
The distance to Kimberley was not more than sixty miles , and it is probable that there was not one man in the force who imagined how long that march would take or how grim the experiences would be which awaited them on the way .
At the dawn of Wednesday , November 22nd , Lord Methuen moved forward until he came into touch with the Boer position at Belmont .
It was surveyed that evening by Colonel Willoughby Verner , and every disposition made to attack it in the morning .
Lord Methuen 's intention had been an attack from front and from flank , but whether from the Grenadiers losing their bearings , or from the mobility of the Boers , which made a flank attack an impossibility , it is certain that all became frontal .
The battle resolved itself into a number of isolated actions in which the various kopjes were rushed by different British regiments , always with success and always with loss .
The honours of the fight , as tested by the grim record of the casualty returns , lay with the Grenadiers , the Coldstreams , the Northumberlands , and the Scots Guards .
The brave Guardsmen lay thickly on the slopes , but their comrades crowned the heights .
The Boers held on desperately and fired their rifles in the very faces of the stormers .
One young officer had his jaw blown to pieces by a rifle which almost touched him .
Another , Blundell of the Guards , was shot dead by a wounded desperado to whom he was offering his water-bottle .
At one point a white flag was waved by the defenders , on which the British left cover , only to be met by a volley .
It was there that Mr. E. F. Knight , of the 'Morning Post , ' became the victim of a double abuse of the usages of war , since his wound , from which he lost his right arm , was from an explosive bullet .
The man who raised the flag was captured , and it says much for the humanity of British soldiers that he was not bayoneted upon the spot .
Yet it is not fair to blame a whole people for the misdeeds of a few , and it is probable that the men who descended to such devices , or who deliberately fired upon our ambulances , were as much execrated by their own comrades as by ourselves .
On Monday , November 27th , at early dawn , the little British army , a dust-coloured column upon the dusty veld , moved forwards again towards their objective .
That night they halted at the pools of Klipfontein , having for once made a whole day 's march without coming in touch with the enemy .
Hopes rose that possibly the two successive defeats had taken the heart out of them and that there would be no further resistance to the advance .
Some , however , who were aware of the presence of Cronje , and of his formidable character , took a juster view of the situation .
And this perhaps is where a few words might be said about the celebrated leader who played upon the western side of the seat of war the same part which Joubert did upon the east .
The cavalry was useless , the infantry was powerless -- there only remained the guns .
When any arm is helpless and harried it always casts an imploring eye upon the guns , and rarely indeed is it that the gallant guns do not respond .
Now the 75th and 18th Field Batteries came rattling and dashing to the front , and unlimbered at one thousand yards .
The naval guns were working at four thousand , but the two combined were insufficient to master the fire of the pieces of large calibre which were opposed to them .
Lord Methuen must have prayed for guns as Wellington did for night , and never was a prayer answered more dramatically .
A strange battery came lurching up from the British rear , unheralded , unknown , the weary gasping horses panting at the traces , the men , caked with sweat and dirt , urging them on into a last spasmodic trot .
The bodies of horses which had died of pure fatigue marked their course , the sergeants ' horses tugged in the gun-teams , and the sergeants staggered along by the limbers .
It was the 62nd Field Battery , which had marched thirty-two miles in eight hours , and now , hearing the crash of battle in front of them , had with one last desperate effort thrown itself into the firing line .
Great credit is due to Major Granet and his men .
Not even those gallant German batteries who saved the infantry at Spicheren could boast of a finer feat .
On the morning of Saturday , December 9th , the British General made an attempt to find out what lay in front of him amid that semicircle of forbidding hills .
To this end he sent out a reconnaissance in the early morning , which included G Battery Horse Artillery , the 9th Lancers , and the ponderous 4.7 naval gun , which , preceded by the majestic march of thirty-two bullocks and attended by eighty seamen gunners , creaked forwards over the plain .
What was there to shoot at in those sunlit boulder-strewn hills in front ?
They lay silent and untenanted in the glare of the African day .
In vain the great gun exploded its huge shell with its fifty pounds of lyddite over the ridges , in vain the smaller pieces searched every cleft and hollow with their shrapnel .
No answer came from the far-stretching hills .
Not a flash or twinkle betrayed the fierce bands who lurked among the boulders .
The force returned to camp no wiser than when it left .
Clouds drifted low in the heavens , and the falling rain made the darkness more impenetrable .
The Highland Brigade was formed into a column -- the Black Watch in front , then the Seaforths , and the other two behind .
To prevent the men from straggling in the night the four regiments were packed into a mass of quarter column as densely as was possible , and the left guides held a rope in order to preserve the formation .
With many a trip and stumble the ill-fated detachment wandered on , uncertain where they were going and what it was that they were meant to do .
Not only among the rank and file , but among the principal officers also , there was the same absolute ignorance .
Brigadier Wauchope knew , no doubt , but his voice was soon to be stilled in death .
The others were aware , of course , that they were advancing either to turn the enemy 's trenches or to attack them , but they may well have argued from their own formation that they could not be near the riflemen yet .
Why they should be still advancing in that dense clump we do not now know , nor can we surmise what thoughts were passing through the mind of the gallant and experienced chieftain who walked beside them .
There are some who claim on the night before to have seen upon his strangely ascetic face that shadow of doom which is summed up in the one word 'fey . '
The hand of coming death may already have lain cold upon his soul .
Out there , close beside him , stretched the long trench , fringed with its line of fierce , staring , eager faces , and its bristle of gun-barrels .
They knew he was coming .
But still , with the dull murmur of many feet , the dense column , nearly four thousand strong , wandered onwards through the rain and the darkness , death and mutilation crouching upon their path .
Who shall blame the Highlanders for retiring when they did ?
Viewed , not by desperate and surprised men , but in all calmness and sanity , it may well seem to have been the very best thing which they could do .
Dashed into chaos , separated from their officers , with no one who knew what was to be done , the first necessity was to gain shelter from this deadly fire , which had already stretched six hundred of their number upon the ground .
The danger was that men so shaken would be stricken with panic , scatter in the darkness over the face of the country , and cease to exist as a military unit .
But the Highlanders were true to their character and their traditions .
There was shouting in the darkness , hoarse voices calling for the Seaforths , for the Argylls , for Company C , for Company H , and everywhere in the gloom there came the answer of the clansmen .
Within half an hour with the break of day the Highland regiments had re-formed , and , shattered and weakened , but undaunted , prepared to renew the contest .
Some attempt at an advance was made upon the right , ebbing and flowing , one little band even reaching the trenches and coming back with prisoners and reddened bayonets .
For the most part the men lay upon their faces , and fired when they could at the enemy ; but the cover which the latter kept was so excellent that an officer who expended 120 rounds has left it upon record that he never once had seen anything positive at which to aim .
Lieutenant Lindsay brought the Seaforths ' Maxim into the firing-line , and , though all her crew except two were hit , it continued to do good service during the day .
The Lancers ' Maxim was equally staunch , though it also was left finally with only the lieutenant in charge and one trooper to work it .
Fortunately the guns were at hand , and , as usual , they were quick to come to the aid of the distressed .
The sun was hardly up before the howitzers were throwing lyddite at 4000 yards , the three field batteries ( 18th , 62nd , 75th ) were working with shrapnel at a mile , and the troop of Horse Artillery was up at the right front trying to enfilade the trenches .
The guns kept down the rifle-fire , and gave the wearied Highlanders some respite from their troubles .
The whole situation had resolved itself now into another Battle of Modder River .
The infantry , under a fire at from six hundred to eight hundred paces , could not advance and would not retire .
The artillery only kept the battle going , and the huge naval gun from behind was joining with its deep bark in the deafening uproar .
But the Boers had already learned -- and it is one of their most valuable military qualities that they assimilate their experience so quickly -- that shell fire is less dangerous in a trench than among rocks .
These trenches , very elaborate in character , had been dug some hundreds of yards from the foot of the hills , so that there was hardly any guide to our artillery fire .
Yet it is to the artillery fire that all the losses of the Boers that day were due .
The cleverness of Cronje 's disposition of his trenches some hundred yards ahead of the kopjes is accentuated by the fascination which any rising object has for a gunner .
Prince Kraft tells the story of how at Sadowa he unlimbered his guns two hundred yards in front of the church of Chlum , and how the Austrian reply fire almost invariably pitched upon the steeple .
So our own gunners , even at a two thousand-yard mark , found it difficult to avoid overshooting the invisible line , and hitting the obvious mark behind .
Some attempt has now been made to sketch the succession of events which had ended in the investment of Ladysmith in northern Natal , and also to show the fortunes of the force which on the western side of the seat of war attempted to advance to the relief of Kimberley .
The distance between these forces may be expressed in terms familiar to the European reader by saying that it was that which separates Paris from Frankfort , or to the American by suggesting that Ladysmith was at Boston and that Methuen was trying to relieve Philadelphia .
Waterless deserts and rugged mountain ranges divided the two scenes of action .
In the case of the British there could be no connection between the two movements , but the Boers by a land journey of something over a hundred miles had a double choice of a route by which Cronje and Joubert might join hands , either by the Bloemfontein-Johannesburg-Laing 's Nek Railway , or by the direct line from Harrismith to Ladysmith .
The possession of these internal lines should have been of enormous benefit to the Boers , enabling them to throw the weight of their forces unexpectedly from the one flank to the other .
General Gatacre was nominally in command of a division , but so cruelly had his men been diverted from him , some to Buller in Natal and some to Methuen , that he could not assemble more than a brigade .
Falling back before the Boer advance , he found himself early in December at Sterkstroom , while the Boers occupied the very strong position of Stormberg , some thirty miles to the north of him .
With the enemy so near him it was Gatacre 's nature to attack , and the moment that he thought himself strong enough he did so .
No doubt he had private information as to the dangerous hold which the Boers were getting upon the colonial Dutch , and it is possible that while Buller and Methuen were attacking east and west they urged Gatacre to do something to hold the enemy in the centre .
On the night of December 9th he advanced .
It is a sad subject to discuss , but it is the one instance in a campaign containing many reverses which amounts to demoralisation among the troops engaged .
The Guards marching with the steadiness of Hyde Park off the field of Magersfontein , or the men of Nicholson 's Nek chafing because they were not led in a last hopeless charge , are , even in defeat , object lessons of military virtue .
But here fatigue and sleeplessness had taken all fire and spirit out of the men .
They dropped asleep by the roadside and had to be prodded up by their exhausted officers .
Many were taken prisoners in their slumber by the enemy who gleaned behind them .
Units broke into small straggling bodies , and it was a sorry and bedraggled force which about ten o'clock came wandering into Molteno .
The place of honour in the rear was kept throughout by the Irish Rifles , who preserved some military formation to the end .
Our losses in killed and wounded were not severe -- military honour would have been less sore had they been more so .
Twenty-six killed , sixty-eight wounded -- that is all .
But between the men on the hillside and the somnambulists of the column , six hundred , about equally divided between the Irish Rifles and the Northumberland Fusiliers , had been left as prisoners .
Two guns , too , had been lost in the hurried retreat .
This defeat of General Gatacre 's , occurring , as it did , in a disaffected district and one of great strategic importance , might have produced the worst consequences .
The gallant Irishmen pushed on , flushed with battle and careless for their losses , the four regiments clubbed into one , with all military organisation rapidly disappearing , and nothing left but their gallant spirit and their furious desire to come to hand-grips with the enemy .
Rolling on in a broad wave of shouting angry men , they never winced from the fire until they had swept up to the bank of the river .
Northern Inniskilling and Southern man of Connaught , orange and green , Protestant and Catholic , Celt and Saxon , their only rivalry now was who could shed his blood most freely for the common cause .
How hateful seem those provincial politics and narrow sectarian creeds which can hold such men apart !
Passing from the misadventure of the 5th Brigade we come as we move from left to right upon the 4th , or Lyttelton 's Brigade , which was instructed not to attack itself but to support the attack on either side of it .
With the help of the naval guns it did what it could to extricate and cover the retreat of the Irishmen , but it could play no very important part in the action , and its losses were insignificant .
On its right in turn Hildyard 's English Brigade had developed its attack upon Colenso and the bridge .
The regiments under Hildyard 's lead were the 2nd West Surrey , the 2nd Devons ( whose first battalion was doing so well with the Ladysmith force ) , the East Surreys , and the West Yorkshires .
The enemy had evidently anticipated the main attack on this position , and not only were the trenches upon the other side exceptionally strong , but their artillery converged upon the bridge , at least a dozen heavy pieces , besides a number of quick-firers , bearing upon it .
The Devons and the Queens , in open order ( an extended line of khaki dots , blending so admirably with the plain that they were hardly visible when they halted ) , led the attack , being supported by the East Surrey and the West Yorkshires .
Advancing under a very heavy fire the brigade experienced much the same ordeal as their comrades of Hart 's brigade , which was mitigated by the fact that from the first they preserved their open order in columns of half-companies extended to six paces , and that the river in front of them did not permit that right flank fire which was so fatal to the Irishmen .
With a loss of some two hundred men the leading regiments succeeded in reaching Colenso , and the West Surrey , advancing by rushes of fifty yards at a time , had established itself in the station , but a catastrophe had occurred at an earlier hour to the artillery which was supporting it which rendered all further advance impossible .
For the reason of this we must follow the fortunes of the next unit upon their right .
For two hours the little knot of heart-sick humiliated officers and men lay in the precarious shelter of the donga and looked out at the bullet-swept plain and the line of silent guns .
Many of them were wounded .
Their chief lay among them , still calling out in his delirium for his guns .
They had been joined by the gallant Baptie , a brave surgeon , who rode across to the donga amid a murderous fire , and did what he could for the injured men .
Now and then a rush was made into the open , sometimes in the hope of firing another round , sometimes to bring a wounded comrade in from the pitiless pelt of the bullets .
How fearful was that lead-storm may be gathered from the fact that one gunner was found with sixty-four wounds in his body .
Several men dropped in these sorties , and the disheartened survivors settled down once more in the donga .
Message of December 16th , as altered by that of December 17th , 1899 .
The week which extended from December 10th to December 17th , 1899 , was the blackest one known during our generation , and the most disastrous for British arms during the century .
We had in the short space of seven days lost , beyond all extenuation or excuse , three separate actions .
No single defeat was of vital importance in itself , but the cumulative effect , occurring as they did to each of the main British forces in South Africa , was very great .
The total loss amounted to about three thousand men and twelve guns , while the indirect effects in the way of loss of prestige to ourselves and increased confidence and more numerous recruits to our enemy were incalculable .
That the patriotic offers of further contingents from the colonies be gratefully accepted .
Time here as elsewhere was working for the British , for reinforcements were steadily coming to Buller 's army .
By the new year Sir Charles Warren 's division ( the 5th ) was nearly complete at Estcourt , whence it could reach the front at any moment .
This division included the 10th brigade , consisting of the Imperial Light Infantry , 2nd Somersets , the 2nd Dorsets , and the 2nd Middlesex ; also the 11th , called the Lancashire Brigade , formed by the 2nd Royal Lancaster , the 2nd Lancashire Fusiliers , the 1st South Lancashire , and the York and Lancaster .
The division also included the 14th Hussars and the 19th , 20th , and 28th batteries of Field Artillery .
Other batteries of artillery , including one howitzer battery , came to strengthen Buller 's force , which amounted now to more than 30,000 men .
Immense transport preparations had to be made , however , before the force could have the mobility necessary for a flank march , and it was not until January 11th that General Buller 's new plans for advance could be set into action .
Before describing what these plans were and the disappointing fate which awaited them , we will return to the story of the siege of Ladysmith , and show how narrowly the relieving force escaped the humiliation -- some would say the disgrace -- of seeing the town which looked to them for help fall beneath their very eyes .
That this did not occur is entirely due to the fierce tenacity and savage endurance of the disease-ridden and half-starved men who held on to the frail lines which covered it .
Sir George White was now confronted with the certainty of an investment , an event for which apparently no preparation had been made , since with an open railway behind him so many useless mouths had been permitted to remain in the town .
Ladysmith lies in a hollow and is dominated by a ring of hills , some near and some distant .
The near ones were in our hands , but no attempt had been made in the early days of the war to fortify and hold Bulwana , Lombard 's Kop , and the other positions from which the town might be shelled .
Whether these might or might not have been successfully held has been much disputed by military men , the balance of opinion being that Bulwana , at least , which has a water-supply of its own , might have been retained .
This question , however , was already academic , as the outer hills were in the hands of the enemy .
As it was , the inner line -- Caesar 's Camp , Wagon Hill , Rifleman 's Post , and round to Helpmakaar Hill -- made a perimeter of fourteen miles , and the difficulty of retaining so extensive a line goes far to exonerate General White , not only for abandoning the outer hills , but also for retaining his cavalry in the town .
After the battle of Ladysmith and the retreat of the British , the Boers in their deliberate but effective fashion set about the investment of the town , while the British commander accepted the same as inevitable , content if he could stem and hold back from the colony the threatened flood of invasion .
On Tuesday , Wednesday , Thursday , and Friday the commandoes gradually closed in upon the south and east , harassed by some cavalry operations and reconnaissances upon our part , the effect of which was much exaggerated by the press .
On Thursday , November 2nd , the last train escaped under a brisk fire , the passengers upon the wrong side of the seats .
At 2 P.M. on the same day the telegraph line was cut , and the lonely town settled herself somberly down to the task of holding off the exultant Boers until the day -- supposed to be imminent -- when the relieving army should appear from among the labyrinth of mountains which lay to the south of them .
Some there were who , knowing both the enemy and the mountains , felt a cold chill within their hearts as they asked themselves how an army was to come through , but the greater number , from General to private , trusted implicitly in the valour of their comrades and in the luck of the British Army .
By the end of the first week of November the Boers had established their circle of fire .
On the east of the town , broken by the loops of the Klip River , is a broad green plain , some miles in extent , which furnished grazing ground for the horses and cattle of the besieged .
Beyond it rises into a long flat-topped hill the famous Bulwana , upon which lay one great Creusot and several smaller guns .
To the north , on Pepworth Hill , was another Creusot , and between the two were the Boer batteries upon Lombard 's Kop .
The British naval guns were placed upon this side , for , as the open loop formed by the river lies at this end , it is the part of the defences which is most liable to assault .
From thence all round the west down to Besters in the south was a continuous series of hills , each crowned with Boer guns , which , if they could not harm the distant town , were at least effective in holding the garrison to its lines .
So formidable were these positions that , amid much outspoken criticism , it has never been suggested that White would have been justified with a limited garrison in incurring the heavy loss of life which must have followed an attempt to force them .
The Manchesters at Caesar 's Camp had been reinforced by the 1st battalion 60th Rifles , who held the prolongation of the same ridge , which is called Waggon Hill .
With the dawn it was found that the Boer riflemen were within eight hundred yards , and from then till evening a constant fire was maintained upon the hill .
The Boer , however , save when the odds are all in his favour , is not , in spite of his considerable personal bravery , at his best in attack .
His racial traditions , depending upon the necessity for economy of human life , are all opposed to it .
As a consequence two regiments well posted were able to hold them off all day with a loss which did not exceed thirty killed and wounded , while the enemy , exposed to the shrapnel of the 42nd battery , as well as the rifle-fire of the infantry , must have suffered very much more severely .
The result of the action was a well-grounded belief that in daylight there was very little chance of the Boers being able to carry the lines .
As the date was that of the Prince of Wales 's birthday , a salute of twenty-one shotted naval guns wound up a successful day .
On November 5th the Boers had remained so inert that the British returned in small force to Colenso and removed some stores -- which seems to suggest that the original retirement was premature .
Four days passed in inactivity -- four precious days for us -- and on the evening of the fourth , November 9th , the watchers on the signal station at Table Mountain saw the smoke of a great steamer coming past Robben Island .
It was the 'Roslin Castle ' with the first of the reinforcements .
Within the week the 'Moor , ' 'Yorkshire , ' 'Aurania , ' 'Hawarden Castle , ' 'Gascon , ' 'Armenian , ' 'Oriental , ' and a fleet of others had passed for Durban with 15,000 men .
Once again the command of the sea had saved the Empire .
The invading force , the numbers of which could not have exceeded some few thousands , formidable only for their mobility , lapped round the more powerful but less active force at Estcourt , and struck behind it at its communications .
There was for a day or two some discussion as to a further retreat , but Hildyard , strengthened by the advice and presence of Colonel Long , determined to hold his ground .
On November 21st the raiding Boers were as far south as Nottingham Road , a point thirty miles south of Estcourt and only forty miles north of the considerable city of Pietermaritzburg .
The situation was serious .
Either the invaders must be stopped , or the second largest town in the colony would be in their hands .
From all sides came tales of plundered farms and broken households .
Some at least of the raiders behaved with wanton brutality .
Smashed pianos , shattered pictures , slaughtered stock , and vile inscriptions , all exhibit a predatory and violent side to the paradoxical Boer character .
[ Footnote : More than once I have heard the farmers in the Free State acknowledge that the ruin which had come upon them was a just retribution for the excesses of Natal . ]
The next British post behind Hildyard 's at Estcourt was Barton 's upon the Mooi River , thirty miles to the south .
Upon this the Boers made a half-hearted attempt , but Joubert had begun to realise the strength of the British reinforcements and the impossibility with the numbers at his disposal of investing a succession of British posts .
He ordered Botha to withdraw from Mooi River and begin his northerly trek .
Leaving Buller to organise his army at Frere , and the Boer commanders to draw their screen of formidable defences along the Tugela , we will return once more to the fortunes of the unhappy town round which the interest of the world , and possibly the destiny of the Empire , were centering .
It is very certain that had Ladysmith fallen , and twelve thousand British soldiers with a million pounds ' worth of stores fallen into the hands of the invaders , we should have been faced with the alternative of abandoning the struggle , or of reconquering South Africa from Cape Town northwards .
South Africa is the keystone of the Empire , and for the instant Ladysmith was the keystone of South Africa .
But the courage of the troops who held the shell-torn townlet , and the confidence of the public who watched them , never faltered for an instant .
December 8th was marked by a gallant exploit on the part of the beleaguered garrison .
Not a whisper had transpired of the coming sortie , and a quarter of an hour before the start officers engaged had no idea of it .
O si sic omnia !
At ten o'clock a band of men slipped out of the town .
There were six hundred of them , all irregulars , drawn from the Imperial Light Horse , the Natal Carabineers , and the Border Mounted Rifles , under the command of Hunter , youngest and most dashing of British Generals .
Edwardes and Boyston were the subcommanders .
The men had no knowledge of where they were going or what they had to do , but they crept silently along under a drifting sky , with peeps of a quarter moon , over a mimosa-shadowed plain .
At last in front of them there loomed a dark mass -- it was Gun Hill , from which one of the great Creusots had plagued them .
A strong support ( four hundred men ) was left at the base of the hill , and the others , one hundred Imperials , one hundred Borders and Carabineers , ten Sappers , crept upwards with Major Henderson as guide .
A Dutch outpost challenged , but was satisfied by a Dutch-speaking Carabineer .
Higher and higher the men crept , the silence broken only by the occasional slip of a stone or the rustle of their own breathing .
Most of them had left their boots below .
Even in the darkness they kept some formation , and the right wing curved forward to outflank the defence .
Suddenly a Mauser crack and a spurt of flame -- then another and another !
'Come on , boys !
There were no bayonets , but that was a detail .
At the word the gunners were off , and there in the darkness in front of the storming party loomed the enormous gun , gigantic in that uncertain light .
Out with the huge breech-block !
Wrap the long lean muzzle round with a collar of gun-cotton !
Keep the guard upon the run until the work is done !
Hunter stood by with a night light in his hand until the charge was in position , and then , with a crash which brought both armies from their tents , the huge tube reared up on its mountings and toppled backwards into the pit .
A howitzer lurked beside it , and this also was blown into ruin .
The attendant Maxim was dragged back by the exultant captors , who reached the town amid shoutings and laughter with the first break of day .
One man wounded , the gallant Henderson , is the cheap price for the best-planned and most dashing exploit of the war .
Secrecy in conception , vigour in execution -- they are the root ideas of the soldier 's craft .
So easily was the enterprise carried out , and so defective the Boer watch , that it is probable that if all the guns had been simultaneously attacked the Boers might have found themselves without a single piece of ordnance in the morning .
[ Footnote : The destruction of the Creusot was not as complete as was hoped .
It was taken back to Pretoria , three feet were sawn off the muzzle , and a new breech-block provided .
The gun was then sent to Kimberley , and it was the heavy cannon which arrived late in the history of that siege and caused considerable consternation among the inhabitants . ]
It may be that the Boers wished once for all to have done at all costs with the constant menace to their rear , or it may be that the deliberate preparations of Buller for his second advance had alarmed them , and that they realised that they must act quickly if they were to act at all .
At any rate , early in the New Year a most determined attack was decided upon .
The storming party consisted of some hundreds of picked volunteers from the Heidelberg ( Transvaal ) and Harrismith ( Free State ) contingents , led by de Villiers .
They were supported by several thousand riflemen , who might secure their success or cover their retreat .
Eighteen heavy guns had been trained upon the long ridge , one end of which has been called Caesar 's Camp and the other Waggon Hill .
This hill , three miles long , lay to the south of the town , and the Boers had early recognised it as being the most vulnerable point , for it was against it that their attack of November 9th had been directed .
Now , after two months , they were about to renew the attempt with greater resolution against less robust opponents .
At twelve o'clock our scouts heard the sounds of the chanting of hymns in the Boer camps .
At two in the morning crowds of barefooted men were clustering round the base of the ridge , and threading their way , rifle in hand , among the mimosa-bushes and scattered boulders which cover the slope of the hill .
Some working parties were moving guns into position , and the noise of their labour helped to drown the sound of the Boer advance .
Both at Caesar 's Camp , the east end of the ridge , and at Waggon Hill , the west end ( the points being , I repeat , three miles apart ) , the attack came as a complete surprise .
The outposts were shot or driven in , and the stormers were on the ridge almost as soon as their presence was detected .
The line of rocks blazed with the flash of their guns .
At the same time as -- or rather earlier than -- the onslaught upon Caesar's Camp a similar attack had been made with secrecy and determination upon the western end of the position called Waggon Hill .
The barefooted Boers burst suddenly with a roll of rifle-fire into the little garrison of Imperial Light Horse and Sappers who held the position .
Mathias of the former , Digby-Jones and Dennis of the latter , showed that 'two in the morning ' courage which Napoleon rated as the highest of military virtues .
They and their men were surprised but not disconcerted , and stood desperately to a slogging match at the closest quarters .
Seventeen Sappers were down out of thirty , and more than half the little body of irregulars .
This end of the position was feebly fortified , and it is surprising that so experienced and sound a soldier as Ian Hamilton should have left it so .
The defence had no marked advantage as compared with the attack , neither trench , sangar , nor wire entanglement , and in numbers they were immensely inferior .
Two companies of the 60th Rifles and a small body of the ubiquitous Gordons happened to be upon the hill and threw themselves into the fray , but they were unable to turn the tide .
Of thirty-three Gordons under Lieutenant MacNaughten thirty were wounded .
[ Footnote : The Gordons and the Sappers were there that morning to re-escort one of Lambton 's 4.7 guns , which was to be mounted there .
Ten seamen were with the gun , and lost three of their number in the defence . ]
As our men retired under the shelter of the northern slope they were reinforced by another hundred and fifty Gordons under the stalwart Miller-Wallnutt , a man cast in the mould of a Berserk Viking .
To their aid also came two hundred of the Imperial Light Horse , burning to assist their comrades .
Another half-battalion of Rifles came with them .
At each end of the long ridge the situation at the dawn of day was almost identical .
In each the stormers had seized one side , but were brought to a stand by the defenders upon the other , while the British guns fired over the heads of their own infantry to rake the further slope .
There has been no better fighting in our time than that upon Waggon Hill on that January morning , and no better fighters than the Imperial Light Horsemen who formed the centre of the defence .
Here , as at Elandslaagte , they proved themselves worthy to stand in line with the crack regiments of the British army .
Through the long day the fight maintained its equilibrium along the summit of the ridge , swaying a little that way or this , but never amounting to a repulse of the stormers or to a rout of the defenders .
So intermixed were the combatants that a wounded man more than once found himself a rest for the rifles of his enemies .
One unfortunate soldier in this position received six more bullets from his own comrades in their efforts to reach the deadly rifleman behind him .
At four o'clock a huge bank of clouds which had towered upwards unheeded by the struggling men burst suddenly into a terrific thunderstorm with vivid lightnings and lashing rain .
It is curious that the British victory at Elandslaagte was heralded by just such another storm .
Up on the bullet-swept hill the long fringes of fighting men took no more heed of the elements than would two bulldogs who have each other by the throat .
Up the greasy hillside , foul with mud and with blood , came the Boer reserves , and up the northern slope came our own reserve , the Devon Regiment , fit representatives of that virile county .
Admirably led by Park , their gallant Colonel , the Devons swept the Boers before them , and the Rifles , Gordons , and Light Horse joined in the wild charge which finally cleared the ridge .
In the meanwhile , the British leaders had been strenuously endeavouring to scrape together a few troops with which to make some stand against the enemy .
For this purpose two small forces were necessary -- the one to oppose the advance through Bethulie and Stormberg , the other to meet the invaders , who , having passed the river at Norval 's Pont , had now occupied Colesberg .
The former task was , as already shown , committed to General Gatacre .
The latter was allotted to General French , the victor of Elandslaagte , who had escaped in the very last train from Ladysmith , and had taken over this new and important duty .
French 's force assembled at Arundel and Gatacre 's at Sterkstroom .
It is with the operations of the former that we have now to deal .
But the Worcester men were steady old soldiers , and the battalion contained no less than four hundred and fifty marksmen in its ranks .
Of these the companies upon the hill had their due proportion , and their fire was so accurate that the Boers found themselves unable to advance any further .
Through the long day a desperate duel was maintained between the two lines of riflemen .
Colonel Cuningham and Major Stubbs were killed while endeavouring to recover the ground which had been lost .
Hovel and Bartholomew continued to encourage their men , and the British fire became so deadly that that of the Boers was dominated .
Under the direction of Hacket Pain , who commanded the nearest post , guns of J battery were brought out into the open and shelled the portion of the kopje which was held by the Boers .
The latter were reinforced , but could make no advance against the accurate rifle fire with which they were met .
The Bisley champion of the battalion , with a bullet through his thigh , expended a hundred rounds before sinking from loss of blood .
It was an excellent defence , and a pleasing exception to those too frequent cases where an isolated force has lost heart in face of a numerous and persistent foe .
With the coming of darkness the Boers withdrew with a loss of over two hundred killed and wounded .
Orders had come from Clements that the whole right wing should be drawn in , and in obedience to them the remains of the victorious companies were called in by Hacket Pain , who moved his force by night in the direction of Rensburg .
The British loss in the action was twenty-eight killed and nearly a hundred wounded or missing , most of which was incurred when the sangars were rushed in the early morning .
Whilst Methuen and Gatacre were content to hold their own at the Modder and at Sterkstroom , and whilst the mobile and energetic French was herding the Boers into Colesberg , Sir Redvers Buller , the heavy , obdurate , inexplicable man , was gathering and organising his forces for another advance upon Ladysmith .
Nearly a month had elapsed since the evil day when his infantry had retired , and his ten guns had not , from the frontal attack upon Colenso .
Since then Sir Charles Warren's division of infantry and a considerable reinforcement of artillery had come to him .
And yet in view of the terrible nature of the ground in front of him , of the fighting power of the Boers , and of the fact that they were always acting upon internal lines , his force even now was , in the opinion of competent judges , too weak for the matter in hand .
61st Howitzer Battery ; two 4.7 naval guns ; eight naval 12-pounder guns ; one squadron 13th Hussars ; Royal Engineers .
About sixteen miles to the westward of Colenso there is a ford over the Tugela River which is called Potgieter 's Drift .
General Buller's apparent plan was to seize this , together with the ferry which runs at this point , and so to throw himself upon the right flank of the Colenso Boers .
Once over the river there is one formidable line of hills to cross , but if this were passed there would be comparatively easy ground until the Ladysmith hills were reached .
With high hopes Buller and his men sallied out upon their adventure .
About eight o'clock , with the clearing of the mist , General Woodgate saw how matters stood .
The ridge , one end of which he held , extended away , rising and falling for some miles .
Had he the whole of the end plateau , and had he guns , he might hope to command the rest of the position .
But he held only half the plateau , and at the further end of it the Boers were strongly entrenched .
The Spion Kop mountain was really the salient or sharp angle of the Boer position , so that the British were exposed to a cross fire both from the left and right .
Beyond were other eminences which sheltered strings of riflemen and several guns .
The plateau which the British held was very much narrower than was usually represented in the press .
In many places the possible front was not much more than a hundred yards wide , and the troops were compelled to bunch together , as there was not room for a single company to take an extended formation .
The cover upon this plateau was scanty , far too scanty for the force upon it , and the shell fire -- especially the fire of the pom-poms -- soon became very murderous .
To mass the troops under the cover of the edge of the plateau might naturally suggest itself , but with great tactical skill the Boer advanced line from Commandant Prinsloo 's Heidelberg and Carolina commandos kept so aggressive an attitude that the British could not weaken the lines opposed to them .
Their skirmishers were creeping round too in such a way that the fire was really coming from three separate points , left , centre , and right , and every corner of the position was searched by their bullets .
Early in the action the gallant Woodgate and many of his Lancashire men were shot down .
The others spread out and held on , firing occasionally at the whisk of a rifle-barrel or the glimpse of a broad-brimmed hat .
From morning to midday , the shell , Maxim , and rifle fire swept across the kop in a continual driving shower .
The British guns in the plain below failed to localise the position of the enemy 's , and they were able to vent their concentrated spite upon the exposed infantry .
No blame attaches to the gunners for this , as a hill intervened to screen the Boer artillery , which consisted of five big guns and two pom-poms .
The subsequent publication of the official despatches has served little purpose , save to show that there was a want of harmony between Buller and Warren , and that the former lost all confidence in his subordinate during the course of the operations .
In these papers General Buller expresses the opinion that had Warren 's operations been more dashing , he would have found his turning movement upon the left a comparatively easy matter .
In this judgment he would probably have the concurrence of most military critics .
He adds , however , 'On the 19th , I ought to have assumed command myself .
I saw that things were not going well -- indeed , everyone saw that .
I blame myself now for not having done so .
I did not , because , if I did , I should discredit General Warren in the estimation of the troops , and , if I were shot , and he had to withdraw across the Tugela , and they had lost confidence in him , the consequences might be very serious .
I must leave it to higher authority whether this argument was a sound one . '
It needs no higher authority than common-sense to say that the argument is an absolutely unsound one .
No consequences could be more serious than that the operations should miscarry and Ladysmith remain unrelieved , and such want of success must in any case discredit Warren in the eyes of his troops .
Besides , a subordinate is not discredited because his chief steps in to conduct a critical operation .
However , these personal controversies may be suffered to remain in that pigeon-hole from which they should never have been drawn .
The getting of the guns up Swartz Kop was a preliminary which was as necessary as it was difficult .
A road was cut , sailors , engineers , and gunners worked with a will under the general direction of Majors Findlay and Apsley Smith .
A mountain battery , two field guns , and six naval 12-pounders were slung up by steel hawsers , the sailors yeo-hoing on the halliards .
The ammunition was taken up by hand .
At six o'clock on the morning of the 5th the other guns opened a furious and probably harmless fire upon Brakfontein , Spion Kop , and all the Boer positions opposite to them .
Shortly afterwards the feigned attack upon Brakfontein was commenced and was sustained with much fuss and appearance of energy until all was ready for the development of the true one .
Wynne's Brigade , which had been Woodgate 's , recovered already from its Spion Kop experience , carried out this part of the plan , supported by six batteries of field artillery , one howitzer battery , and two 4.7 naval guns .
Three hours later a telegram was on its way to Pretoria to tell how triumphantly the burghers had driven back an attack which was never meant to go forward .
The infantry retired first , then the artillery in alternate batteries , preserving a beautiful order and decorum .
The last battery , the 78th , remained to receive the concentrated fire of the Boer guns , and was so enveloped in the dust of the exploding shells that spectators could only see a gun here or a limber there .
Out of this whirl of death it quietly walked , without a bucket out of its place , the gunners drawing one wagon , the horses of which had perished , and so effected a leisurely and contemptuous withdrawal .
The gallantry of the gunners has been one of the most striking features of the war , but it has never been more conspicuous than in this feint at Brakfontein .
On February 21st Buller threw his pontoon bridge over the river near Colenso , and the same evening his army began to cross .
It was at once evident that the Boer resistance had by no means collapsed .
Wynne's Lancashire Brigade were the first across , and found themselves hotly engaged before nightfall .
The low kopjes in front of them were blazing with musketry fire .
The brigade held its own , but lost the Brigadier ( the second in a month ) and 150 rank and file .
Next morning the main body of the infantry was passed across , and the army was absolutely committed to the formidable and unnecessary enterprise of fighting its way straight to Ladysmith .
For a time they were able to keep some cover , and the casualties were comparatively few .
But now at last , as the evening sun threw a long shadow from the hills , the leading regiment , the Inniskillings , found themselves at the utmost fringe of boulders with a clear slope between them and the main trench of the enemy .
Up there where the shrapnel was spurting and the great lyddite shells crashing they could dimly see a line of bearded faces and the black dots of the slouch hats .
With a yell the Inniskillings sprang out , carried with a rush the first trench , and charged desperately onwards for the second one .
It was a supremely dashing attack against a supremely steady resistance , for among all their gallant deeds the Boers have never fought better than on that February evening .
Amid such a smashing shell fire as living mortals have never yet endured they stood doggedly , these hardy men of the veld , and fired fast and true into the fiery ranks of the Irishmen .
The yell of the stormers was answered by the remorseless roar of the Mausers and the deep-chested shouts of the farmers .
Up and up surged the infantry , falling , rising , dashing bull-headed at the crackling line of the trench .
But still the bearded faces glared at them over the edge , and still the sheet of lead pelted through their ranks .
The regiment staggered , came on , staggered again , was overtaken by supporting companies of the Dublins and the Connaughts , came on , staggered once more , and finally dissolved into shreds , who ran swiftly back for cover , threading their way among their stricken comrades .
Never on this earth was there a retreat of which the survivors had less reason to be ashamed .
They had held on to the utmost capacity of human endurance .
Their Colonel , ten officers , and more than half the regiment were lying on the fatal hill .
Honour to them , and honour also to the gallant Dutchmen who , rooted in the trenches , had faced the rush and fury of such an onslaught !
Today to them , tomorrow to us -- but it is for a soldier to thank the God of battles for worthy foes .
While the Irish Brigade assaulted Railway Hill an attack had been made upon the left , which was probably meant as a demonstration to keep the Boers from reinforcing their comrades rather than as an actual attempt upon their lines .
Such as it was , however , it cost the life of at least one brave soldier , for Colonel Thorold , of the Welsh Fusiliers , was among the fallen .
Thorold , Thackeray , and Sitwell in one evening .
Who can say that British colonels have not given their men a lead ?
And now the long-drawn story draws to a swift close .
Cautiously feeling their way with a fringe of horse , the British pushed over the great plain , delayed here and there by the crackle of musketry , but finding always that the obstacle gave way and vanished as they approached it .
At last it seemed clear to Dundonald that there really was no barrier between his horsemen and the beleaguered city .
With a squadron of Imperial Light Horse and a squadron of Natal Carabineers he rode on until , in the gathering twilight , the Ladysmith picket challenged the approaching cavalry , and the gallant town was saved .
On March 3rd Buller 's force entered Ladysmith in state between the lines of the defenders .
For their heroism the Dublin Fusiliers were put in the van of the procession , and it is told how , as the soldiers who lined the streets saw the five officers and small clump of men , the remains of what had been a strong battalion , realising , for the first time perhaps , what their relief had cost , many sobbed like children .
With cheer after cheer the stream of brave men flowed for hours between banks formed by men as brave .
But for the purposes of war the garrison was useless .
A month of rest and food would be necessary before they could be ready to take the field once more .
On November 7th the bombardment of the town commenced from nine 9-pounder guns to which the artillery of the garrison could give no adequate reply .
The result , however , of a fortnight 's fire , during which seven hundred shells were discharged , was the loss of two non-combatants .
The question of food was recognised as being of more importance than the enemy 's fire .
An early relief appeared probable , however , as the advance of Methuen 's force was already known .
One pound of bread , two ounces of sugar , and half a pound of meat were allowed per head .
It was only on the small children that the scarcity of milk told with tragic effect .
At Ladysmith , at Mafeking , and at Kimberley hundreds of these innocents were sacrificed .
And at last the great day came .
It is on record how dramatic was the meeting between the mounted outposts of the defenders and the advance guard of the relievers , whose advent seems to have been equally unexpected by friend and foe .
A skirmish was in progress on February 15th between a party of the Kimberley Light Horse and of the Boers , when a new body of horsemen , unrecognised by either side , appeared upon the plain and opened fire upon the enemy .
One of the strangers rode up to the patrol .
'What the dickens does K.L .
H. mean on your shoulder-strap ? '
'It means Kimberley Light Horse .
Who are you ? '
'I am one of the New Zealanders . '
Macaulay in his wildest dream of the future of the much-quoted New Zealander never pictured him as heading a rescue force for the relief of a British town in the heart of Africa .
The four regiments which composed the infantry of the force -- the Black Watch , the Argyll and Sutherlands , the Seaforths , and the Highland Light Infantry -- left Lord Methuen 's camp on Saturday , February 3rd , and halted at Fraser 's Drift , passing on next day to Koodoosberg .
The day was very hot , and the going very heavy , and many men fell out , some never to return .
The drift ( or ford ) was found , however , to be undefended , and was seized by Macdonald , who , after pitching camp on the south side of the river , sent out strong parties across the drift to seize and entrench the Koodoosberg and some adjacent kopjes which , lying some three-quarters of a mile to the north-west of the drift formed the key of the position .
A few Boer scouts were seen hurrying with the news of his coming to the head laager .
The effect of these messages was evident by Tuesday ( February 6th ) , when the Boers were seen to be assembling upon the north bank .
By next morning they were there in considerable numbers , and began an attack upon a crest held by the Seaforths .
Macdonald threw two companies of the Black Watch and two of the Highland Light Infantry into the fight .
The Boers made excellent practice with a 7-pounder mountain gun , and their rifle fire , considering the good cover which our men had , was very deadly .
Poor Tait , of the Black Watch , good sportsman and gallant soldier , with one wound hardly healed upon his person , was hit again .
'They 've got me this time , ' were his dying words .
Blair , of the Seaforths , had his carotid cut by a shrapnel bullet , and lay for hours while the men of his company took turns to squeeze the artery .
But our artillery silenced the Boer gun , and our infantry easily held their riflemen .
Babington with the cavalry brigade arrived from the camp about 1.30 , moving along the north bank of the river .
In spite of the fact that men and horses were weary from a tiring march , it was hoped by Macdonald 's force that they would work round the Boers and make an attempt to capture either them or their gun .
But the horsemen seem not to have realised the position of the parties , or that possibility of bringing off a considerable coup , so the action came to a tame conclusion , the Boers retiring unpursued from their attack .
On Thursday , February 8th , they were found to have withdrawn , and on the same evening our own force was recalled , to the surprise and disappointment of the public at home , who had not realised that in directing their attention to their right flank the column had already produced the effect upon the enemy for which they had been sent .
They could not be left there , as they were needed for those great operations which were pending .
It was on the 9th that the brigade returned ; on the 10th they were congratulated by Lord Roberts in person ; and on the 11th those new dispositions were made which were destined not only to relieve Kimberley , but to inflict a blow upon the Boer cause from which it was never able to recover .
So all day they rode , hussars , dragoons , and lancers , over the withered veld , until men and horses drooped with the heat and the exertion .
A front of nearly two miles was kept , the regiments moving two abreast in open order ; and the sight of this magnificent cloud of horsemen sweeping over the great barren plain was a glorious one .
The veld had caught fire upon the right , and a black cloud of smoke with a lurid heart to it covered the flank .
The beat of the sun from above and the swelter of dust from below were overpowering .
Gun horses fell in the traces and died of pure exhaustion .
The men , parched and silent , but cheerful , strained their eyes to pierce the continual mirage which played over the horizon , and to catch the first glimpse of the Modder .
At last , as the sun began to slope down to the west , a thin line of green was discerned , the bushes which skirt the banks of that ill-favoured stream .
With renewed heart the cavalry pushed on and made for the drift , while Major Rimington , to whom the onerous duty of guiding the force had been entrusted , gave a sigh of relief as he saw that he had indeed struck the very point at which he had aimed .
The infantry force which General Roberts had assembled was a very formidable one .
The Guards he had left under Methuen in front of the lines of Magersfontein to contain the Boer force .
With them he had also left those regiments which had fought in the 9th Brigade in all Methuen 's actions .
These , as will be remembered , were the 1st Northumberland Fusiliers , the 2nd Yorkshire Light Infantry , the 2nd Northamptons , and one wing of the Loyal North Lancashire Regiment .
These stayed to hold Cronje in his position .
There remained three divisions of infantry , one of which , the ninth , was made up on the spot .
These were constituted in this way :
There was only one thing which apparently should not have been done , and that was to attack him .
His position was a formidable one .
Not only were the banks of the river fringed with his riflemen under excellent cover , but from these banks there extended on each side a number of dongas , which made admirable natural trenches .
The only possible attack from either side must be across a level plain at least a thousand or fifteen hundred yards in width , where our numbers would only swell our losses .
It must be a bold soldier and a far bolder civilian , who would venture to question an operation carried out under the immediate personal direction of Lord Kitchener ; but the general consensus of opinion among critics may justify that which might be temerity in the individual .
Had Cronje not been tightly surrounded , the action with its heavy losses might have been justified as an attempt to hold him until his investment should be complete .
There seems , however , to be no doubt that he was already entirely surrounded , and that , as experience proved , we had only to sit round him to insure his surrender .
It is not given to the greatest man to have every soldierly gift equally developed , and it may be said without offence that Lord Kitchener 's cool judgment upon the actual field of battle has not yet been proved as conclusively as his longheaded power of organisation and his iron determination .
While the infantry had been severely handled by the Boer riflemen , our guns , the 76th , 81st , and 82nd field batteries , with the 65th howitzer battery , had been shelling the river bed , though our artillery fire proved as usual to have little effect against scattered and hidden riflemen .
At least , however , it distracted their attention , and made their fire upon the exposed infantry in front of them less deadly .
Now , as in Napoleon 's time , the effect of the guns is moral rather than material .
About midday French 's horse-artillery guns came into action from the north .
Smoke and flames from the dongas told that some of our shells had fallen among the wagons and their combustible stores .
What had we got in return for our eleven hundred casualties ?
We had contracted the Boer position from about three miles to less than two .
So much was to the good , as the closer they lay the more effective our artillery fire might be expected to be .
But it is probable that our shrapnel alone , without any loss of life , might have effected the same thing .
It is easy to be wise after the event , but it does certainly appear that with our present knowledge the action at Paardeberg was as unnecessary as it was expensive .
The sun descended on Sunday , February 18th , upon a bloody field and crowded field hospitals , but also upon an unbroken circle of British troops still hemming in the desperate men who lurked among the willows and mimosas which drape the brown steep banks of the Modder .
A visit to the laager showed that the horrible smells which had been carried across to the British lines , and the swollen carcasses which had swirled down the muddy river were true portents of its condition .
Strong-nerved men came back white and sick from a contemplation of the place in which women and children had for ten days been living .
From end to end it was a festering mass of corruption , overshadowed by incredible swarms of flies .
Yet the engineer who could face evil sights and nauseous smells was repaid by an inspection of the deep narrow trenches in which a rifleman could crouch with the minimum danger from shells , and the caves in which the non-combatants remained in absolute safety .
Of their dead we have no accurate knowledge , but two hundred wounded in a donga represented their losses , not only during a bombardment of ten days , but also in that Paardeberg engagement which had cost us eleven hundred casualties .
No more convincing example could be adduced both of the advantage of the defence over the attack , and of the harmlessness of the fiercest shell fire if those who are exposed to it have space and time to make preparations .
The victory , if such a word can apply to such an action , had cost some fifty or sixty of the cavalry killed and wounded , while it is doubtful if the Boers lost as many .
The finest military display on the British side had been the magnificent marching of Kelly-Kenny 's 6th Division , who had gone for ten hours with hardly a halt .
One 9-pound Krupp gun was the only trophy .
On the other hand , Roberts had turned them out of their strong position , had gained twelve or fifteen miles on he road to Bloemfontein , and for the first time shown how helpless a Boer army was in country which gave our numbers a chance .
From now onwards it was only in surprise and ambuscade that they could hope for a success .
We had learned and they had learned that they could not stand in the open field .
And now the army flowed swiftly onwards to the capital .
The indefatigable 6th Division , which had done march after march , one more brilliant than another , since they had crossed the Riet River , reached Asvogel Kop on the evening of Sunday , March 11th , the day after the battle .
On Monday the army was still pressing onwards , disregarding all else and striking straight for the heart as Blucher struck at Paris in 1814 .
At midday they halted at the farm of Gregorowski , he who had tried the Reform prisoners after the Raid .
The cavalry pushed on down Kaal Spruit , and in the evening crossed the Southern railway line which connects Bloemfontein with the colony , cutting it at a point some five miles from the town .
In spite of some not very strenuous opposition from a Boer force a hill was seized by a squadron of Greys with some mounted infantry and Rimington 's Guides , aided by U battery R.H.A.
, and was held by them all that night .
On the same evening Major Hunter-Weston , an officer who had already performed at least one brilliant feat in the war , was sent with Lieutenant Charles and a handful of Mounted Sappers and Hussars to cut the line to the north .
After a difficult journey on a very dark night he reached his object and succeeded in finding and blowing up a culvert .
There is a Victoria Cross gallantry which leads to nothing save personal decoration , and there is another and far higher gallantry of calculation , which springs from a cool brain as well as a hot heart , and it is from the men who possess this rare quality that great warriors arise .
Such feats as the cutting of this railway or the subsequent saving of the Bethulie Bridge by Grant and Popham are of more service to the country than any degree of mere valour untempered by judgment .
Among other results the cutting of the line secured for us twenty-eight locomotives , two hundred and fifty trucks , and one thousand tons of coal , all of which were standing ready to leave Bloemfontein station .
The gallant little band were nearly cut off on their return , but fought their way through with the loss of two horses , and so got back in triumph .
Some trenches had been dug and sangars erected to the north-west of the town ; but Lord Roberts , with his usual perverseness , took the wrong turning and appeared upon the broad open plain to the south , where resistance would have been absurd .
Already Steyn and the irreconcilables had fled from the town , and the General was met by a deputation of the Mayor , the Landdrost , and Mr. Fraser to tender the submission of the capital .
Fraser , a sturdy clear-headed Highlander , had been the one politician in the Free State who combined a perfect loyalty to his adopted country with a just appreciation of what a quarrel A l'outrance with the British Empire would mean .
Had Fraser 's views prevailed , the Orange Free State would still exist as a happy and independent State .
As it is , he may help her to happiness and prosperity as the prime minister of the Orange River Colony .
Aided by the accurate fire of the 79th R.F.A.
, the colonials succeeded , after a long day of desultory fighting , in driving the enemy from his position .
Leaving a garrison in Dordrecht Brabant followed up his victory and pushed forward with two thousand men and eight guns ( six of them light 7-pounders ) to occupy Jamestown , which was done without resistance .
On March 10th the colonial force approached Aliwal , the frontier town , and so rapid was the advance of Major Henderson with Brabant 's Horse that the bridge at Aliwal was seized before the enemy could blow it up .
At the other side of the bridge there was a strong stand made by the enemy , who had several Krupp guns in position ; but the light horse , in spite of a loss of some twenty-five men killed and wounded , held on to the heights which command the river .
A week or ten days were spent in pacifying the large north-eastern portion of Cape Colony , to which Aliwal acts as a centre .
Barkly East , Herschel , Lady Grey , and other villages were visited by small detachments of the colonial horsemen , who pushed forward also into the south-eastern portion of the Free State , passing through Rouxville , and so along the Basutoland border as far as Wepener .
The rebellion in the Colony was now absolutely dead in the north-east , while in the north-west in the Prieska and Carnarvon districts it was only kept alive by the fact that the distances were so great and the rebel forces so scattered that it was very difficult for our flying columns to reach them .
Lord Kitchener had returned from Paardeberg to attend to this danger upon our line of communications , and by his exertions all chance of its becoming serious soon passed .
With a considerable force of Yeomanry and Cavalry he passed swiftly over the country , stamping out the smouldering embers .
General Lyttelton 's Division had camped as far out as Elandslaagte with Burn Murdoch 's cavalry , while Dundonald 's brigade covered the space between Burn Murdoch 's western outposts and the Drakensberg passes .
Few Boers were seen , but it was known that the passes were held in some strength .
Meanwhile the line was being restored in the rear , and on March 9th the gallant White was enabled to take train for Durban , though it was not until ten days later that the Colenso bridge was restored .
The Ladysmith garrison had been sent down to Colenso to recruit their health .
There they were formed into a new division , the 4th , the brigades being given to Howard and Knox , and the command to Lyttelton , who had returned his former division , the second , to Clery .
The 5th and 6th brigades were also formed into one division , the 10th , which was placed under the capable command of Hunter , who had confirmed in the south the reputation which he had won in the north of Africa .
In the first week of April Hunter 's Division was sent down to Durban and transferred to the western side , where they were moved up to Kimberley , whence they advanced northwards .
The man on the horse has had in this war an immense advantage over the man on foot , but there have been times when the man on the ship has restored the balance .
Captain Mahan might find some fresh texts in the transference of Hunter 's Division , or in the subsequent expedition to Beira .
The documents were as follow : --
'With this object , and in view of the assertions of various British statesmen to the effect that this war was begun and is carried on with the set purpose of undermining Her Majesty 's authority in South Africa , and of setting up an administration over all South Africa independent of Her Majesty 's Government , we consider it our duty to solemnly declare that this war was undertaken solely as a defensive measure to safeguard the threatened independence of the South African Republic , and is only continued in order to secure and safeguard the incontestable independence of both Republics as sovereign international States , and to obtain the assurance that those of Her Majesty 's subjects who have taken part with us in this war shall suffer no harm whatsoever in person or property .
On March 13th Lord Roberts occupied the capital of the Orange Free State .
On May 1st , more than six weeks later , the advance was resumed .
This long delay was absolutely necessary in order to supply the place of the ten thousand horses and mules which are said to have been used up in the severe work of the preceding month .
It was not merely that a large number of the cavalry chargers had died or been abandoned , but it was that of those which remained the majority were in a state which made them useless for immediate service .
How far this might have been avoided is open to question , for it is notorious that General French's reputation as a horsemaster does not stand so high as his fame as a cavalry leader .
But besides the horses there was urgent need of every sort of supply , from boots to hospitals , and the only way by which they could come was by two single-line railways which unite into one single-line railway , with the alternative of passing over a precarious pontoon bridge at Norval 's Pont , or truck by truck over the road bridge at Bethulie .
To support an army of fifty thousand men under these circumstances , eight hundred miles from a base , is no light matter , and a premature advance which could not be thrust home would be the greatest of misfortunes .
The public at home and the army in Africa became restless under the inaction , but it was one more example of the absolute soundness of Lord Roberts 's judgment and the quiet resolution with which he adheres to it .
He issued a proclamation to the inhabitants of the Free State promising protection to all who should bring in their arms and settle down upon their farms .
The most stringent orders were issued against looting or personal violence , but nothing could exceed the gentleness and good humour of the troops .
Indeed there seemed more need for an order which should protect them against the extortion of their conquered enemies .
It is strange to think that we are separated by only ninety years from the savage soldiery of Badajoz and San Sebastian .
To return to the military operations : these , although they were stagnant so far as the main army was concerned , were exceedingly and inconveniently active in other quarters .
Three small actions , two of which were disastrous to our arms , and one successful defence marked the period of the pause at Bloemfontein .
The force which Broadwood had with him consisted of the 10th Hussars and the composite regiment , Rimington 's Scouts , Roberts 's Horse , the New Zealand and Burmah Mounted Infantry , with Q and U batteries of Horse Artillery .
With such a force , consisting entirely of mounted men , he could not storm the hills upon which the Boer guns were placed , and his twelve-pounders were unable to reach the heavier cannon of the enemy .
His best game was obviously to continue his march to Bloemfontein .
He sent on the considerable convoy of wagons and the guns , while he with the cavalry covered the rear , upon which the long-range pieces of the enemy kept up the usual well-directed but harmless fire .
The effect of the Sanna 's Post defeat was increased by the fact that only four days later ( on April 4th ) a second even more deplorable disaster befell our troops .
This was the surrender of five companies of infantry , two of them mounted , at Reddersberg .
So many surrenders of small bodies of troops had occurred during the course of the war that the public , remembering how seldom the word 'surrender ' had ever been heard in our endless succession of European wars , had become very restive upon the subject , and were sometimes inclined to question whether this new and humiliating fact did not imply some deterioration of our spirit .
The fear was natural , and yet nothing could be more unjust to this the most splendid army which has ever marched under the red-crossed flag .
The fact was new because the conditions were new , and it was inherent in those conditions .
In that country of huge distances small bodies must be detached , for the amount of space covered by the large bodies was not sufficient for all military purposes .
In reconnoitring , in distributing proclamations , in collecting arms , in overawing outlying districts , weak columns must be used .
Very often these columns must contain infantry soldiers , as the demands upon the cavalry were excessive .
Such bodies , moving through a hilly country with which they were unfamiliar , were always liable to be surrounded by a mobile enemy .
Once surrounded the length of their resistance was limited by three things : their cartridges , their water , and their food .
When they had all three , as at Wepener or Mafeking , they could hold out indefinitely .
When one or other was wanting , as at Reddersberg or Nicholson 's Nek , their position was impossible .
They could not break away , for how can men on foot break away from horsemen ?
Hence those repeated humiliations , which did little or nothing to impede the course of the war , and which were really to be accepted as one of the inevitable prices which we had to pay for the conditions under which the war was fought .
Numbers , discipline , and resources were with us .
Mobility , distances , nature of the country , insecurity of supplies , were with them .
We need not take it to heart therefore if it happened , with all these forces acting against them , that our soldiers found themselves sometimes in a position whence neither wisdom nor valour could rescue them .
To travel through that country , fashioned above all others for defensive warfare , with trench and fort of superhuman size and strength , barring every path , one marvels how it was that such incidents were not more frequent and more serious .
It is deplorable that the white flag should ever have waved over a company of British troops , but the man who is censorious upon the subject has never travelled in South Africa .
At the same time , the Boers came on with every confidence of victory , for they had a superiority in guns and an immense superiority in men .
But after a day or two of fierce struggle their attack dwindled down into a mere blockade .
On April 9th they attacked furiously , both by day and by night , and on the 10th the pressure was equally severe .
In these two days occurred the vast majority of the casualties .
But the defenders took cover in a way to which British regulars have not yet attained , and they outshot their opponents both with their rifles and their cannon .
Captain Lukin 's management of the artillery was particularly skilful .
The weather was vile and the hastily dug trenches turned into ditches half full of water , but neither discomfort nor danger shook the courage of the gallant colonials .
Assault after assault was repulsed , and the scourging of the cannon was met with stolid endurance .
The Boers excelled all their previous feats in the handling of artillery by dragging two guns up to the summit of the lofty Jammersberg , whence they fired down upon the camp .
Nearly all the horses were killed and three hundred of the troopers were hit , a number which is double that of the official return , for the simple reason that the spirit of the force was so high that only those who were very severely wounded reported themselves as wounded at all .
None but the serious cases ever reached the hands of Dr. Faskally , who did admirable work with very slender resources .
How many the enemy lost can never be certainly known , but as they pushed home several attacks it is impossible to imagine that their losses were less than those of the victorious defenders .
At the end of seventeen days of mud and blood the brave irregulars saw an empty laager and abandoned trenches .
Their own resistance and the advance of Brabant to their rescue had caused a hasty retreat of the enemy .
Wepener , Mafeking , Kimberley , the taking of the first guns at Ladysmith , the deeds of the Imperial Light Horse -- it can not be denied that our irregular South African forces have a brilliant record for the war .
They are associated with many successes and with few disasters .
Their fine record can not , I think , be fairly ascribed to any greater hardihood which one portion of our race has when compared with another , for a South African must admit that in the best colonial corps at least half the men were Britons of Britain .
In the Imperial Light Horse the proportion was very much higher .
But what may fairly be argued is that their exploits have proved , what the American war proved long ago , that the German conception of discipline is an obsolete fetish , and that the spirit of free men , whose individualism has been encouraged rather than crushed , is equal to any feat of arms .
The clerks and miners and engineers who went up Elandslaagte Hill without bayonets , shoulder to shoulder with the Gordons , and who , according to Sir George White , saved Ladysmith on January 6th , have shown for ever that with men of our race it is the spirit within , and not the drill or the discipline , that makes a formidable soldier .
An intelligent appreciation of the fact might in the course of the next few years save us as much money as would go far to pay for the war .
It may well be asked how for so long a period as seventeen days the British could tolerate a force to the rear of them when with their great superiority of numbers they could have readily sent an army to drive it away .
The answer must be that Lord Roberts had despatched his trusty lieutenant , Kitchener , to Aliwal , whence he had been in heliographic communication with Wepener , that he was sure that the place could hold out , and that he was using it , as he did Kimberley , to hold the enemy while he was making his plans for their destruction .
This was the bait to tempt them to their ruin .
Had the trap not been a little slow in closing , the war in the Free State might have ended then and there .
From the 9th to the 25th the Boers were held in front of Wepener .
Let us trace the movements of the other British detachments during that time .
What held Lord Roberts 's hand for some few days after he was ready to strike was the abominable weather .
Rain was falling in sheets , and those who know South African roads , South African mud , and South African drifts will understand how impossible swift military movements are under those circumstances .
But with the first clearing of the clouds the hills to the south and east of Bloemfontein were dotted with our scouts .
Rundle with his 8th division was brought swiftly up from the south , united with Chermside to the east of Reddersberg , and the whole force , numbering 13,000 rifles with thirty guns , advanced upon Dewetsdorp , Rundle , as senior officer , being in command .
As they marched the blue hills of Wepener lined the sky some twenty miles to the south , eloquent to every man of the aim and object of their march .
While Rundle and French had advanced on Dewetsdorp as described , the other force which was intended to head off De Wet had gone direct to Thabanchu .
The advance began by a movement of Ian Hamilton on April 22nd with eight hundred mounted infantry upon the waterworks .
The enemy , who held the hills beyond , allowed Hamilton 's force to come right down to the Modder before they opened fire from three guns .
The mounted infantry fell back , and encamped for the night out of range .
[ Footnote : This was a remarkable exhibition of the harmlessness of shell-fire against troops in open formation .
I myself saw at least forty shells , all of which burst , fall among the ranks of the mounted infantry , who retired at a contemptuous walk .
There were no casualties . ]
Before morning they were reinforced by Smith-Dorrien 's brigade ( Gordons , Canadians , and Shropshires -- the Cornwalls had been left behind ) and some more mounted Infantry .
With daylight a fine advance was begun , the brigade moving up in very extended order and the mounted men turning the right flank of the defence .
By evening we had regained the waterworks , a most important point for Bloemfontein , and we held all the line of hills which command it .
This strong position would not have been gained so easily if it had not been for Pole-Carew 's and French 's actions two days before , on their way to join Rundle , which enabled them to turn it from the south .
The operations which have been here described may be finally summed up in one short paragraph .
A Boer army came south of the British line and besieged a British garrison .
Three British forces , those of French , Rundle , and Ian Hamilton , were despatched to cut it off .
It successfully threaded its way among them and escaped .
It was followed to the northward as far as the town of Winburg , which remained in the British possession .
Lord Roberts had failed in his plan of cutting off De Wet's army , but , at the expense of many marches and skirmishes , the south-east of the State was cleared of the enemy .
It is not clear why the imperial authorities should desire to hold this place , since it has no natural advantages to help the defence , but lies exposed in a widespread plain .
A glance at the map must show that the railway line would surely be cut both to the north and south of the town , and the garrison isolated at a point some two hundred and fifty miles from any reinforcements .
Considering that the Boers could throw any strength of men or guns against the place , it seemed certain that if they seriously desired to take possession of it they could do so .
Under ordinary circumstances any force shut up there was doomed to capture .
But what may have seemed short-sighted policy became the highest wisdom , owing to the extraordinary tenacity and resource of Baden-Powell , the officer in command .
Through his exertions the town acted as a bait to the Boers , and occupied a considerable force in a useless siege at a time when their presence at other seats of war might have proved disastrous to the British cause .
On October 16th the siege began in earnest .
On that date the Boers brought up two 12-pounder guns , and the first of that interminable flight of shells fell into the town .
The enemy got possession of the water supply , but the garrison had already dug wells .
Before October 20th five thousand Boers , under the formidable Cronje , had gathered round the town .
'Surrender to avoid bloodshed ' was his message .
'When is the bloodshed going to begin ? '
When the Boers had been shelling the town for some weeks the lighthearted Colonel sent out to say that if they went on any longer he should be compelled to regard it as equivalent to a declaration of war .
It is to be hoped that Cronje also possessed some sense of humour , or else he must have been as sorely puzzled by his eccentric opponent as the Spanish generals were by the vagaries of Lord Peterborough .
On October 31st the Boers ventured upon an attack on Cannon Kopje , which is a small fort and eminence to the south of the town .
It was defended by Colonel Walford , of the British South African Police , with fifty-seven of his men and three small guns .
The attack was repelled with heavy loss to the Boers .
The British casualties were six killed and five wounded .
On this date a vigorous attack was made upon one of the Boer forts on the north .
There seems to be little doubt that the enemy had some inkling of our intention , as the fort was found to have been so strengthened as to be impregnable without scaling ladders .
The attacking force consisted of two squadrons of the Protectorate Regiment and one of the Bechuanaland Rifles , backed up by three guns .
So desperate was the onslaught that of the actual attacking party -- a forlorn hope , if ever there was one -- fifty-three out of eighty were killed and wounded , twenty-five of the former and twenty-eight of the latter .
Several of that gallant band of officers who had been the soul of the defence were among the injured .
Captain FitzClarence was wounded , Vernon , Sandford , and Paton were killed , all at the very muzzles of the enemy 's guns .
It must have been one of the bitterest moments of Baden-Powell 's life when he shut his field-glass and said , 'Let the ambulance go out ! '
The garrison , in the face of increasing losses and decreasing food , lost none of the high spirits which it reflected from its commander .
The programme of a single day of jubilee -- Heaven only knows what they had to hold jubilee over -- shows a cricket match in the morning , sports in the afternoon , a concert in the evening , and a dance , given by the bachelor officers , to wind up .
Baden-Powell himself seems to have descended from the eyrie from which , like a captain on the bridge , he rang bells and telephoned orders , to bring the house down with a comic song and a humorous recitation .
The ball went admirably , save that there was an interval to repel an attack which disarranged the programme .
Sports were zealously cultivated , and the grimy inhabitants of casemates and trenches were pitted against each other at cricket or football .
[ Footnote : Sunday cricket so shocked Snyman that he threatened to fire upon it if it were continued . ]
The monotony was broken by the occasional visits of a postman , who appeared or vanished from the vast barren lands to the west of the town , which could not all be guarded by the besiegers .
Sometimes a few words from home came to cheer the hearts of the exiles , and could be returned by the same uncertain and expensive means .
The documents which found their way up were not always of an essential or even of a welcome character .
At least one man received an unpaid bill from an angry tailor .
In the meantime Mafeking -- abandoned , as it seemed , to its fate -- was still as formidable as a wounded lion .
Far from weakening in its defence it became more aggressive , and so persistent and skilful were its riflemen that the big Boer gun had again and again to be moved further from the town .
Six months of trenches and rifle-pits had turned every inhabitant into a veteran .
Now and then words of praise and encouragement came to them from without .
Once it was a special message from the Queen , once a promise of relief from Lord Roberts .
But the rails which led to England were overgrown with grass , and their brave hearts yearned for the sight of their countrymen and for the sound of their voices .
'How long , O Lord , how long ? '
was the cry which was wrung from them in their solitude .
But the flag was still held high .
April was a trying month for the defence .
They knew that Methuen , who had advanced as far as Fourteen Streams upon the Vaal River , had retired again upon Kimberley .
They knew also that Plumer 's force had been weakened by the repulse at Ramathlabama , and that many of his men were down with fever .
Six weary months had this village withstood the pitiless pelt of rifle bullet and shell .
Help seemed as far away from them as ever .
But if troubles may be allayed by sympathy , then theirs should have lain lightly .
The attention of the whole empire had centred upon them , and even the advance of Roberts 's army became secondary to the fate of this gallant struggling handful of men who had upheld the flag so long .
On the Continent also their resistance attracted the utmost interest , and the numerous journals there who find the imaginative writer cheaper than the war correspondent announced their capture periodically as they had once done that of Ladysmith .
From a mere tin-roofed village Mafeking had become a prize of victory , a stake which should be the visible sign of the predominating manhood of one or other of the great white races of South Africa .
Unconscious of the keenness of the emotions which they had aroused , the garrison manufactured brawn from horsehide , and captured locusts as a relish for their luncheons , while in the shot-torn billiard-room of the club an open tournament was started to fill in their hours off duty .
But their vigilance , and that of the hawk-eyed man up in the Conning Tower , never relaxed .
The besiegers had increased in number , and their guns were more numerous than before .
A less acute man than Baden-Powell might have reasoned that at least one desperate effort would be made by them to carry the town before relief could come .
Colonel Mahon , a young Irish officer who had made his reputation as a cavalry leader in Egypt , had started early in May from Kimberley with a small but mobile force consisting of the Imperial Light Horse ( brought round from Natal for the purpose ) , the Kimberley Mounted Corps , the Diamond Fields Horse , some Imperial Yeomanry , a detachment of the Cape Police , and 100 volunteers from the Fusilier brigade , with M battery R.H.A .
and pom-poms , twelve hundred men in all .
Whilst Hunter was fighting his action at Rooidam on May 4th , Mahon with his men struck round the western flank of the Boers and moved rapidly to the northwards .
On May 11th they had left Vryburg , the halfway house , behind them , having done one hundred and twenty miles in five days .
They pushed on , encountering no opposition save that of nature , though they knew that they were being closely watched by the enemy .
At Koodoosrand it was found that a Boer force was in position in front , but Mahon avoided them by turning somewhat to the westward .
His detour took him , however , into a bushy country , and here the enemy headed him off , opening fire at short range upon the ubiquitous Imperial Light Horse , who led the column .
A short engagement ensued , in which the casualties amounted to thirty killed and wounded , but which ended in the defeat and dispersal of the Boers , whose force was certainly very much weaker than the British .
On May 15th the relieving column arrived without further opposition at Masibi Stadt , twenty miles to the west of Mafeking .
So ended a singular incident , the defence of an open town which contained no regular soldiers and a most inadequate artillery against a numerous and enterprising enemy with very heavy guns .
All honour to the towns folk who bore their trial so long and so bravely -- and to the indomitable men who lined the trenches for seven weary months .
Their constancy was of enormous value to the empire .
In the all-important early month at least four or five thousand Boers were detained by them when their presence elsewhere would have been fatal .
During all the rest of the war , two thousand men and eight guns ( including one of the four big Creusots ) had been held there .
It prevented the invasion of Rhodesia , and it gave a rallying-point for loyal whites and natives in the huge stretch of country from Kimberley to Bulawayo .
All this had , at a cost of two hundred lives , been done by this one devoted band of men , who killed , wounded , or took no fewer than one thousand of their opponents .
Critics may say that the enthusiasm in the empire was excessive , but at least it was expended over worthy men and a fine deed of arms .
But either the burghers were half-hearted or there was no real intention to make a stand .
About half-past two their fire slackened and Pole-Carew was directed to push on .
That debonnaire soldier with his two veteran brigades obeyed the order with alacrity , and the infantry swept over the ridge , with some thirty or forty casualties , the majority of which fell to the Warwicks .
The position was taken , and Hamilton , who came up late , was only able to send on De Lisle 's mounted infantry , chiefly Australians , who ran down one of the Boer maxims in the open .
The action had cost us altogether about seventy men .
Among the injured was the Duke of Norfolk , who had shown a high sense of civic virtue in laying aside the duties and dignity of a Cabinet Minister in order to serve as a simple captain of volunteers .
At the end of this one fight the capital lay at the mercy of Lord Roberts .
Consider the fight which they made for their chief city , compare it with that which the British made for the village of Mafeking , and say on which side is that stern spirit of self-sacrifice and resolution which are the signs of the better cause .
In the early morning of June 5th , the Coldstream Guards were mounting the hills which commanded the town .
Beneath them in the clear African air lay the famous city , embowered in green , the fine central buildings rising grandly out of the wide circle of villas .
Through the Nek part of the Guards ' Brigade and Maxwell 's Brigade had passed , and had taken over the station , from which at least one train laden with horses had steamed that morning .
Two others , both ready to start , were only just stopped in time .
Had the Boers been the men of Colenso and of Spion Kop , this storming of Alleman 's Nek would have been a bloody business .
The position was strong , the cover was slight , and there was no way round .
But the infantry came on with the old dash without the old stubborn resolution being opposed to them .
The guns prepared the way , and then the Dorsets , the Dublins , the Middlesex , the Queen 's , and the East Surrey did the rest .
The door was open and the Transvaal lay before us .
The next day Volksrust was in our hands .
Before briefly recounting the series of events which took place upon the line of communications , the narrative must return to Lord Roberts at Pretoria , and describe the operations which followed his occupation of that city .
In leaving the undefeated forces of the Free State behind him , the British General had unquestionably run a grave risk , and was well aware that his railway communication was in danger of being cut .
By the rapidity of his movements he succeeded in gaining the enemy's capital before that which he had foreseen came to pass ; but if Botha had held him at Pretoria while De Wet struck at him behind , the situation would have been a serious one .
Having once attained his main object , Roberts could receive with equanimity the expected news that De Wet with a mobile force of less than two thousand men had , on June 7th , cut the line at Roodeval to the north of Kroonstad .
Both rail and telegraph were destroyed , and for a few days the army was isolated .
Fortunately there were enough supplies to go on with , and immediate steps were taken to drive away the intruder , though , like a mosquito , he was brushed from one place only to settle upon another .
Had Botha withdrawn to a safe distance , Lord Roberts would certainly have halted , as he had done at Bloemfontein , and waited for remounts and reinforcements .
But the war could not be allowed to languish when an active enemy lay only fifteen miles off , within striking distance of two cities and of the line of rail .
Taking all the troops that he could muster , the British General moved out once more on Monday , June 11th , to drive Botha from his position .
He had with him Pole-Carew 's 11th Division , which numbered about six thousand men with twenty guns , Ian Hamilton 's force , which included one infantry brigade ( Bruce Hamilton 's ) , one cavalry brigade , and a corps of mounted infantry , say , six thousand in all , with thirty guns .
There remained French 's Cavalry Division , with Hutton 's Mounted Infantry , which could not have exceeded two thousand sabres and rifles .
The total force was , therefore , not more than sixteen or seventeen thousand men , with about seventy guns .
Their task was to carry a carefully prepared position held by at least ten thousand burghers with a strong artillery .
Had the Boer of June been the Boer of December , the odds would have been against the British .
Christian de Wet , the elder of two brothers of that name , was at this time in the prime of life , a little over forty years of age .
He was a burly middle-sized bearded man , poorly educated , but endowed with much energy and common-sense .
His military experience dated back to Majuba Hill , and he had a large share of that curious race hatred which is intelligible in the case of the Transvaal , but inexplicable in a Freestater who has received no injury from the British Empire .
Some weakness of his sight compels the use of tinted spectacles , and he had now turned these , with a pair of particularly observant eyes behind them , upon the scattered British forces and the long exposed line of railway .
That wily and indefatigable man was not long out of our ken .
On June 14th he appeared once more at Rhenoster , where the construction trains , under the famous Girouard , were working furiously at the repair of the damage which he had already done .
This time the guard was sufficient to beat him off , and he vanished again to the eastward .
He succeeded , however , in doing some harm , and very nearly captured Lord Kitchener himself .
A permanent post had been established at Rhenoster under the charge of Colonel Spens of the Shropshires , with his own regiment and several guns .
Smith-Dorrien , one of the youngest and most energetic of the divisional commanders , had at the same time undertaken the supervision and patrolling of the line .
It was evident now to the British commanders that there would be no peace and no safety for their communications while an undefeated army of seven or eight thousand men , under such leaders as De Wet and Olivier , was lurking amid the hills which flanked their railroad .
A determined effort was made , therefore , to clear up that corner of the country .
Having closed the only line of escape by the junction of Ian Hamilton and of Buller , the attention of six separate bodies of troops was concentrated upon the stalwart Freestaters .
These were the divisions of Rundle and of Brabant from the south , the brigade of Clements on their extreme left , the garrison of Lindley under Paget , the garrison of Heilbron under Macdonald , and , most formidable of all , a detachment under Hunter which was moving from the north .
A crisis was evidently approaching .
On getting into touch with Clements , Paget sallied out from Lindley , leaving the Buffs behind to garrison the town .
He had with him Brookfield 's mounted brigade one thousand strong , eight guns , and two fine battalions of infantry , the Munster Fusiliers and the Yorkshire Light Infantry .
On July 3rd he found near Leeuw Kop a considerable force of Boers with three guns opposed to him , Clements being at that time too far off upon the flank to assist him .
Four guns of the 38th R.F.A .
( Major Oldfield ) and two belonging to the City Volunteers came into action .
The Royal Artillery guns appear to have been exposed to a very severe fire , and the losses were so heavy that for a time they could not be served .
The escort was inadequate , insufficiently advanced , and badly handled , for the Boer riflemen were able , by creeping up a donga , to get right into the 38th battery , and the gallant major , with Lieutenant Belcher , was killed in the defence of the guns .
Captain FitzGerald , the only other officer present , was wounded in two places , and twenty men were struck down , with nearly all the horses of one section .
Captain Marks , who was brigade-major of Colonel Brookfield 's Yeomanry , with the help of Lieutenant Keevil Davis and the 15th I.Y .
came to the rescue of the disorganised and almost annihilated section .
At the same time the C.I.V .
guns were in imminent danger , but were energetically covered by Captain Budworth , adjutant of the battery .
Soon , however , the infantry , Munster Fusiliers , and Yorkshire Light Infantry , which had been carrying out a turning movement , came into action , and the position was taken .
The force moved onwards , and on July 6th they were in front of Bethlehem .
On July 30th the motley army which had held the British off so long emerged from among the mountains .
But it soon became evident that in speaking for all Prinsloo had gone beyond his powers .
Discipline was low and individualism high in the Boer army .
Every man might repudiate the decision of his commandant , as every man might repudiate the white flag of his comrade .
On the first day no more than eleven hundred men of the Ficksburg and Ladybrand commandos , with fifteen hundred horses and two guns , were surrendered .
Next day seven hundred and fifty more men came in with eight hundred horses , and by August 6th the total of the prisoners had mounted to four thousand one hundred and fifty with three guns , two of which were our own .
But Olivier , with fifteen hundred men and several guns , broke away from the captured force and escaped through the hills .
Of this incident General Hunter , an honourable soldier , remarks in his official report : 'I regard it as a dishonourable breach of faith upon the part of General Olivier , for which I hold him personally responsible .
He admitted that he knew that General Prinsloo had included him in the unconditional surrender . '
It is strange that , on Olivier 's capture shortly afterwards , he was not court-martialled for this breach of the rules of war , but that good-natured giant , the Empire , is quick -- too quick , perhaps -- to let byegones be byegones .
On August 4th Harrismith surrendered to Macdonald , and thus was secured the opening of the Van Reenen 's Pass and the end of the Natal system of railways .
This was of the very first importance , as the utmost difficulty had been found in supplying so large a body of troops so far from the Cape base .
In a day the base was shifted to Durban , and the distance shortened by two-thirds , while the army came to be on the railway instead of a hundred miles from it .
This great success assured Lord Roberts 's communications from serious attack , and was of the utmost importance in enabling him to consolidate his position at Pretoria .
Lord Roberts had now been six weeks in the capital , and British troops had overrun the greater part of the south and west of the Transvaal , but in spite of this there was continued Boer resistance , which flared suddenly up in places which had been nominally pacified and disarmed .
It was found , as has often been shown in history , that it is easier to defeat a republican army than to conquer it .
From Klerksdorp , from Ventersdorp , from Rustenburg , came news of risings against the newly imposed British authority .
The concealed Mauser and the bandolier were dug up once more from the trampled corner of the cattle kraal , and the farmer was a warrior once again .
Vague news of the exploits of De Wet stimulated the fighting burghers and shamed those who had submitted .
A letter was intercepted from the guerilla chief to Cronje 's son , who had surrendered near Rustenburg .
De Wet stated that he had gained two great victories and had fifteen hundred captured rifles with which to replace those which the burghers had given up .
Not only were the outlying districts in a state of revolt , but even round Pretoria the Boers were inclined to take the offensive , while both that town and Johannesburg were filled with malcontents who were ready to fly to their arms once more .
On August 7th Ian Hamilton abandoned Rustenburg , taking Baden-Powell and his men with him .
It was obviously unwise to scatter the British forces too widely by attempting to garrison every single town .
For the instant the whole interest of the war centred upon De Wet and his dash into the Transvaal .
One or two minor events , however , which can not be fitted into any continuous narrative may be here introduced .
On July 21st the Boers made a determined attack upon the railhead at a point thirteen miles east of Heidelberg , where over a hundred Royal Engineers were engaged upon a bridge .
They were protected by three hundred Dublin Fusiliers under Major English .
For some hours the little party was hard pressed by the burghers , who had two field-pieces and a pom-pom .
They could make no impression , however , upon the steady Irish infantry , and after some hours the arrival of General Hart with reinforcements scattered the assailants , who succeeded in getting their guns away in safety .
De Wet trekked onwards during the night of the 9th , shedding wagons and stores as he went .
He was able to replace some of his exhausted beasts from the farmhouses which he passed .
Methuen on the morning of the 10th struck away to the west , sending messages back to Broadwood and Kitchener in the rear that they should bear to the east , and so nurse the Boer column between them .
At the same time he sent on a messenger , who unfortunately never arrived , to warn Smith-Dorrien at Bank Station to throw himself across De Wet 's path .
On the 11th it was realised that De Wet had succeeded , in spite of great exertions upon the part of Smith-Dorrien 's infantry , in crossing the railway line , and that he had left all his pursuers to the south of him .
But across his front lay the Magaliesberg range .
There are only three passes , the Magato Pass , Olifant 's Nek , and Commando Nek .
It was understood that all three were held by British troops .
It was obvious , therefore , that if Methuen could advance in such a way as to cut De Wet off from slipping through to the west he would be unable to get away .
Broadwood and Kitchener would be behind him , and Pretoria , with the main British army , to the east .
On the 12th Methuen 's van again overtook De Wet 's rear , and the old game of rearguard riflemen on one side , and a pushing artillery on the other , was once more resumed .
All day the Boers streamed over the veld with the guns and the horsemen at their heels .
A shot from the 78th battery struck one of De Wet 's guns , which was abandoned and captured .
Many stores were taken and much more , with the wagons which contained them , burned by the Boers .
Fighting incessantly , both armies traversed thirty-five miles of ground that day .
It was fully understood that Olifant 's Nek was held by the British , so Methuen felt that if he could block the Magato Pass all would be well .
He therefore left De Wet 's direct track , knowing that other British forces were behind him , and he continued his swift advance until he had reached the desired position .
It really appeared that at last the elusive raider was in a corner .
But , alas for fallen hopes , and alas for the wasted efforts of gallant men !
Olifant 's Nek had been abandoned and De Wet had passed safely through it into the plains beyond , where De la Rey 's force was still in possession .
In vain Methuen 's weary column forced the Magato Pass and descended into Rustenburg .
The enemy was in a safe country once more .
Whose the fault , or whether there was a fault at all , it is for the future to determine .
At least unalloyed praise can be given to the Boer leader for the admirable way in which he had extricated himself from so many dangers .
, moving along the northern side of the mountains , he appeared at Commando Nek on the Little Crocodile River , where he summoned Baden-Powell to surrender , and received some chaff in reply from that light-hearted commander .
Then , swinging to the eastward , he endeavoured to cross to the north of Pretoria .
On the 19th he was heard of at Hebron .
Baden-Powell and Paget had , however , already barred this path , and De Wet , having sent Steyn on with a small escort , turned back to the Free State .
On the 22nd it was reported that , with only a handful of his followers , he had crossed the Magaliesberg range by a bridlepath and was riding southwards .
Lord Roberts was at last free to turn his undivided attention upon Botha .
On August 8th Buller 's troops advanced to the north-east from Paardekop , pushing a weak Boer force with five guns in front of them .
At the cost of twenty-five wounded , principally of the 60th Rifles , the enemy was cleared off , and the town of Amersfoort was occupied .
On the 13th , moving on the same line , and meeting with very slight opposition , Buller took possession of Ermelo .
His advance was having a good effect upon the district , for on the 12th the Standerton commando , which numbered 182 men , surrendered to Clery .
On the 15th , still skirmishing , Buller 's men were at Twyfelaar , and had taken possession of Carolina .
Here and there a distant horseman riding over the olive-coloured hills showed how closely and incessantly he was watched ; but , save for a little sniping upon his flanks , there was no fighting .
He was coming now within touch of French 's cavalry , operating from Middelburg , and on the 14th heliographic communication was established with Gordon 's Brigade .
On the first day the movement upon Buller 's part consisted in a very deliberate reconnaissance of and closing in upon the enemy 's position , his troops bivouacking upon the ground which they had won .
On the second , finding that all further progress was barred by the strong ridge of Bergendal , he prepared his attack carefully with artillery and then let loose his infantry upon it .
It was a gallant feat of arms upon either side .
The Boer position was held by a detachment of the Johannesburg Police , who may have been bullies in peace , but were certainly heroes in war .
The fire of sixty guns was concentrated for a couple of hours upon a position only a few hundred yards in diameter .
In this infernal fire , which left the rocks yellow with lyddite , the survivors still waited grimly for the advance of the infantry .
No finer defence was made in the war .
The attack was carried out across an open glacis by the 2nd Rifle Brigade and by the Inniskilling Fusiliers , the men of Pieter 's Hill .
Through a deadly fire the gallant infantry swept over the position , though Metcalfe , the brave colonel of the Rifles , with eight other officers , and seventy men were killed or wounded .
Lysley , Steward , and Campbell were all killed in leading their companies , but they could not have met their deaths upon an occasion more honourable to their battalion .
Great credit must also be given to A and B companies of the Inniskilling Fusiliers , who were actually the first over the Boer position .
The cessation of the artillery fire was admirably timed .
It was sustained up to the last possible instant .
'As it was , ' said the captain of the leading company , 'a 94-pound shell burst about thirty yards in front of the right of our lot .
The smell of the lyddite was awful . '
A pom-pom and twenty prisoners , including the commander of the police , were the trophies of the day .
An outwork of the Boer position had been carried , and the rumour of defeat and disaster had already spread through their ranks .
Braver men than the burghers have never lived , but they had reached the limits of human endurance , and a long experience of defeat in the field had weakened their nerve and lessened their morale .
They were no longer men of the same fibre as those who had crept up to the trenches of Spion Kop , or faced the lean warriors of Ladysmith on that grim January morning at Caesar 's Camp .
Dutch tenacity would not allow them to surrender , and yet they realised how hopeless was the fight in which they were engaged .
Nearly fifteen thousand of their best men were prisoners , ten thousand at the least had returned to their farms and taken the oath .
Another ten had been killed , wounded , or incapacitated .
Most of the European mercenaries had left ; they held only the ultimate corner of their own country , they had lost their grip upon the railway line , and their supply of stores and of ammunition was dwindling .
To such a pass had eleven months of war reduced that formidable army who had so confidently advanced to the conquest of South Africa .
At dawn on September 22nd a half-hearted attempt was made by the commando of Erasmus to attack Elands River Station , but it was beaten back by the garrison .
While it was going on Paget fell upon the camp which Erasmus had left behind him , and captured his stores .
From all over the country , from Plumer 's Bushmen , from Barton at Krugersdorp , from the Colonials at Heilbron , from Clements on the west , came the same reports of dwindling resistance and of the abandoning of cattle , arms , and ammunition .
One find of the utmost importance was made at Komatipoort , and at Hector Spruit on the Crocodile River .
That excellent artillery which had fought so gallant a fight against our own more numerous guns , was found destroyed and abandoned .
Pole-Carew at Komatipoort got one Long Tom ( 96-pound ) Creusot , and one smaller gun .
Ian Hamilton at Hector Spruit found the remains of many guns , which included two of our horse artillery twelve-pounders , two large Creusot guns , two Krupps , one Vickers-Maxim quick firer , two pompoms and four mountain guns .
THE CAMPAIGN OF DE WET .
One other change had come over the war , which caused more distress and searchings of conscience among some of the people of Great Britain than the darkest hours of their misfortunes .
This lay in the increased bitterness of the struggle , and in those more strenuous measures which the British commanders felt themselves entitled and compelled to adopt .
Nothing could exceed the lenity of Lord Roberts 's early proclamations in the Free State .
But , as the months went on and the struggle still continued , the war assumed a harsher aspect .
Every farmhouse represented a possible fort , and a probable depot for the enemy .
The extreme measure of burning them down was only carried out after a definite offence , such as affording cover for snipers , or as a deterrent to railway wreckers , but in either case it is evident that the women or children who were usually the sole occupants of the farm could not by their own unaided exertions prevent the line from being cut or the riflemen from firing .
It is even probable that the Boers may have committed these deeds in the vicinity of houses the destruction of which they would least regret .
Thus , on humanitarian grounds there were strong arguments against this policy of destruction being pushed too far , and the political reasons were even stronger , since a homeless man is necessarily the last man to settle down , and a burned-out family the last to become contented British citizens .
On the other hand , the impatience of the army towards what they regarded as the abuses of lenity was very great , and they argued that the war would be endless if the women in the farm were allowed always to supply the sniper on the kopje .
The irregular and brigand-like fashion in which the struggle was carried out had exasperated the soldiers , and though there were few cases of individual outrage or unauthorised destruction , the general orders were applied with some harshness , and repressive measures were taken which warfare may justify but which civilisation must deplore .
On receiving this severe blow De Wet promptly raised the investment and hastened to regain his favourite haunts .
Considerable reinforcements had reached Barton upon the same day , including the Dublins , the Essex , Strathcona 's Horse , and the Elswick Battery , with some very welcome supplies of ammunition .
As Barton had now more than a thousand mounted men of most excellent quality it is difficult to imagine why he did not pursue his defeated enemy .
He seems to have underrated the effect which he had produced , for instead of instantly assuming the offensive he busied himself in strengthening his defences .
Yet the British losses in the whole operations had not exceeded one hundred , so that there does not appear to have been any reason why the force should be crippled .
As Barton was in direct and constant telegraphic communication with Pretoria , it is possible that he was acting under superior orders in the course which he adopted .
In defiance of chronology it may perhaps make a clearer narrative if I continue at once with the movements of De Wet from the time that he lost his guns at Bothaville , and then come back to the consideration of the campaign in the Transvaal , and to a short account of those scattered and disconnected actions which break the continuity of the story .
Before following De Wet , however , it is necessary to say something of the general state of the Orange River Colony and of some military developments which had occurred there .
Under the wise and conciliatory rule of General Pretyman the farmers in the south and west were settling down , and for the time it looked as if a large district was finally pacified .
The mild taxation was cheerfully paid , schools were reopened , and a peace party made itself apparent , with Fraser and Piet de Wet , the brother of Christian , among its strongest advocates .
The attack developed at that end of the ridge which was held by the company of Highlanders .
Every night the Boer riflemen drew in closer , and every morning found the position more desperate .
On the 20th the water supply of the garrison was cut , though a little was still brought up by volunteers during the night .
The thirst in the sultry trenches was terrible , but the garrison still , with black lips and parched tongues , held on to their lines .
On the 22nd the attack had made such progress that the post had by the Highlanders became untenable , and had to be withdrawn .
It was occupied next morning by the Boers , and the whole ridge was at their mercy .
Out of eighteen men who served one of the British guns sixteen were killed or wounded , and the last rounds were fired by the sergeant-farrier , who carried , loaded , and fired all by himself .
All day the soldiers held out , but the thirst was in itself enough to justify if not to compel a surrender .
At half-past five the garrison laid down their arms , having lost about sixty killed or wounded .
There does not , as far as one can learn , seem to have been any attempt to injure the two guns which fell into the hands of the enemy .
De Wet himself was one of the first to ride into the British trenches , and the prisoners gazed with interest at the short strong figure , with the dark tail coat and the square-topped bowler hat , of the most famous of the Boer leaders .
De Wet 's plan for the invasion of the Colony was not yet destined to be realised , for a tenacious man had set himself to frustrate it .
Several small but mobile British columns , those of Pilcher , of Barker , and of Herbert , under the supreme direction of Charles Knox , were working desperately to head him off .
In torrents of rain which turned every spruit into a river and every road into a quagmire , the British horsemen stuck manfully to their work .
De Wet had hurried south , crossed the Caledon River , and made for Odendaal 's Drift .
But Knox , after the skirmish at Vaalbank , had trekked swiftly south to Bethulie , and was now ready with three mobile columns and a network of scouts and patrols to strike in any direction .
For a few days he had lost touch , but his arrangements were such that he must recover it if the Boers either crossed the railroad or approached the river .
On December 2nd he had authentic information that De Wet was crossing the Caledon , and in an instant the British columns were all off at full cry once more , sweeping over the country with a front of fifteen miles .
On the 3rd and 4th , in spite of frightful weather , the two little armies of horsemen struggled on , fetlock-deep in mud , with the rain lashing their faces .
At night without cover , drenched and bitterly cold , the troopers threw themselves down on the sodden veld to snatch a few hours ' sleep before renewing the interminable pursuit .
The drift over the Caledon flowed deep and strong , but the Boer had passed and the Briton must pass also .
Thirty guns took to the water , diving completely under the coffee-coloured surface , to reappear glistening upon the southern bank .
Everywhere there were signs of the passage of the enemy .
A litter of crippled or dying horses marked their track , and a Krupp gun was found abandoned by the drift .
The Dewetsdorp prisoners , too , had been set loose , and began to stumble and stagger back to their countrymen , their boots worn off , and their putties wrapped round their bleeding feet .
It is painful to add that they had been treated with a personal violence and a brutality in marked contrast to the elaborate hospitality shown by the British Government to its involuntary guests .
As already stated , the camp of Clements lay under a precipitous cliff , upon the summit of which he had placed four companies of the 2nd Northumberland Fusiliers .
This strong post was a thousand feet higher than the camp .
Below lay the main body of the force , two more companies of fusiliers , four of Yorkshire Light Infantry , the 2nd Mounted Infantry , Kitchener 's Horse , yeomanry , and the artillery .
The latter consisted of one heavy naval gun , four guns of the 8th R.F.A.
, and P battery R.H.A .
The whole force amounted to about fifteen hundred men .
Another incident calling for some mention was the determined attack made by the Boers upon the town of Vryheid , in the extreme south-east of the Transvaal near the Natal border .
Throughout November this district had been much disturbed , and the small British garrison had evacuated the town and taken up a position on the adjacent hills .
Upon December 11th the Boers attempted to carry the trenches .
The garrison of the town appears to have consisted of the 2nd Royal Lancaster regiment , some five hundred strong , a party of the Lancashire Fusiliers , 150 strong , and fifty men of the Royal Garrison Artillery , with a small body of mounted infantry .
They held a hill about half a mile north of the town , and commanding it .
The attack , which was a surprise in the middle of the night , broke upon the pickets of the British , who held their own in a way which may have been injudicious but was certainly heroic .
Instead of falling back when seriously attacked , the young officers in charge of these outposts refused to move , and were speedily under such a fire that it was impossible to reinforce them .
There were four outposts , under Woodgate , Theobald , Lippert , and Mangles .
The attack at 2.15 on a cold dark morning began at the post held by Woodgate , the Boers coming hand-to-hand before they were detected .
Woodgate , who was unarmed at the instant , seized a hammer , and rushed at the nearest Boer , but was struck by two bullets and killed .
His post was dispersed or taken .
Theobald and Lippert , warned by the firing , held on behind their sangars , and were ready for the storm which burst over them .
Lippert was unhappily killed , and his ten men all hit or taken , but young Theobald held his own under a heavy fire for twelve hours .
Mangles also , the gallant son of a gallant father , held his post all day with the utmost tenacity .
The troops in the trenches behind were never seriously pressed , thanks to the desperate resistance of the outposts , but Colonel Gawne of the Lancasters was unfortunately killed .
Towards evening the Boers abandoned the attack , leaving fourteen of their number dead upon the ground , from which it may be guessed that their total casualties were not less than a hundred .
The British losses were three officers and five men killed , twenty-two men wounded , and thirty men with one officer missing -- the latter being the survivors of those outposts which were overwhelmed by the Boer advance .
( DECEMBER 1900 TO APRIL 1901 . )
The second column was commanded by Kritzinger , a burgher of Zastron , in the Orange River Colony .
His force was about 800 strong .
Crossing the border at Rhenoster Hoek upon December 16th , they pushed for Burghersdorp , but were headed off by a British column .
Passing through Venterstad , they made for Steynsberg , fighting two indecisive skirmishes with small British forces .
The end of the year saw them crossing the rail road at Sherburne , north of Rosmead Junction , where they captured a train as they passed , containing some Colonial troops .
At this time they were a hundred miles inside the Colony , and nearly three hundred from Hertzog 's western column .
The British were now sweeping north on a very extended front .
Colenbrander had occupied Van Rhyns Dorp , to the east of Calvinia , while Bethune 's force was operating to the west of it .
De Lisle hardly halted at Calvinia , but pushed onwards to Williston , covering seventy-two miles of broken country in forty-eight hours , one of the most amazing performances of the war .
Quick as he was , the Boers were quicker still , and during his northward march he does not appear to have actually come into contact with them .
Their line of retreat lay through Carnarvon , and upon February 22nd they crossed the railway line to the north of De Aar , and joined upon February 26th the new invading force under De Wet , who had now crossed the Orange River .
De Lisle , who had passed over five hundred miles of barren country since he advanced from Piquetburg , made for the railway at Victoria West , and was despatched from that place on February 22nd to the scene of action in the north .
From all parts Boer and Briton were concentrating in their effort to aid or to repel the inroad of the famous guerilla .
When last mentioned Kritzinger 's men had crossed the railway north of Rosmead on December 30th , and held up a train containing some Colonial troops .
From then onwards a part of them remained in the Middelburg and Graaf-Reinet districts , while part moved towards the south .
On January 11th there was a sharp skirmish near Murraysburg , in which Byng 's column was engaged , at the cost of twenty casualties , all of Brabant 's or the South African Light Horse .
On the 16th a very rapid movement towards the south began .
On that date Boers appeared at Aberdeen , and on the 18th at Willowmore , having covered seventy miles in two days .
Their long , thin line was shredded out over 150 miles , and from Maraisburg , in the north , to Uniondale , which is only thirty miles from the coast , there was rumour of their presence .
In this wild district and in that of Oudtshoorn the Boer vanguard flitted in and out of the hills , Haig's column striving hard to bring them to an action .
So well-informed were the invaders that they were always able to avoid the British concentrations , while if a British outpost or patrol was left exposed it was fortunate if it escaped disaster .
On February 6th a small body of twenty-five of the 7th King 's Dragoon Guards and of the West Australians , under Captain Oliver , were overwhelmed at Klipplaat , after a very fine defence , in which they held their own against 200 Boers for eight hours , and lost nearly fifty per cent of their number .
On the 12th a patrol of yeomanry was surprised and taken near Willowmore .
We last saw De Wet when , after a long chase , he had been headed back from the Orange River , and , winning clear from Knox 's pursuit , had in the third week of December passed successfully through the British cordon between Thabanchu and Ladybrand .
Thence he made his way to Senekal , and proceeded , in spite of the shaking which he had had , to recruit and recuperate in the amazing way which a Boer army has .
There is no force so easy to drive and so difficult to destroy .
The British columns still kept in touch with De Wet , but found it impossible to bring him to an action in the difficult district to which he had withdrawn .
His force had split up into numerous smaller bodies , capable of reuniting at a signal from their leader .
These scattered bodies , mobile as ever , vanished if seriously attacked , while keenly on the alert to pounce upon any British force which might be overpowered before assistance could arrive .
Such an opportunity came to the commando led by Philip Botha , and the result was another petty reverse to the British arms .
The early days of January 1901 were not fortunate for the British arms , as the check in which Kitchener 's Bodyguard was so roughly handled , near Lindley , was closely followed by a brisk action at Naauwpoort or Zandfontein , near the Magaliesberg , in which De la Rey left his mark upon the Imperial Light Horse .
The Boer commandos , having been driven into the mountains by French and Clements in the latter part of December , were still on the look-out to strike a blow at any British force which might expose itself .
Several mounted columns had been formed to scour the country , one under Kekewich , one under Gordon , and one under Babington .
The two latter , meeting in a mist upon the morning of January 5th , actually turned their rifles upon each other , but fortunately without any casualties resulting .
A more deadly rencontre was , however , awaiting them .
The attack broke first upon Monument Hill , a post held by Captain Fosbery with eighty-three Royal Irish .
Chance or treason guided the Boers to the weak point of the wire entanglement and they surged into the fort , where the garrison fought desperately to hold its own .
There was thick mist and driving rain ; and the rush of vague and shadowy figures amid the gloom was the first warning of the onslaught .
The Irishmen were overborne by a swarm of assailants , but they nobly upheld their traditional reputation .
Fosbery met his death like a gallant gentleman , but not more heroically than Barry , the humble private , who , surrounded by Boers , thought neither of himself nor of them , but smashed at the maxim gun with a pickaxe until he fell riddled with bullets .
Half the garrison were on the ground before the post was carried .
A second post upon the other side of the town was defended by Lieutenant Marshall with twenty men , mostly Shropshires .
For an hour they held out until Marshall and nine out of his twelve Shropshires had been hit .
Then this post also was carried .
On January 22nd General Cunninghame left Oliphant 's Nek with a small force consisting of the Border and Worcester Regiments , the 6th Mounted Infantry , Kitchener 's Horse , 7th Imperial Yeomanry , 8th R.F.A.
, and P battery R.H.A .
It had instructions to move south upon the enemy known to be gathering there .
By midday this force was warmly engaged , and found itself surrounded by considerable bodies of De la Rey 's burghers .
That night they camped at Middelfontein , and were strongly attacked in the early morning .
So menacing was the Boer attitude , and so formidable the position , that the force was in some danger .
Fortunately they were in heliographic communication with Oliphant 's Nek , and learned upon the 23rd that Babington had been ordered to their relief .
All day Cunninghame 's men were under a long-range fire , but on the 24th Babington appeared , and the British force was successfully extricated , having seventy-five casualties .
This action of Middelfontein is interesting as having been begun in Queen Victoria 's reign , and ended in that of Edward VII .
This allusion to the peace movement among the burghers may serve as an introduction to the attempt made by Lord Kitchener , at the end of February 1901 , to bring the war to a close by negotiation .
Throughout its course the fortitude of Great Britain and of the Empire had never for an instant weakened , but her conscience had always been sensitive at the sight of the ruin which had befallen so large a portion of South Africa , and any settlement would have been eagerly hailed which would insure that the work done had not been wasted , and would not need to be done again .
A peace on any other terms would simply shift upon the shoulders of our descendants those burdens which we were not manly enough to bear ourselves .
There had arisen , as has been said , a considerable peace movement among the burghers of the refugee camps and also among the prisoners of war .
It was hoped that some reflection of this might be found among the leaders of the people .
To find out if this were so Lord Kitchener , at the end of February , sent a verbal message to Louis Botha , and on the 27th of that month the Boer general rode with an escort of Hussars into Middelburg .
'Sunburned , with a pleasant , fattish face of a German type , and wearing an imperial , ' says one who rode beside him .
Judging from the sounds of mirth heard by those without , the two leaders seem to have soon got upon amiable terms , and there was hope that a definite settlement might spring from their interview .
From the beginning Lord Kitchener explained that the continued independence of the two republics was an impossibility .
But on every other point the British Government was prepared to go great lengths in order to satisfy and conciliate the burghers .
Long before his reinforcements had come to hand , while his Yeomanry was still gathering in long queues upon the London pavement to wait their turn at the recruiting office , Lord Kitchener had dealt the enemy several shrewd blows which materially weakened their resources in men and material .
The chief of these was the great drive down the Eastern Transvaal undertaken by seven columns under the command of French .
Before considering this , however , a few words must be devoted to the doings of Methuen in the south-west .
This hard-working General , having garrisoned Zeerust and Lichtenburg , had left his old district and journeyed with a force which consisted largely of Bushmen and Yeomanry to the disturbed parts of Bechuanaland which had been invaded by De Villiers .
Here he cleared the country as far as Vryburg , which he had reached in the middle of January , working round to Kuruman and thence to Taungs .
From Taungs his force crossed the Transvaal border and made for Klerksdorp , working through an area which had never been traversed and which contained the difficult Masakani hills .
He left Taungs upon February 2nd , fighting skirmishes at Uitval's Kop , Paardefontein and Lilliefontein , in each of which the enemy was brushed aside .
Passing through Wolmaranstad , Methuen turned to the north , where at Haartebeestefontein , on February 19th , he fought a brisk engagement with a considerable force of Boers under De Villiers and Liebenberg .
On the day before the fight he successfully outwitted the Boers , for , learning that they had left their laager in order to take up a position for battle , he pounced upon the laager and captured 10,000 head of cattle , forty-three wagons , and forty prisoners .
Stimulated by this success , he attacked the Boers next day , and after five hours of hard fighting forced the pass which they were holding against him .
As Methuen had but 1500 men , and was attacking a force which was as large as his own in a formidable position , the success was a very creditable one .
The Yeomanry all did well , especially the 5th and 10th battalions .
So also did the Australians and the Loyal North Lancashires .
The British casualties amounted to sixteen killed and thirty-four wounded , while the Boers left eighteen of their dead upon the position which they had abandoned .
Lord Methuen 's little force returned to Klerksdorp , having deserved right well of their country .
From Klerksdorp Methuen struck back westwards to the south of his former route , and on March 14th he was reported at Warrenton .
Here also in April came Erroll 's small column , bringing with it the garrison and inhabitants of Hoopstad , a post which it had been determined , in accordance with Lord Kitchener's policy of centralisation , to abandon .
Their concentration had not escaped the notice of the British military authorities , who welcomed any movement which might bring to a focus that resistance which had been so nebulous and elusive .
Lord Kitchener having once seen the enemy fairly gathered into this huge cover , undertook the difficult task of driving it from end to end .
For this enterprise General French was given the chief command , and had under his orders no fewer than seven columns , which started from different points of the Delagoa and of the Natal railway lines , keeping in touch with each other and all trending south and east .
A glance at the map would show , however , that it was a very large field for seven guns , and that it would need all their alertness to prevent the driven game from breaking back .
Three columns started from the Delagoa line , namely , Smith-Dorrien 's from Wonderfontein ( the most easterly ) , Campbell 's from Middelburg , and Alderson 's from Eerstefabrieken , close to Pretoria .
Four columns came from the western railway line : General Knox 's from Kaalfontein , Major Allenby 's from Zuurfontein ( both stations between Pretoria and Johannesburg ) , General Dartnell 's from Springs , close to Johannesburg , and finally General Colville ( not to be confused with Colvile ) from Greylingstad in the south .
The whole movement resembled a huge drag net , of which Wonderfontein and Greylingstad formed the ends , exactly one hundred miles apart .
On January 27th the net began to be drawn .
Some thousands of Boers with a considerable number of guns were known to be within the enclosure , and it was hoped that even if their own extreme mobility enabled them to escape it would be impossible for them to save their transport and their cannon .
Each of the British columns was about 2000 strong , making a total of 14,000 men with about fifty guns engaged in the operations .
A front of not less than ten miles was to be maintained by each force .
The first decided move was on the part of the extreme left wing , Smith-Dorrien's column , which moved south on Carolina , and thence on Bothwell near Lake Chrissie .
The arduous duty of passing supplies down from the line fell mainly upon him , and his force was in consequence larger than the others , consisting of 8500 men with thirteen guns .
On the arrival of Smith-Dorrien at Carolina the other columns started , their centre of advance being Ermelo .
Over seventy miles of veld the gleam of the helio by day and the flash of the signal lamps at night marked the steady flow of the British tide .
Here and there the columns came in touch with the enemy and swept him before them .
French had a skirmish at Wilge River at the end of January , and Campbell another south of Middelburg , in which he had twenty casualties .
On February 4th Smith-Dorrien was at Lake Chrissie ; French had passed through Bethel and the enemy was retiring on Amsterdam .
The hundred-mile ends of the drag net were already contracted to a third of that distance , and the game was still known to be within it .
On the 5th Ermelo was occupied , and the fresh deep ruts upon the veld told the British horsemen of the huge Boer convoy that was ahead of them .
For days enormous herds , endless flocks , and lines of wagons which stretched from horizon to horizon had been trekking eastward .
Cavalry and mounted infantry were all hot upon the scent .
All over the country small British columns had been operating during these months -- operations which were destined to increase in scope and energy as the cold weather drew in .
The weekly tale of prisoners and captures , though small for any one column , gave the aggregate result of a considerable victory .
In these scattered and obscure actions there was much good work which can have no reward save the knowledge of duty done .
Among many successful raids and skirmishes may be mentioned two by Colonel Park from Lydenburg , which resulted between them in the capture of nearly 100 of the enemy , including Abel Erasmus of sinister reputation .
Nor would any summary of these events be complete without a reference to the very gallant defence of Mahlabatini in Zululand , which was successfully held by a handful of police and civilians against an irruption of the Boers .
With the advent of winter and of reinforcements the British operations became very energetic in every part of the country , and some account of them will now be added .
The African winter extends roughly from April to September , and as the grass during that period would be withered on the veld , the mobility of the Boer commandos must be very much impaired .
It was recognised therefore that if the British would avoid another year of war it could only be done by making good use of the months which lay before them .
For this reason Lord Kitchener had called for the considerable reinforcements which have been already mentioned , but on the other hand he was forced to lose many thousands of his veteran Yeomanry , Australians , and Canadians , whose term of service was at an end .
The volunteer companies of the infantry returned also to England , and so did nine militia battalions , whose place was taken however by an equal number of new-comers .
On April 13th the southern columns were started , but already the British preparations had alarmed the Boers , and Botha , with his main commandos , had slipped south across the line into that very district from which he had been so recently driven .
Viljoen 's commando still remained to the north , and the British troops , pouring in from every side , converged rapidly upon it .
The success of the operations was considerable , though not complete .
The Tantesberg , which had been the rallying-point of the Boers , was occupied , and Roos-Senekal , their latest capital , was taken , with their State papers and treasure .
Viljoen , with a number of followers , slipped through between the columns , but the greater part of the burghers , dashing furiously about like a shoal of fish when they become conscious of the net , were taken by one or other of the columns .
A hundred of the Boksburg commando surrendered en masse , fifty more were taken at Roos-Senekal ; forty-one of the formidable Zarps with Schroeder , their leader , were captured in the north by the gallantry and wit of a young Australian officer named Reid ; sixty more were hunted down by the indefatigable Vialls , leader of the Bushmen .
From all parts of the district came the same story of captures and surrenders .
There had been some sniping during the whole morning , but no indications of the determined attack which was about to be delivered .
The force in retiring upon the camp had become divided , and the rearguard consisted of the small column under Major Chance which had originally formed the left wing .
A veld fire was raging on one flank of this rearguard , and through the veil of smoke a body of five hundred Boers charged suddenly home with magnificent gallantry upon the guns .
We have few records of a more dashing or of a more successful action in the whole course of the war .
So rapid was it that hardly any time elapsed between the glimpse of the first dark figures galloping through the haze and the thunder of their hoofs as they dashed in among the gunners .
The Yeomanry were driven back and many of them shot down .
The charge of the mounted Boers was supported by a very heavy fire from a covering party , and the gun-detachments were killed or wounded almost to a man .
The lieutenant in charge and the sergeant were both upon the ground .
So far as it is possible to reconstruct the action from the confused accounts of excited eye-witnesses and from the exceedingly obscure official report of General Dixon , there was no longer any resistance round the guns , which were at once turned by their captors upon the nearest British detachment .
In May , Sir Bindon Blood , having returned to the line to refit , made yet another cast through that thrice-harried belt of country which contains Ermelo , Bethel , and Carolina , in which Botha , Viljoen , and the fighting Boers had now concentrated .
Working over the blackened veld he swung round in the Barberton direction , and afterwards made a westerly drive in conjunction with small columns commanded by Walter Kitchener , Douglas , and Campbell of the Rifles , while Colville , Garnett , and Bullock co-operated from the Natal line .
Again the results were disappointing when compared with the power of the instrument employed .
On July 5th he reached Springs , near Johannesburg , with a considerable amount of stock , but with no great number of prisoners .
The elusive Botha had slipped away to the south and was reported upon the Zululand border , while Viljoen had succeeded in crossing the Delagoa line and winning back to his old lair in the district north of Middelburg , from which he had been evicted in April .
The commandos were like those pertinacious flies which buzz upwards when a hand approaches them , but only to settle again in the same place .
One could but try to make the place less attractive than before .
It might at first sight seem the simplest of military operations to hunt down these scattered and insignificant bands ; but as a matter of fact nothing could be more difficult .
Operating in a country which was both vast and difficult , with excellent horses , the best of information and supplies ready for them everywhere , it was impossible for the slow-moving British columns with their guns and their wagons to overtake them .
Formidable even in flight , the Boers were always ready to turn upon any force which exposed itself too rashly to retaliation , and so amid the mountain passes the British chiefs had to use an amount of caution which was incompatible with extreme speed .
Only when a commando was exactly localised so that two or three converging British forces could be brought to bear upon it , was there a reasonable chance of forcing a fight .
Still , with all these heavy odds against them , the various little columns continued month after month to play hide-and-seek with the commandos , and the game was by no means always on the one side .
The varied fortunes of this scrambling campaign can only be briefly indicated in these pages .
On June 8th the supreme command of the operations in Cape Colony was undertaken by General French , who from this time forward manoeuvred his numerous columns upon a connected plan with the main idea of pushing the enemy northwards .
It was some time , however , before his disposition bore fruit , for the commandos were still better mounted and lighter than their pursuers .
On June 13th the youthful and dashing Scheepers , who commanded his own little force at an age when he would have been a junior lieutenant of the British army , raided Murraysburg and captured a patrol .
On June 17th Monro with Lovat 's Scouts and Bethune 's Mounted Infantry had some slight success near Tarkastad , but three days later the ill-fated Midland Mounted Rifles were surprised in the early morning by Kritzinger at Waterkloof , which is thirty miles west of Cradock , and were badly mauled by him .
They lost ten killed , eleven wounded , and sixty-six prisoners in this unfortunate affair .
Again the myth that colonial alertness is greater than that of regular troops seems to have been exposed .
In the north-east , Myburgh , Wessels , and the truculent Fouche were allowed almost a free hand for some months , while the roving bands were rounded up in the midlands and driven along until they were west of the main railroad .
Here , in the Calvinia district , several commandos united in October 1901 under Maritz , Louw , Smit , and Theron .
Their united bands rode down into the rich grain-growing country round Piquetberg and Malmesbury , pushing south until it seemed as if their academic supporters at Paarl were actually to have a sight of the rebellion which they had fanned to a flame .
At one period their patrols were within forty miles of Cape Town .
The movement was checked , however , by a small force of Lancers and district troops , and towards the end of October , Maritz , who was chief in this quarter , turned northwards , and on the 29th captured a small British convoy which crossed his line of march .
Early in November he doubled back and attacked Piquetberg , but was beaten off with some loss .
From that time a steady pressure from the south and east drove these bands farther and farther into the great barren lands of the west , until , in the following April , they had got as far as Namaqualand , many hundred miles away .
The young Boer leader , Scheepers , had long been a thorn in the side of the British .
He had infested the southern districts for some months , and he had distinguished himself both by the activity of his movements and by the ruthless vigour of some of his actions .
Early in October a serious illness and consequent confinement to his bed brought him at last within the range of British mobility .
On his recovery he was tried for repeated breaches of the laws of war , including the murder of several natives .
He was condemned to death , and was executed in December .
Much sympathy was excited by his gallantry and his youth -- he was only twenty-three .
On the other hand , our word was pledged to protect the natives , and if he whose hand had been so heavy upon them escaped , all confidence would have been lost in our promises and our justice .
That British vengeance was not indiscriminate was shown soon afterwards in the case of a more important commander , Kritzinger , who was the chief leader of the Boers within Cape Colony .
Kritzinger was wounded and captured while endeavouring to cross the line near Hanover Road upon December 15th .
He was put upon his trial , and his fate turned upon how far he was responsible for the misdeeds of some of his subordinates .
It was clearly shown that he had endeavoured to hold them within the bounds of civilised warfare , and with congratulations and handshakings he was acquitted by the military court .
In the last two months of the year 1901 , a new system was introduced into the Cape Colony campaign by placing the Colonial and district troops immediately under the command of Colonial officers and of the Colonial Government .
It had long been felt that some devolution was necessary , and the change was justified by the result .
Without any dramatic incident , an inexorable process of attrition , caused by continual pursuit and hardship , wore out the commandos .
Large bands had become small ones , and small ones had vanished .
Only by the union of several bodies could any enterprise higher than the looting of a farmhouse be successfully attempted .
The first of these was the fight in which Colonel Doran 's column extricated itself with severe loss from a most perilous plight .
The whole force under Doran consisted of 350 men with two guns , and this handful was divided by an expedition which he , with 150 men , undertook in order to search a distant farm .
The remaining two hundred men , under Captain Saunders , were left upon February 5th with the guns and the convoy at a place called Middlepost , which lies about fifty miles south-west of Calvinia .
These men were of the 11th , 23rd , and 24th Imperial Yeomanry , with a troop of Cape Police .
The Boer Intelligence was excellent , as might be expected in a country which is dotted with farms .
The weakened force at Middlepost was instantly attacked by Smuts 's commando .
Saunders evacuated the camp and abandoned the convoy , which was the only thing he could do , but he concentrated all his efforts upon preserving his guns .
The night was illuminated by the blazing wagons , and made hideous by the whoops of the drunken rebels who caroused among the captured stores .
With the first light of dawn the small British force was fiercely assailed on all sides , but held its own in a manner which would have done credit to any troops .
The much criticised Yeomen fought like veterans .
A considerable position had to be covered , and only a handful of men were available at the most important points .
One ridge , from which the guns would be enfiladed , was committed to the charge of Lieutenants Tabor and Chichester with eleven men of the 11th Imperial Yeomanry , their instructions being 'to hold it to the death . '
The order was obeyed with the utmost heroism .
After a desperate defence the ridge was only taken by the Boers when both officers had been killed and nine out of eleven men were on the ground .
In spite of the loss of this position the fight was still sustained until shortly after midday , when Doran with the patrol returned .
The position was still most dangerous , the losses had been severe , and the Boers were increasing in strength .
An immediate retreat was ordered , and the small column , after ten days of hardship and anxiety , reached the railway line in safety .
The wounded were left to the care of Smuts , who behaved with chivalry and humanity .
The re-establishment of settled law and order was becoming more marked every week in those south-western districts , which had long been most disturbed .
Colonel Crewe in this region , and Colonel Lukin upon the other side of the line , acting entirely with Colonial troops , were pushing back the rebels , and holding , by a well-devised system of district defence , all that they had gained .
By the end of February there were none of the enemy south of the Beaufort West and Clanwilliam line .
These results were not obtained without much hard marching and a little hard fighting .
Small columns under Crabbe , Capper , Wyndham , Nickall , and Lund , were continually on the move , with little to show for it save an ever-widening area of settled country in their rear .
In a skirmish on February 20th Judge Hugo , a well-known Boer leader , was killed , and Vanheerden , a notorious rebel , was captured .
At the end of this month Fouche 's tranquil occupation of the north-east was at last disturbed , and he was driven out of it into the midlands , where he took refuge with the remains of his commando in the Camdeboo Mountains .
Malan 's men had already sought shelter in the same natural fortress .
Malan was wounded and taken in a skirmish near Somerset East a few days before the general Boer surrender .
Fouche gave himself up at Cradock on June 2nd .
Whilst this prolonged contest had raged round Fort Itala , a similar attack upon a smaller scale was being made upon Fort Prospect , some fifteen miles to the eastward .
This small post was held by a handful of Durham Artillery Militia and of Dorsets .
The attack was delivered by Grobler with several hundred burghers , but it made no advance although it was pushed with great vigour , and repeated many times in the course of the day .
Captain Rowley , who was in command , handled his men with such judgment that one killed and eight wounded represented his casualties during a long day 's fighting .
Here again the Boer losses were in proportion to the resolution of their attack , and are said to have amounted to sixty killed and wounded .
Considering the impossibility of replacing the men , and the fruitless waste of valuable ammunition , September 26th was an evil day for the Boer cause .
The British casualties amounted to seventy-three .
Louis Botha with his commando is said to have ridden sixty miles in order to join the forces of Grobler and Oppermann , and overwhelm the British column .
It may have been the presence of their commander or a desire to have vengeance for the harrying which they had undergone upon the Natal border , but whatever the reason , the Boer attack was made with a spirit and dash which earned the enthusiastic applause of every soldier who survived to describe it .
With the low roar of a great torrent , several hundred horsemen burst through the curtain of mist , riding at a furious pace for the British guns .
The rear screen of Mounted Infantry fell back before this terrific rush , and the two bodies of horsemen came pell-mell down upon the handful of Buffs and the guns .
The infantry were ridden into and surrounded by the Boers , who found nothing to stop them from galloping on to the low ridge upon which the guns were stationed .
This ridge was held by eighty of the Scottish Horse and forty of the Yorkshire M.I.
, with a few riflemen from the 25th Mounted Infantry .
The latter were the escort of the guns , but the former were the rear screen who had fallen back rapidly because it was the game to do so , but who were in no way shaken , and who instantly dismounted and formed when they reached a defensive position .
It was fortunate that the command of the column devolved upon so experienced and cool-headed a soldier as Wools-Sampson .
To attempt a counter-attack for the purpose of recapturing the guns would , in case of disaster , have risked the camp and the convoy .
The latter was the prize which the Boers had particularly in view , and to expose it would be to play their game .
Very wisely , therefore , Wools-Sampson held the attacking Boers off with his guns and his riflemen , while every spare pair of hands was set to work entrenching the position and making it impregnable against attack .
Outposts were stationed upon all those surrounding points which might command the camp , and a summons to surrender from the Boer leader was treated with contempt .
All day a long-range fire , occasionally very severe , rained upon the camp .
Colonel Benson was brought in by the ambulance , and used his dying breath in exhorting his subordinate to hold out .
'No more night marches ' are said to have been the last words spoken by this gallant soldier as he passed away in the early morning after the action .
On October 31st the force remained on the defensive , but early on November 1st the gleaming of two heliographs , one to the north-east and one to the south-west , told that two British columns , those of De Lisle and of Barter , were hastening to the rescue .
But the Boers had passed as the storm does , and nothing but their swathe of destruction was left to show where they had been .
They had taken away the guns during the night , and were already beyond the reach of pursuit .
Leaving the Eastern Transvaal , the narrative must now return to several incidents of importance which had occurred at various points of the seat of war during the latter months of 1901 .
Two days later , hard on the heels of Gough 's mishap , of the Vlakfontein incident , and of the annihilation of the squadron of Lancers in the Cape , there was a serious affair at Elands Kloof , near Zastron , in the extreme south of the Orange River Colony .
In this a detachment of the Highland Scouts raised by the public spirit of Lord Lovat was surprised at night and very severely handled by Kritzinger 's commando .
The loss of Colonel Murray , their commander , of the adjutant of the same name , and of forty-two out of eighty of the Scouts , shows how fell was the attack , which broke as sudden and as strong as a South African thunderstorm upon the unconscious camp .
The Boers appear to have eluded the outposts and crept right among the sleeping troops , as they did in the case of the Victorians at Wilmansrust .
Twelve gunners were also hit , and the only field gun taken .
The retiring Boers were swiftly followed up by Thorneycroft 's column , however , and the gun was retaken , together with twenty of Kritzinger 's men .
It must be confessed that there seems some irony in the fact that , within five days of the British ruling by which the Boers were no longer a military force , these non-belligerents had inflicted a loss of nearly six hundred men killed , wounded , or taken .
Two small commandos , that of Koch in the Orange River Colony , and that of Carolina , had been captured by Williams and Benson .
Combined they only numbered a hundred and nine men , but here , as always , they were men who could never be replaced .
The second action was a sharp attack delivered by Muller 's Boers upon Colonel Park 's column on the night of December 19th , at Elandspruit .
The fight was sharp while it lasted , but it ended in the repulse of the assailants .
The British casualties were six killed and twenty-four wounded .
The Boers , who left eight dead behind them , suffered probably to about the same extent .
In this action the Boers , who were under the command of Wessels , delivered their attack with a cleverness and dash which deserved success .
Their stratagem , however , depending as it did upon the use of British uniforms and methods , was illegitimate by all the laws of war , and one can but marvel at the long-suffering patience of officers and men who endured such things without any attempt at retaliation .
There is too much reason to believe also , that considerable brutality was shown by those Boers who carried the kopje , and the very high proportion of killed to wounded among the British who lay there corroborates the statement of the survivors that several were shot at close quarters after all resistance had ceased .
This rough encounter of Tafelkop was followed only four days later by a very much more serious one at Tweefontein , which proved that even after two years of experience we had not yet sufficiently understood the courage and the cunning of our antagonist .
The blockhouse line was being gradually extended from Harrismith to Bethlehem , so as to hold down this turbulent portion of the country .
The Harrismith section had been pushed as far as Tweefontein , which is nine miles west of Elands River Bridge , and here a small force was stationed to cover the workers .
This column consisted of four squadrons of the 4th Imperial Yeomanry , one gun of the 79th battery , and one pom-pom , the whole under the temporary command of Major Williams of the South Staffords , Colonel Firmin being absent .
The prisoners , over two hundred in number , were hurried away by the Boers , who seemed under the immediate eye of De Wet to have behaved with exemplary humanity to the wounded .
The captives were taken by forced marches to the Basuto border , where they were turned adrift , half clad and without food .
By devious ways and after many adventures , they all made their way back again to the British lines .
It was well for De Wet that he had shown such promptness in getting away , for within three hours of the end of the action the two regiments of Imperial Horse appeared upon the scene , having travelled seventeen miles in the time .
Already , however , the rearguard of the Boers was disappearing into the fastness of the Langberg , where all pursuit was vain .
At the opening of the year 1902 it was evident to every observer that the Boer resistance , spirited as it was , must be nearing its close .
By a long succession of captures their forces were much reduced in numbers .
They were isolated from the world , and had no means save precarious smuggling of renewing their supplies of ammunition .
It was known also that their mobility , which had been their great strength , was decreasing , and that in spite of their admirable horsemastership their supply of remounts was becoming exhausted .
An increasing number of the burghers were volunteering for service against their own people , and it was found that all fears as to this delicate experiment were misplaced , and that in the whole army there were no keener and more loyal soldiers .
The spines of this great system were always the railway lines , which were guarded on either side , and down which , as down a road , went flocks , herds , pedestrians , and everything which wished to travel in safety .
From these long central cords the lines branched out to right and left , cutting up the great country into manageable districts .
A category of them would but weary the reader , but suffice it that by the beginning of the year the south-east of the Transvaal and the north-east of the Orange River Colony , the haunts of Botha and De Wet , had been so intersected that it was obvious that the situation must soon be impossible for both of them .
Only on the west of the Transvaal was there a clear run for De la Rey and Kemp .
Hence it was expected , as actually occurred , that in this quarter the most stirring events of the close of the campaign would happen .
One of the consequences of the successful drives about to be described in the Orange River Colony was that a number of the Free Staters came north of the Vaal in order to get away from the extreme pressure upon the south .
At the end of March a considerable number had reinforced the local commandos in that district to the east of Springs , no very great distance from Johannesburg , which had always been a storm centre .
A cavalry force was stationed at this spot which consisted at that time of the 2nd Queen 's Bays , the 7th Hussars , and some National Scouts , all under Colonel Lawley of the Hussars .
After a series of minor engagements east of Springs , Lawley had possessed himself of Boschman 's Kop , eighteen miles from that town , close to the district which was the chief scene of Boer activity .
From this base he despatched upon the morning of April 1st three squadrons of the Bays under Colonel Fanshawe , for the purpose of surprising a small force of the enemy which was reported at one of the farms .
Fanshawe 's strength was about three hundred men .
Moving rapidly , and covering himself by a succession of rearguard skirmishes , De Wet danced like a will-o'the-wisp in front of and round the British columns .
De Lisle , Fanshawe , Byng , Rimington , Dawkins , and Rawlinson were all snatching at him and finding him just beyond their finger-tips .
The master-mind at Pretoria had , however , thought out a scheme which was worthy of De Wet himself in its ingenuity .
A glance at the map will show that the little branch from Heilbron to Wolvehoek forms an acute angle with the main line .
Both these railways were strongly blockhoused and barbed-wired , so that any force which was driven into the angle , and held in it by a force behind it , would be in a perilous position .
To attempt to round De Wet 's mobile burghers into this obvious pen would have been to show one 's hand too clearly .
In vain is the net laid in sight of the bird .
The drive was therefore made away from this point , with the confident expectation that the guerilla chief would break back through the columns , and that they might then pivot round upon him and hustle him so rapidly into the desired position that he would not realise his danger until it was too late .
Byng 's column was left behind the driving line to be ready for the expected backward break .
All came off exactly as expected .
De Wet doubled back through the columns , and one of his commandos stumbled upon Byng 's men , who were waiting on the Vlei River to the west of Reitz .
The Boers seem to have taken it for granted that , having passed the British driving line , they were out of danger , and for once it was they who were surprised .
The South African Light Horse , the New Zealanders , and the Queensland Bushmen all rode in upon them .
A fifteen-pounder , the one taken at Tweefontein , and two pom-poms were captured , with thirty prisoners and a considerable quantity of stores .
On the 6th De Wet realised his position , and with characteristic audacity and promptness he took means to clear the formidable toils which had been woven round him .
The greater part of his command scattered , with orders to make their way as best they might out of the danger .
Working in their own country , where every crease and fold of the ground was familiar to them , it is not surprising that most of them managed to make their way through gaps in the attenuated line of horsemen behind them .
A few were killed , and a considerable number taken , 270 being the respectable total of the prisoners .
Three or four slipped through , however , for every one who stuck in the meshes .
De Wet himself was reported to have made his escape by driving cattle against the wire fences which enclosed him .
It seems , however , to have been nothing more romantic than a wire-cutter which cleared his path , though cattle no doubt made their way through the gap which he left .
With a loss of only three of his immediate followers be Wet won his way out of the most dangerous position which even his adventurous career had ever known .
Lord Kitchener had descended to Wolvehoek to be present at the climax of the operations , but it was not fated that he was to receive the submission of the most energetic of his opponents , and he returned to Pretoria to weave a fresh mesh around him .
It was feared at first that the greater part of the Boers might have escaped upon this night of the 23rd , when Manie Botha 's storming party burst through the ranks of the New Zealanders .
It was soon discovered that this was not so , and the columns as they closed in had evidence from the numerous horsemen who scampered aimlessly over the hills in front of them that the main body of the enemy was still in the toils .
The advance was in tempestuous weather and over rugged country , but the men were filled with eagerness , and no precaution was neglected to keep the line intact .
More important even than the results of the drive was the discovery of one of De Wet 's arsenals in a cave in the Vrede district .
Half-way down a precipitous krantz , with its mouth covered by creepers , no writer of romance could have imagined a more fitting headquarters for a guerilla chief .
The find was made by Ross 's Canadian Scouts , who celebrated Dominion Day by this most useful achievement .
Forty wagon-loads of ammunition and supplies were taken out of the cave .
De Wet was known to have left the north-east district , and to have got across the railway , travelling towards the Vaal as if it were his intention to join De la Rey in the Transvaal .
The Boer resistance had suddenly become exceedingly energetic in that part , and several important actions had been fought , to which we will presently turn .
Before doing so it would be as well to bring the chronicle of events in the Orange River Colony down to the conclusion of peace .
There were still a great number of wandering Boers in the northern districts and in the frontier mountains , who were assiduously , but not always successfully , hunted down by the British troops .
Much arduous and useful work was done by several small columns , the Colonial Horse and the Artillery Mounted Rifles especially distinguishing themselves .
The latter corps , formed from the gunners whose field-pieces were no longer needed , proved themselves to be a most useful body of men ; and the British gunner , when he took to carrying his gun , vindicated the reputation which he had won when his gun had carried him .
The new year found the British connecting Ventersdorp with Tafelkop by a blockhouse line .
The latter place had been a centre of Boer activity .
Colonel Hickie 's column covered this operation .
Meanwhile Methuen had struck across through Wolmaranstad as far as Vryburg .
In these operations , which resulted in constant small captures , he was assisted by a column under Major Paris working from Kimberley .
From Vryburg Lord Methuen made his way in the middle of January to Lichtenburg , meeting with a small rebuff in the neighbourhood of that town , for a detachment of Yeomanry was overwhelmed by General Celliers , who killed eight , wounded fifteen , and captured forty .
From Lichtenburg Lord Methuen continued his enormous trek , and arrived on February 1st at Klerksdorp once more .
Little rest was given to his hard-worked troops , and they were sent off again within the week under the command of Von Donop , with the result that on February 8th , near Wolmaranstad , they captured Potgieter 's laager with forty Boer prisoners .
Von Donop remained at Wolmaranstad until late in February ; On the 23rd he despatched an empty convoy back to Klerksdorp , the fate of which will be afterwards narrated .
The escort of the convoy consisted of the 5th Imperial Yeomanry , sixty of Paget 's Horse , three companies of the ubiquitous Northumberland Fusiliers , two guns of the 4th R.F.A.
, and a pom-pom , amounting in all to 630 men .
Colonel Anderson was in command .
On the morning of Tuesday , February 25th , the convoy was within ten miles of its destination , and the sentries on the kopjes round the town could see the gleam of the long line of white-tilted wagons .
Their hazardous voyage was nearly over , and yet they were destined to most complete and fatal wreck within sight of port .
So confident were they that the detachment of Paget's Horse was permitted to ride on the night before into the town .
It was as well , for such a handful would have shared and could not have averted the disaster .
It was to one of Walter Kitchener 's lieutenants that the honour fell to come in direct contact with the main force of the burghers .
This General had moved out to a point about forty miles west of Klerksdorp .
Forming his laager there , he despatched Cookson on March 30th with seventeen hundred men to work further westward in the direction of the Harts River .
Under Cookson 's immediate command were the 2nd Canadian Mounted Infantry , Damant 's Horse , and four guns of the 7th R.F.A .
His lieutenant , Keir , commanded the 28th Mounted Infantry , the Artillery Mounted Rifles , and 2nd Kitchener 's Fighting Scouts .
The force was well mounted , and carried the minimum of baggage .
Perceiving that he was in front of the whole Boer army , and knowing that he might expect reinforcements , Cookson decided to act upon the defensive .
A position was rapidly taken up along the Brakspruit , and preparations made to resist the impending attack .
The line of defence was roughly the line of the spruit , but for some reason , probably to establish a cross fire , one advanced position was occupied upon either flank .
On the left flank was a farmhouse , which was held by two hundred men of the Artillery Rifles .
On the extreme right was another outpost of twenty-four Canadians and forty-five Mounted Infantry .
They occupied no defensible position , and their situation was evidently a most dangerous one , only to be justified by some strong military reason which is not explained by any account of the action .
It only remains in one short chapter to narrate the progress of the peace negotiations , the ultimate settlement , and the final consequences of this long-drawn war .
However disheartening the successive incidents may have been in which the Boers were able to inflict heavy losses upon us and to renew their supplies of arms and ammunition , it was none the less certain that their numbers were waning and that the inevitable end was steadily approaching .
With mathematical precision the scientific soldier in Pretoria , with his web of barbed wire radiating out over the whole country , was week by week wearing them steadily down .
And yet after the recent victory of De la Rey and various braggadocio pronouncements from the refugees at The Hague , it was somewhat of a surprise to the British public when it was announced upon March 22nd that the acting Government of the Transvaal , consisting of Messrs. Schalk Burger , Lucas Meyer , Reitz , Jacoby , Krogh , and Van Velden had come into Middelburg and requested to be forwarded by train to Pretoria for the purpose of discussing terms of peace with Lord Kitchener .
A thrill of hope ran through the Empire at the news , but so doubtful did the issue seem that none of the preparations were relaxed which would ensure a vigorous campaign in the immediate future .
In the South African as in the Peninsular and in the Crimean wars , it may truly be said that Great Britain was never so ready to fight as at the dawning of peace .
At least two years of failure and experience are needed to turn a civilian and commercial nation into a military power .
THE LOST WORLD I have wrought my simple plan If I give one hour of joy To the boy who 's half a man , Or the man who 's half a boy .
`` THERE ARE HEROISMS ALL ROUND US '' II .
`` TRY YOUR LUCK WITH PROFESSOR CHALLENGER '' III .
`` HE IS A PERFECTLY IMPOSSIBLE PERSON '' IV .
`` IT 'S JUST THE VERY BIGGEST THING IN THE WORLD '' V .
`` I WAS THE FLAIL OF THE LORD '' VII .
`` TO-MORROW WE DISAPPEAR INTO THE UNKNOWN '' VIII .
`` THE OUTLYING PICKETS OF THE NEW WORLD '' IX .
`` WHO COULD HAVE FORESEEN IT ? ''
`` THE MOST WONDERFUL THINGS HAVE HAPPENED '' XI .
`` FOR ONCE I WAS THE HERO '' XII .
`` IT WAS DREADFUL IN THE FOREST '' XIII .
`` A SIGHT I SHALL NEVER FORGET '' XIV .
`` THOSE WERE THE REAL CONQUESTS '' XV .
`` OUR EYES HAVE SEEN GREAT WONDERS '' XVI .
THE LOST WORLD The Lost World CHAPTER I `` There Are Heroisms All Round Us '' Mr. Hungerton , her father , really was the most tactless person upon earth , -- a fluffy , feathery , untidy cockatoo of a man , perfectly good-natured , but absolutely centered upon his own silly self .
If anything could have driven me from Gladys , it would have been the thought of such a father-in-law .
I am convinced that he really believed in his heart that I came round to the Chestnuts three days a week for the pleasure of his company , and very especially to hear his views upon bimetallism , a subject upon which he was by way of being an authority .
For an hour or more that evening I listened to his monotonous chirrup about bad money driving out good , the token value of silver , the depreciation of the rupee , and the true standards of exchange .
`` Suppose , '' he cried with feeble violence , `` that all the debts in the world were called up simultaneously , and immediate payment insisted upon , -- what under our present conditions would happen then ? ''
I gave the self-evident answer that I should be a ruined man , upon which he jumped from his chair , reproved me for my habitual levity , which made it impossible for him to discuss any reasonable subject in my presence , and bounced off out of the room to dress for a Masonic meeting .
At last I was alone with Gladys , and the moment of Fate had come !
All that evening I had felt like the soldier who awaits the signal which will send him on a forlorn hope ; hope of victory and fear of repulse alternating in his mind .
She sat with that proud , delicate profile of hers outlined against the red curtain .
How beautiful she was !
And yet how aloof !
We had been friends , quite good friends ; but never could I get beyond the same comradeship which I might have established with one of my fellow-reporters upon the Gazette , -- perfectly frank , perfectly kindly , and perfectly unsexual .
My instincts are all against a woman being too frank and at her ease with me .
It is no compliment to a man .
Where the real sex feeling begins , timidity and distrust are its companions , heritage from old wicked days when love and violence went often hand in hand .
The bent head , the averted eye , the faltering voice , the wincing figure -- these , and not the unshrinking gaze and frank reply , are the true signals of passion .
Even in my short life I had learned as much as that -- or had inherited it in that race memory which we call instinct .
Gladys was full of every womanly quality .
Some judged her to be cold and hard ; but such a thought was treason .
That delicately bronzed skin , almost oriental in its coloring , that raven hair , the large liquid eyes , the full but exquisite lips , -- all the stigmata of passion were there .
But I was sadly conscious that up to now I had never found the secret of drawing it forth .
However , come what might , I should have done with suspense and bring matters to a head to-night .
She could but refuse me , and better be a repulsed lover than an accepted brother .
So far my thoughts had carried me , and I was about to break the long and uneasy silence , when two critical , dark eyes looked round at me , and the proud head was shaken in smiling reproof .
`` I have a presentiment that you are going to propose , Ned .
I do wish you would n't ; for things are so much nicer as they are . ''
I drew my chair a little nearer .
`` Now , how did you know that I was going to propose ? ''
I asked in genuine wonder .
`` Do n't women always know ?
Do you suppose any woman in the world was ever taken unawares ?
But -- oh , Ned , our friendship has been so good and so pleasant !
What a pity to spoil it !
Do n't you feel how splendid it is that a young man and a young woman should be able to talk face to face as we have talked ? ''
`` I do n't know , Gladys .
You see , I can talk face to face with -- with the station-master . ''
I ca n't imagine how that official came into the matter ; but in he trotted , and set us both laughing .
`` That does not satisfy me in the least .
I want my arms round you , and your head on my breast , and -- oh , Gladys , I want -- -- '' She had sprung from her chair , as she saw signs that I proposed to demonstrate some of my wants .
`` You 've spoiled everything , Ned , '' she said .
`` It 's all so beautiful and natural until this kind of thing comes in !
It is such a pity !
Why ca n't you control yourself ? ''
`` I did n't invent it , '' I pleaded .
`` It 's nature .
It 's love . ''
`` Well , perhaps if both love , it may be different .
I have never felt it . ''
`` But you must -- you , with your beauty , with your soul !
Oh , Gladys , you were made for love !
You must love ! ''
`` One must wait till it comes . ''
`` But why ca n't you love me , Gladys ?
Is it my appearance , or what ? ''
She did unbend a little .
She put forward a hand -- such a gracious , stooping attitude it was -- and she pressed back my head .
Then she looked into my upturned face with a very wistful smile .
`` No it is n't that , '' she said at last .
`` You 're not a conceited boy by nature , and so I can safely tell you it is not that .
It 's deeper . ''
`` My character ? ''
`` What can I do to mend it ?
Do sit down and talk it over .
No , really , I wo n't if you 'll only sit down ! ''
She looked at me with a wondering distrust which was much more to my mind than her whole-hearted confidence .
How primitive and bestial it looks when you put it down in black and white !
-- and perhaps after all it is only a feeling peculiar to myself .
Anyhow , she sat down .
`` Now tell me what 's amiss with me ? ''
`` I 'm in love with somebody else , '' said she .
It was my turn to jump out of my chair .
`` It 's nobody in particular , '' she explained , laughing at the expression of my face : `` only an ideal .
I 've never met the kind of man I mean . ''
`` Tell me about him .
What does he look like ? ''
`` Oh , he might look very much like you . ''
`` How dear of you to say that !
Well , what is it that he does that I do n't do ?
Just say the word , -- teetotal , vegetarian , aeronaut , theosophist , superman .
I 'll have a try at it , Gladys , if you will only give me an idea what would please you . ''
She laughed at the elasticity of my character .
`` Well , in the first place , I do n't think my ideal would speak like that , '' said she .
`` He would be a harder , sterner man , not so ready to adapt himself to a silly girl 's whim .
But , above all , he must be a man who could do , who could act , who could look Death in the face and have no fear of him , a man of great deeds and strange experiences .
It is never a man that I should love , but always the glories he had won ; for they would be reflected upon me .
Think of Richard Burton !
When I read his wife's life of him I could so understand her love !
Did you ever read the wonderful last chapter of that book about her husband ?
These are the sort of men that a woman could worship with all her soul , and yet be the greater , not the less , on account of her love , honored by all the world as the inspirer of noble deeds . ''
She looked so beautiful in her enthusiasm that I nearly brought down the whole level of the interview .
I gripped myself hard , and went on with the argument .
`` What a prosaic motive !
It seems to take all the romance out of it .
But , still , whatever your motive , I am glad that you went down that mine . ''
She gave me her hand ; but with such sweetness and dignity that I could only stoop and kiss it .
`` I dare say I am merely a foolish woman with a young girl 's fancies .
And yet it is so real with me , so entirely part of my very self , that I can not help acting upon it .
If I marry , I do want to marry a famous man ! ''
`` Why should you not ? ''
`` It is women like you who brace men up .
Give me a chance , and see if I will take it !
Besides , as you say , men ought to MAKE their own chances , and not wait until they are given .
Look at Clive -- just a clerk , and he conquered India !
I'll do something in the world yet ! ''
`` Well , Mr. Malone , from all I hear , you seem to be doing very well , '' said he in his kindly Scotch accent .
`` You seem very anxious to lose your life . ''
He gathered his brows in scientific disapproval .
`` Challenger was the man who came with some cock-and-bull story from South America . ''
`` Anything more about Challenger ? ''
`` Well , it is a translation . ''
`` No , no ; you 'll see the letter -- nothing contentious , I assure you . ''
`` Well , that 's my chair and desk .
You 'll find paper there .
I 'd like to censor it before it goes . ''
`` To get there .
Once I am in his room I may see some opening .
I may even go the length of open confession .
If he is a sportsman he will be tickled . ''
`` Got your letter ? ''
`` I assure you that I can fight my own battles , and that I have no possible need of your sympathy .
Put me alone , sir , and with my back to the wall .
G. E. C. is happiest then .
Well , sir , let us do what we can to curtail this visit , which can hardly be agreeable to you , and is inexpressibly irksome to me .
You had , as I have been led to believe , some comments to make upon the proposition which I advanced in my thesis . ''
He leaned forward with great earnestness .
`` I suppose you are aware , '' said he , checking off points upon his fingers , `` that the cranial index is a constant factor ? ''
`` And that the germ plasm is different from the parthenogenetic egg ? ''
`` Ah , what indeed ? ''
`` What does it prove ? ''
`` Look here , sir , '' said I , backing to the door and opening it ; `` you can be as abusive as you like .
But there is a limit .
You shall not assault me . ''
Then and there we should have tried the thing out , for he was effervescing with fight , but fortunately I was rescued from an odious situation .
A policeman was beside us , his notebook in his hand .
`` What 's all this ?
You ought to be ashamed '' said the policeman .
It was the most rational remark which I had heard in Enmore Park .
`` Well , '' he insisted , turning to me , `` what is it , then ? ''
`` It 's not the first time , either , '' said the policeman , severely , shaking his head .
`` You were in trouble last month for the same thing .
You 've blackened this young man 's eye .
Do you give him in charge , sir ? ''
`` Come in ! ''
`` I 've not done with you yet . ''
`` It 's Just the very Biggest Thing in the World ''
`` You try me too much .
A ruffian -- a common brawling ruffian -- that's what you have become . ''
`` Really , sir -- -- ! ''
said I , looking at the lady .
`` Here 's Mr. Malone pleading for you , Jessie .
Say 'please , ' and down you come . ''
`` You must behave yourself , dear .
Mr. Malone is a Pressman .
He will have it all in his rag to-morrow , and sell an extra dozen among our neighbors .
'Strange story of high life ' -- you felt fairly high on that pedestal , did you not ?
Then a sub-title , 'Glimpse of a singular menage . '
He 's a foul feeder , is Mr. Malone , a carrion eater , like all of his kind -- porcus ex grege diaboli -- a swine from the devil 's herd .
That 's it , Malone -- what ? ''
He looked at me with doubt in his insolent eyes .
`` Yes , sir . ''
`` The man 's knapsack lay beside the couch , and I examined the contents .
His name was written upon a tab within it -- Maple White , Lake Avenue , Detroit , Michigan .
It is a name to which I am prepared always to lift my hat .
It is not too much to say that it will rank level with my own when the final credit of this business comes to be apportioned .
`` Good heavens ! ''
`` Then you think the beast was -- -- Why , Charing Cross station would hardly make a kennel for such a brute ! ''
For answer the Professor took a book down from a shelf .
`` It might be a very thick human collar-bone , '' I said .
`` Then your case is not hopeless .
I feel that there is reason lurking in you somewhere , so we will patiently grope round for it .
We will now leave the dead American and proceed with my narrative .
You can imagine that I could hardly come away from the Amazon without probing deeper into the matter .
There were indications as to the direction from which the dead traveler had come .
Indian legends would alone have been my guide , for I found that rumors of a strange land were common among all the riverine tribes .
You have heard , no doubt , of Curupuri ? ''
`` I had it .
It was unfortunately lost with so much else in the same boat accident which ruined my photographs .
I clutched at it as it disappeared in the swirl of the rapids , and part of its wing was left in my hand .
I was insensible when washed ashore , but the miserable remnant of my superb specimen was still intact ; I now lay it before you . ''
My small stock of knowledge was exhausted .
`` And then , sir , what did you do next ? ''
`` It was the wet season , Mr. Malone , and my stores were exhausted .
I explored some portion of this huge cliff , but I was unable to find any way to scale it .
The pyramidal rock upon which I saw and shot the pterodactyl was more accessible .
Being something of a cragsman , I did manage to get half way to the top of that .
From that height I had a better idea of the plateau upon the top of the crags .
It appeared to be very large ; neither to east nor to west could I see any end to the vista of green-capped cliffs .
Below , it is a swampy , jungly region , full of snakes , insects , and fever .
It is a natural protection to this singular country . ''
`` But the creature that the American drew ?
How do you account for that ? ''
I nursed my eye and was silent .
`` But Mr. McArdle -- my news editor , you know -- will want to know what I have done . ''
`` Well , '' he cried , expectantly , `` what may it run to ?
I 'm thinking , young man , you have been in the wars .
Do n't tell me that he assaulted you . ''
`` You do n't mean to say you really believe this stuff of his about mammoths and mastodons and great sea sairpents ? ''
My day was a busy one , and I had an early dinner at the Savage Club with Tarp Henry , to whom I gave some account of my adventures .
He listened with a sceptical smile on his gaunt face , and roared with laughter on hearing that the Professor had convinced me .
`` Challenger 's sketch-book . ''
`` Will you come to the meeting ? ''
`` Well , it is all in the main line of my business .
I am a journalist on the Gazette . ''
`` What is the risk ? ''
`` All right , sonny my lad -- you 'll do , '' said he .
I looked up in surprise .
`` I saw after Jack Ballinger myself this mornin ' .
He blew a hole in the skirt of my kimono , bless his shaky old hand , but we got a jacket on him , and he 's to be all right in a week .
I say , young fellah , I hope you do n't mind -- what ?
You see , between you an ' me close-tiled , I look on this South American business as a mighty serious thing , and if I have a pal with me I want a man I can bank on .
So I sized you down , and I 'm bound to say that you came well out of it .
You see , it 's all up to you and me , for this old Summerlee man will want dry-nursin ' from the first .
By the way , are you by any chance the Malone who is expected to get his Rugby cap for Ireland ? ''
`` This is a Bland 's .577 axite express , '' said he .
`` I got that big fellow with it . ''
He glanced up at the white rhinoceros .
`` Ten more yards , and he 'd would have added me to HIS collection .
Hope you know your Gordon , for he 's the poet of the horse and the gun and the man that handles both .
Now , here 's a useful tool -- .470 , telescopic sight , double ejector , point-blank up to three-fifty .
That 's the rifle I used against the Peruvian slave-drivers three years ago .
I was the flail of the Lord up in those parts , I may tell you , though you wo n't find it in any Blue-book .
There are times , young fellah , when every one of us must make a stand for human right and justice , or you never feel clean again .
That 's why I made a little war on my own .
Declared it myself , waged it myself , ended it myself .
Each of those nicks is for a slave murderer -- a good row of them -- what ?
That big one is for Pedro Lopez , the king of them all , that I killed in a backwater of the Putomayo River .
Now , here 's something that would do for you . ''
He took out a beautiful brown-and-silver rifle .
`` Well rubbered at the stock , sharply sighted , five cartridges to the clip .
You can trust your life to that . ''
He handed it to me and closed the door of his oak cabinet .
`` By the way , '' he continued , coming back to his chair , `` what do you know of this Professor Challenger ? ''
The scientific attainments of Professor Summerlee are too well known for me to trouble to recapitulate them .
He is better equipped for a rough expedition of this sort than one would imagine at first sight .
His tall , gaunt , stringy figure is insensible to fatigue , and his dry , half-sarcastic , and often wholly unsympathetic manner is uninfluenced by any change in his surroundings .
Though in his sixty-sixth year , I have never heard him express any dissatisfaction at the occasional hardships which we have had to encounter .
I had regarded his presence as an encumbrance to the expedition , but , as a matter of fact , I am now well convinced that his power of endurance is as great as my own .
In temper he is naturally acid and sceptical .
From the beginning he has never concealed his belief that Professor Challenger is an absolute fraud , that we are all embarked upon an absurd wild-goose chase and that we are likely to reap nothing but disappointment and danger in South America , and corresponding ridicule in England .
Such are the views which , with much passionate distortion of his thin features and wagging of his thin , goat-like beard , he poured into our ears all the way from Southampton to Manaos .
Since landing from the boat he has obtained some consolation from the beauty and variety of the insect and bird life around him , for he is absolutely whole-hearted in his devotion to science .
He spends his days flitting through the woods with his shot-gun and his butterfly-net , and his evenings in mounting the many specimens he has acquired .
Among his minor peculiarities are that he is careless as to his attire , unclean in his person , exceedingly absent-minded in his habits , and addicted to smoking a short briar pipe , which is seldom out of his mouth .
He has been upon several scientific expeditions in his youth ( he was with Robertson in Papua ) , and the life of the camp and the canoe is nothing fresh to him .
`` A pretty business it is ! ''
cried the Professor , bitterly .
`` It struck me as preposterous in London , but I 'm bound to say that it seems even more so upon closer acquaintance .
I do n't know what is inside this envelope , but , unless it is something pretty definite , I shall be much tempted to take the next down-river boat and catch the Bolivia at Para .
After all , I have some more responsible work in the world than to run about disproving the assertions of a lunatic .
Now , Roxton , surely it is time . ''
`` Invisible ink ! ''
Instead of answering , Professor Challenger entered , shook hands with myself and Lord John , bowed with ponderous insolence to Professor Summerlee , and sank back into a basket-chair , which creaked and swayed beneath his weight .
`` Then so you shall .
You need no chart of directions now , since you will have the inestimable advantage of my own guidance .
From the first I had determined that I would myself preside over your investigation .
The most elaborate charts would , as you will readily admit , be a poor substitute for my own intelligence and advice .
As to the small ruse which I played upon you in the matter of the envelope , it is clear that , had I told you all my intentions , I should have been forced to resist unwelcome pressure to travel out with you . ''
It was August 2nd when we snapped our last link with the outer world by bidding farewell to the Esmeralda .
Since then four days have passed , during which we have engaged two large canoes from the Indians , made of so light a material ( skins over a bamboo framework ) that we should be able to carry them round any obstacle .
These we have loaded with all our effects , and have engaged two additional Indians to help us in the navigation .
I understand that they are the very two -- Ataca and Ipetu by name -- who accompanied Professor Challenger upon his previous journey .
They appeared to be terrified at the prospect of repeating it , but the chief has patriarchal powers in these countries , and if the bargain is good in his eyes the clansman has little choice in the matter .
Our friends at home may well rejoice with us , for we are at our goal , and up to a point , at least , we have shown that the statement of Professor Challenger can be verified .
We have not , it is true , ascended the plateau , but it lies before us , and even Professor Summerlee is in a more chastened mood .
Not that he will for an instant admit that his rival could be right , but he is less persistent in his incessant objections , and has sunk for the most part into an observant silence .
I must hark back , however , and continue my narrative from where I dropped it .
We are sending home one of our local Indians who is injured , and I am committing this letter to his charge , with considerable doubts in my mind as to whether it will ever come to hand .
`` What do you make of that ? ''
It was an Assai palm which I took for my landmark .
The secret opening is half a mile onwards upon the other side of the river .
There is no break in the trees .
That is the wonder and the mystery of it .
There where you see light-green rushes instead of dark-green undergrowth , there between the great cotton woods , that is my private gate into the unknown .
Push through , and you will understand . ''
For a fairyland it was -- the most wonderful that the imagination of man could conceive .
The thick vegetation met overhead , interlacing into a natural pergola , and through this tunnel of verdure in a golden twilight flowed the green , pellucid river , beautiful in itself , but marvelous from the strange tints thrown by the vivid light from above filtered and tempered in its fall .
Clear as crystal , motionless as a sheet of glass , green as the edge of an iceberg , it stretched in front of us under its leafy archway , every stroke of our paddles sending a thousand ripples across its shining surface .
It was a fitting avenue to a land of wonders .
All sign of the Indians had passed away , but animal life was more frequent , and the tameness of the creatures showed that they knew nothing of the hunter .
Fuzzy little black-velvet monkeys , with snow-white teeth and gleaming , mocking eyes , chattered at us as we passed .
With a dull , heavy splash an occasional cayman plunged in from the bank .
Once a dark , clumsy tapir stared at us from a gap in the bushes , and then lumbered away through the forest ; once , too , the yellow , sinuous form of a great puma whisked amid the brushwood , and its green , baleful eyes glared hatred at us over its tawny shoulder .
Bird life was abundant , especially the wading birds , stork , heron , and ibis gathering in little groups , blue , scarlet , and white , upon every log which jutted from the bank , while beneath us the crystal water was alive with fish of every shape and color .
Advancing in single file along the bank of the stream , we soon found that it narrowed down to a mere brook , and finally that it lost itself in a great green morass of sponge-like mosses , into which we sank up to our knees .
The place was horribly haunted by clouds of mosquitoes and every form of flying pest , so we were glad to find solid ground again and to make a circuit among the trees , which enabled us to outflank this pestilent morass , which droned like an organ in the distance , so loud was it with insect life .
On the second day after leaving our canoes we found that the whole character of the country changed .
Our road was persistently upwards , and as we ascended the woods became thinner and lost their tropical luxuriance .
The huge trees of the alluvial Amazonian plain gave place to the Phoenix and coco palms , growing in scattered clumps , with thick brushwood between .
In the damper hollows the Mauritia palms threw out their graceful drooping fronds .
We traveled entirely by compass , and once or twice there were differences of opinion between Challenger and the two Indians , when , to quote the Professor 's indignant words , the whole party agreed to `` trust the fallacious instincts of undeveloped savages rather than the highest product of modern European culture . ''
That we were justified in doing so was shown upon the third day , when Challenger admitted that he recognized several landmarks of his former journey , and in one spot we actually came upon four fire-blackened stones , which must have marked a camping-place .
The road still ascended , and we crossed a rock-studded slope which took two days to traverse .
The vegetation had again changed , and only the vegetable ivory tree remained , with a great profusion of wonderful orchids , among which I learned to recognize the rare Nuttonia Vexillaria and the glorious pink and scarlet blossoms of Cattleya and odontoglossum .
Occasional brooks with pebbly bottoms and fern-draped banks gurgled down the shallow gorges in the hill , and offered good camping-grounds every evening on the banks of some rock-studded pool , where swarms of little blue-backed fish , about the size and shape of English trout , gave us a delicious supper .
On the ninth day after leaving the canoes , having done , as I reckon , about a hundred and twenty miles , we began to emerge from the trees , which had grown smaller until they were mere shrubs .
Their place was taken by an immense wilderness of bamboo , which grew so thickly that we could only penetrate it by cutting a pathway with the machetes and billhooks of the Indians .
It took us a long day , traveling from seven in the morning till eight at night , with only two breaks of one hour each , to get through this obstacle .
Anything more monotonous and wearying could not be imagined , for , even at the most open places , I could not see more than ten or twelve yards , while usually my vision was limited to the back of Lord John 's cotton jacket in front of me , and to the yellow wall within a foot of me on either side .
From above came one thin knife-edge of sunshine , and fifteen feet over our heads one saw the tops of the reeds swaying against the deep blue sky .
I do not know what kind of creatures inhabit such a thicket , but several times we heard the plunging of large , heavy animals quite close to us .
From their sounds Lord John judged them to be some form of wild cattle .
Just as night fell we cleared the belt of bamboos , and at once formed our camp , exhausted by the interminable day .
Challenger was too furious to speak .
He simply swung his pack upon his back and continued upon his march .
Lord John came abreast of me , however , and his face was more grave than was his wont .
He had his Zeiss glasses in his hand .
`` Who could have Foreseen it ? ''
`` There seems to be only one reasonable course , '' said Professor Summerlee .
`` If you have explored the east , we should travel along the base of the cliff to the west , and seek for a practicable point for our ascent . ''
`` That 's it , '' said Lord John .
`` The odds are that this plateau is of no great size , and we shall travel round it until we either find an easy way up it , or come back to the point from which we started . ''
Summerlee had been so interested that he had stood unresisting while Challenger tilted his head into the air .
Now he shook his colleague off and came back to his dignity .
`` I should be glad , Professor Challenger , '' said he , `` if you could see your way to make any remarks which may occur to you without seizing me by the chin .
Even the appearance of a very ordinary rock python does not appear to justify such a liberty . ''
`` But there is life upon the plateau all the same , '' his colleague replied in triumph .
`` And now , having demonstrated this important conclusion so that it is clear to anyone , however prejudiced or obtuse , I am of opinion that we can not do better than break up our camp and travel to westward until we find some means of ascent . ''
`` He had chalk , then ? ''
`` The roof has fallen in ! ''
In vain we dragged out some of the pieces .
The only effect was that the larger ones became detached and threatened to roll down the gradient and crush us .
It was evident that the obstacle was far beyond any efforts which we could make to remove it .
The road by which Maple White had ascended was no longer available .
One incident occurred , however , before we left the gorge , which is of importance in view of what came afterwards .
What occurred was this .
Lord John had shot an ajouti -- which is a small , pig-like animal -- and , half of it having been given to the Indians , we were cooking the other half upon our fire .
There is a chill in the air after dark , and we had all drawn close to the blaze .
The night was moonless , but there were some stars , and one could see for a little distance across the plain .
Well , suddenly out of the darkness , out of the night , there swooped something with a swish like an aeroplane .
The whole group of us were covered for an instant by a canopy of leathery wings , and I had a momentary vision of a long , snake-like neck , a fierce , red , greedy eye , and a great snapping beak , filled , to my amazement , with little , gleaming teeth .
The next instant it was gone -- and so was our dinner .
A huge black shadow , twenty feet across , skimmed up into the air ; for an instant the monster wings blotted out the stars , and then it vanished over the brow of the cliff above us .
We all sat in amazed silence round the fire , like the heroes of Virgil when the Harpies came down upon them .
It was Summerlee who was the first to speak .
`` He keeps a firm grip upon actuality .
The only drawback is that we have conclusively proved by ocular demonstration that there are no water channels down the rocks . ''
`` I think it may be fairly assumed that if it does not come outwards it must run inwards . ''
I was still drinking in this wonderful panorama when the heavy hand of the Professor fell upon my shoulder .
`` Your department , sir ? ''
`` We all have our professions , and soldierin ' is mine .
We are , accordin ' to my ideas , invadin ' a new country , which may or may not be chock-full of enemies of sorts .
To barge blindly into it for want of a little common sense and patience is n't my notion of management . ''
The remonstrance was too reasonable to be disregarded .
Challenger tossed his head and shrugged his heavy shoulders .
`` Well , sir , what do you propose ? ''
And there we were , the four of us , upon the dreamland , the lost world , of Maple White .
To all of us it seemed the moment of our supreme triumph .
Who could have guessed that it was the prelude to our supreme disaster ?
Let me say in a few words how the crushing blow fell upon us .
Now that we had the clue to his action , each of us could cast back and remember some sinister act upon the part of the half-breed -- his constant desire to know our plans , his arrest outside our tent when he was over-hearing them , the furtive looks of hatred which from time to time one or other of us had surprised .
We were still discussing it , endeavoring to adjust our minds to these new conditions , when a singular scene in the plain below arrested our attention .
It was a question which it was easier to ask than to answer .
One thing only was clear .
He was our one trusty link with the outside world .
On no account must he leave us .
And so it is that I have spent nearly the whole of this our first night upon the plateau writing up our experiences by the light of a single candle-lantern .
We supped and camped at the very edge of the cliff , quenching our thirst with two bottles of Apollinaris which were in one of the cases .
It is vital to us to find water , but I think even Lord John himself had had adventures enough for one day , and none of us felt inclined to make the first push into the unknown .
We forbore to light a fire or to make any unnecessary sound .
To-morrow ( or to-day , rather , for it is already dawn as I write ) we shall make our first venture into this strange land .
When I shall be able to write again -- or if I ever shall write again -- I know not .
Meanwhile , I can see that the Indians are still in their place , and I am sure that the faithful Zambo will be here presently to get my letter .
I only trust that it will come to hand .
The most wonderful things have happened and are continually happening to us .
All the paper that I possess consists of five old note-books and a lot of scraps , and I have only the one stylographic pencil ; but so long as I can move my hand I will continue to set down our experiences and impressions , for , since we are the only men of the whole human race to see such things , it is of enormous importance that I should record them whilst they are fresh in my memory and before that fate which seems to be constantly impending does actually overtake us .
Whether Zambo can at last take these letters to the river , or whether I shall myself in some miraculous way carry them back with me , or , finally , whether some daring explorer , coming upon our tracks with the advantage , perhaps , of a perfected monoplane , should find this bundle of manuscript , in any case I can see that what I am writing is destined to immortality as a classic of true adventure .
`` Most interesting , '' said Summerlee , bending over my shin .
`` An enormous blood-tick , as yet , I believe , unclassified . ''
`` The first-fruits of our labors , '' said Challenger in his booming , pedantic fashion .
`` We can not do less than call it Ixodes Maloni .
The very small inconvenience of being bitten , my young friend , can not , I am sure , weigh with you as against the glorious privilege of having your name inscribed in the deathless roll of zoology .
Unhappily you have crushed this fine specimen at the moment of satiation . ''
`` Filthy vermin ! ''
`` You should cultivate the scientific eye and the detached scientific mind , '' said he .
`` To a man of philosophic temperament like myself the blood-tick , with its lancet-like proboscis and its distending stomach , is as beautiful a work of Nature as the peacock or , for that matter , the aurora borealis .
It pains me to hear you speak of it in so unappreciative a fashion .
No doubt , with due diligence , we can secure some other specimen . ''
And now we had to decide upon our immediate movements .
We shifted our position from among the tick-laden bushes until we came to a small clearing thickly surrounded by trees upon all sides .
There were some flat slabs of rock in the center , with an excellent well close by , and there we sat in cleanly comfort while we made our first plans for the invasion of this new country .
Birds were calling among the foliage -- especially one with a peculiar whooping cry which was new to us -- but beyond these sounds there were no signs of life .
`` It can only have one name , '' said he .
`` It is called after the pioneer who discovered it .
It is Maple White Land . ''
Hardly had we started when we came across signs that there were indeed wonders awaiting us .
After a few hundred yards of thick forest , containing many trees which were quite unknown to me , but which Summerlee , who was the botanist of the party , recognized as forms of conifera and of cycadaceous plants which have long passed away in the world below , we entered a region where the stream widened out and formed a considerable bog .
High reeds of a peculiar type grew thickly before us , which were pronounced to be equisetacea , or mare's-tails , with tree-ferns scattered amongst them , all of them swaying in a brisk wind .
Suddenly Lord John , who was walking first , halted with uplifted hand .
`` In the face of specimens ? ''
It was destined that on this very morning -- our first in the new country -- we were to find out what strange hazards lay around us .
It was a loathsome adventure , and one of which I hate to think .
If , as Lord John said , the glade of the iguanodons will remain with us as a dream , then surely the swamp of the pterodactyls will forever be our nightmare .
Let me set down exactly what occurred .
Our professors would gladly have stayed there all day , so entranced were they by this opportunity of studying the life of a prehistoric age .
They pointed out the fish and dead birds lying about among the rocks as proving the nature of the food of these creatures , and I heard them congratulating each other on having cleared up the point why the bones of this flying dragon are found in such great numbers in certain well-defined areas , as in the Cambridge Green-sand , since it was now seen that , like penguins , they lived in gregarious fashion .
`` A most interesting and convincing experience , '' said Challenger , as we halted beside the brook and he bathed a swollen knee .
`` We are exceptionally well informed , Summerlee , as to the habits of the enraged pterodactyl . ''
`` All well , Massa Challenger , all well ! ''
`` Me stay here .
You always find me when you want . ''
`` I say , Malone , '' said he , `` do you remember that place where those beasts were ? ''
`` Exactly , '' said I .
A volcanic tube full of blue clay . ''
`` What of that ? ''
That night ( our third in Maple White Land ) we had an experience which left a fearful impression upon our minds , and made us thankful that Lord John had worked so hard in making our retreat impregnable .
We were all sleeping round our dying fire when we were aroused -- or , rather , I should say , shot out of our slumbers -- by a succession of the most frightful cries and screams to which I have ever listened .
I know no sound to which I could compare this amazing tumult , which seemed to come from some spot within a few hundred yards of our camp .
It was as ear-splitting as any whistle of a railway-engine ; but whereas the whistle is a clear , mechanical , sharp-edged sound , this was far deeper in volume and vibrant with the uttermost strain of agony and horror .
We clapped our hands to our ears to shut out that nerve-shaking appeal .
A cold sweat broke out over my body , and my heart turned sick at the misery of it .
All the woes of tortured life , all its stupendous indictment of high heaven , its innumerable sorrows , seemed to be centered and condensed into that one dreadful , agonized cry .
And then , under this high-pitched , ringing sound there was another , more intermittent , a low , deep-chested laugh , a growling , throaty gurgle of merriment which formed a grotesque accompaniment to the shriek with which it was blended .
For three or four minutes on end the fearsome duet continued , while all the foliage rustled with the rising of startled birds .
Then it shut off as suddenly as it began .
For a long time we sat in horrified silence .
Then Lord John threw a bundle of twigs upon the fire , and their red glare lit up the intent faces of my companions and flickered over the great boughs above our heads .
From the utter silence there emerged a deep , regular pat-pat .
It was the tread of some animal -- the rhythm of soft but heavy pads placed cautiously upon the ground .
It stole slowly round the camp , and then halted near our gateway .
There was a low , sibilant rise and fall -- the breathing of the creature .
Only our feeble hedge separated us from this horror of the night .
Each of us had seized his rifle , and Lord John had pulled out a small bush to make an embrasure in the hedge .
`` I thought he would n't face the fire , '' said Lord John , laughing , as he came back and threw his branch among the faggots .
`` Or megalosaurus , '' said Summerlee .
`` Perhaps Professor Summerlee may have an observation to make , '' he said , and the two savants ascended together into some rarefied scientific atmosphere , where the possibilities of a modification of the birth-rate were weighed against the decline of the food supply as a check in the struggle for existence .
Ever since the mysterious visit which had been paid to our camp we always returned to it with some misgivings .
However , on this occasion we found everything in order .
That evening we had a grand discussion upon our present situation and future plans , which I must describe at some length , as it led to a new departure by which we were enabled to gain a more complete knowledge of Maple White Land than might have come in many weeks of exploring .
It was Summerlee who opened the debate .
All day he had been querulous in manner , and now some remark of Lord John 's as to what we should do on the morrow brought all his bitterness to a head .
`` What we ought to be doing to-day , to-morrow , and all the time , '' said he , `` is finding some way out of the trap into which we have fallen .
You are all turning your brains towards getting into this country .
I say that we should be scheming how to get out of it . ''
`` I am surprised , sir , '' boomed Challenger , stroking his majestic beard , `` that any man of science should commit himself to so ignoble a sentiment .
You are in a land which offers such an inducement to the ambitious naturalist as none ever has since the world began , and you suggest leaving it before we have acquired more than the most superficial knowledge of it or of its contents .
I expected better things of you , Professor Summerlee . ''
`` Our young friend makes up for many obvious mental lacunae by some measure of primitive common sense , '' remarked Challenger .
`` The interests of his deplorable profession are immaterial to us ; but , as he observes , we can not get down in any case , so it is a waste of energy to discuss it . ''
`` We heard a row , as if your foot had slipped .
What was it ? ''
I was so shocked at the sudden and strange appearance of this ape-man that I hesitated whether I should not climb down again and tell my experience to my companions .
But I was already so far up the great tree that it seemed a humiliation to return without having carried out my mission .
`` How do you know that ? ''
`` Because I have never been without that feeling that something malevolent was watching us .
I mentioned it to you , Professor Challenger . ''
The first thing which I saw filled me with amazement .
When I described the view from the summit of the great tree , I said that on the farther cliff I could see a number of dark spots , which appeared to be the mouths of caves .
Now , as I looked up at the same cliffs , I saw discs of light in every direction , ruddy , clearly-defined patches , like the port-holes of a liner in the darkness .
For a moment I thought it was the lava-glow from some volcanic action ; but this could not be so .
Any volcanic action would surely be down in the hollow and not high among the rocks .
What , then , was the alternative ?
It was wonderful , and yet it must surely be .
These ruddy spots must be the reflection of fires within the caves -- fires which could only be lit by the hand of man .
There were human beings , then , upon the plateau .
How gloriously my expedition was justified !
Here was news indeed for us to bear back with us to London !
For a long time I lay and watched these red , quivering blotches of light .
I suppose they were ten miles off from me , yet even at that distance one could observe how , from time to time , they twinkled or were obscured as someone passed before them .
What would I not have given to be able to crawl up to them , to peep in , and to take back some word to my comrades as to the appearance and character of the race who lived in so strange a place !
It was out of the question for the moment , and yet surely we could not leave the plateau until we had some definite knowledge upon the point .
My attention was soon drawn away from these distant sights and brought back to what was going on at my very feet .
Two creatures like large armadillos had come down to the drinking-place , and were squatting at the edge of the water , their long , flexible tongues like red ribbons shooting in and out as they lapped .
A huge deer , with branching horns , a magnificent creature which carried itself like a king , came down with its doe and two fawns and drank beside the armadillos .
No such deer exist anywhere else upon earth , for the moose or elks which I have seen would hardly have reached its shoulders .
Presently it gave a warning snort , and was off with its family among the reeds , while the armadillos also scuttled for shelter .
A new-comer , a most monstrous animal , was coming down the path .
Madman that I was to linger so long before I fled !
Up to then he had hunted by scent , and his movement was slow .
But he had actually seen me as I started to run .
From then onwards he had hunted by sight , for the path showed him where I had gone .
Now , as he came round the curve , he was springing in great bounds .
The moonlight shone upon his huge projecting eyes , the row of enormous teeth in his open mouth , and the gleaming fringe of claws upon his short , powerful forearms .
With a scream of terror I turned and rushed wildly down the path .
Behind me the thick , gasping breathing of the creature sounded louder and louder .
His heavy footfall was beside me .
Every instant I expected to feel his grip upon my back .
And then suddenly there came a crash -- I was falling through space , and everything beyond was darkness and rest .
I was so stunned by this sudden shock that for a time I must have nearly lost my reason .
I have a vague recollection , as one remembers a bad dream , of rushing about through the woods all round the empty camp , calling wildly for my companions .
No answer came back from the silent shadows .
The horrible thought that I might never see them again , that I might find myself abandoned all alone in that dreadful place , with no possible way of descending into the world below , that I might live and die in that nightmare country , drove me to desperation .
I could have torn my hair and beaten my head in my despair .
Only now did I realize how I had learned to lean upon my companions , upon the serene self-confidence of Challenger , and upon the masterful , humorous coolness of Lord John Roxton .
Without them I was like a child in the dark , helpless and powerless .
I did not know which way to turn or what I should do first .
`` One of our Indians .
Other ones beat him and take away his pay .
He come back to us .
Ready now to take letter , bring rope , -- anything . ''
`` A Sight which I shall Never Forget ''
Just as the sun was setting upon that melancholy night I saw the lonely figure of the Indian upon the vast plain beneath me , and I watched him , our one faint hope of salvation , until he disappeared in the rising mists of evening which lay , rose-tinted from the setting sun , between the far-off river and me .
`` What is it all ? ''
I asked , when I had got my breath .
`` Where are the professors ?
And who is it that is after us ? ''
`` That little lot will do no good , but I expect their search parties are all over the wood .
Well , I was telling you my tale of woe .
They got us soon to this town of theirs -- about a thousand huts of branches and leaves in a great grove of trees near the edge of the cliff .
It's three or four miles from here .
The filthy beasts fingered me all over , and I feel as if I should never be clean again .
They tied us up -- the fellow who handled me could tie like a bosun -- and there we lay with our toes up , beneath a tree , while a great brute stood guard over us with a club in his hand .
When I say 'we ' I mean Summerlee and myself .
Old Challenger was up a tree , eatin ' pines and havin ' the time of his life .
I 'm bound to say that he managed to get some fruit to us , and with his own hands he loosened our bonds .
If you 'd seen him sitting up in that tree hob-nobbin ' with his twin brother -- and singin ' in that rollin' bass of his , 'Ring out , wild bells , ' cause music of any kind seemed to put 'em in a good humor , you 'd have smiled ; but we were n't in much mood for laughin ' , as you can guess .
They were inclined , within limits , to let him do what he liked , but they drew the line pretty sharply at us .
It was a mighty consolation to us all to know that you were runnin' loose and had the archives in your keepin ' .
`` I think you have had the escape of your life , young fellah my lad .
It was catchin ' those Indians that put you clean out of their heads , else they would have been back to the camp for you as sure as fate and gathered you in .
Of course , as you said , they have been watchin ' us from the beginnin ' out of that tree , and they knew perfectly well that we were one short .
However , they could think only of this new haul ; so it was I , and not a bunch of apes , that dropped in on you in the morning .
Well , we had a horrid business afterwards .
what a nightmare the whole thing is !
You remember the great bristle of sharp canes down below where we found the skeleton of the American ?
Well , that is just under ape-town , and that 's the jumpin'-off place of their prisoners .
I expect there 's heaps of skeletons there , if we looked for 'em .
They have a sort of clear parade-ground on the top , and they make a proper ceremony about it .
One by one the poor devils have to jump , and the game is to see whether they are merely dashed to pieces or whether they get skewered on the canes .
They took us out to see it , and the whole tribe lined up on the edge .
Four of the Indians jumped , and the canes went through 'em like knittin ' needles through a pat of butter .
No wonder we found that poor Yankee 's skeleton with the canes growin ' between his ribs .
It was horrible -- but it was doocedly interestin ' too .
We were all fascinated to see them take the dive , even when we thought it would be our turn next on the spring-board .
`` Well , it was n't .
They kept six of the Indians up for to-day -- that's how I understood it -- but I fancy we were to be the star performers in the show .
Challenger might get off , but Summerlee and I were in the bill .
Their language is more than half signs , and it was not hard to follow them .
So I thought it was time we made a break for it .
I had been plottin ' it out a bit , and had one or two things clear in my mind .
It was all on me , for Summerlee was useless and Challenger not much better .
The only time they got together they got slangin ' because they could n't agree upon the scientific classification of these red-headed devils that had got hold of us .
One said it was the dryopithecus of Java , the other said it was pithecanthropus .
Madness , I call it -- Loonies , both .
But , as I say , I had thought out one or two points that were helpful .
One was that these brutes could not run as fast as a man in the open .
They have short , bandy legs , you see , and heavy bodies .
Even Challenger could give a few yards in a hundred to the best of them , and you or I would be a perfect Shrubb .
Another point was that they knew nothin ' about guns .
I do n't believe they ever understood how the fellow I shot came by his hurt .
If we could get at our guns there was no sayin ' what we could do .
`` But the professors ! ''
I cried , in consternation .
`` Shoot into the thick of them !
sonny , shoot ! ''
`` I beg , sir , that you will change the subject .
Your remarks are irrelevant and unintelligible .
The question before us is what are we to do with these Indians ?
The obvious thing is to escort them home , if we knew where their home was . ''
`` Our young friend here knows where they live .
I gather that it is some distance . ''
`` I , for one , could never get there .
Surely I hear those brutes still howling upon our track . ''
As he spoke , from the dark recesses of the woods we heard far away the jabbering cry of the ape-men .
The Indians once more set up a feeble wail of fear .
And the Professor , much eased in his mind , settled down to his slumber once more .
We were able now to take a more leisurely view of the Indians whom we had rescued .
They were small men , wiry , active , and well-built , with lank black hair tied up in a bunch behind their heads with a leathern thong , and leathern also were their loin-clothes .
Their faces were hairless , well formed , and good-humored .
The lobes of their ears , hanging ragged and bloody , showed that they had been pierced for some ornaments which their captors had torn out .
Their speech , though unintelligible to us , was fluent among themselves , and as they pointed to each other and uttered the word `` Accala '' many times over , we gathered that this was the name of the nation .
Occasionally , with faces which were convulsed with fear and hatred , they shook their clenched hands at the woods round and cried : `` Doda !
which was surely their term for their enemies .
`` What do you make of them , Challenger ? ''
`` One thing is very clear to me , and that is that the little chap with the front of his head shaved is a chief among them . ''
`` They may be undeveloped types , '' said he , stroking his beard and looking round at them , `` but their deportment in the presence of their superiors might be a lesson to some of our more advanced Europeans .
Strange how correct are the instincts of the natural man ! ''
`` Of course I will come . ''
`` And you , Summerlee ? ''
`` To such base uses do we come , '' said Lord John , smiling .
`` But we are up against it , so what 's the decision ? ''
`` Then it is settled , '' said Lord John , and turning to the chief he nodded and slapped his rifle .
Summerlee had lain down and slept upon the sand , but we others roamed round the edge of the water , seeking to learn something more of this strange country .
Twice we found pits of blue clay , such as we had already seen in the swamp of the pterodactyls .
These were old volcanic vents , and for some reason excited the greatest interest in Lord John .
What attracted Challenger , on the other hand , was a bubbling , gurgling mud geyser , where some strange gas formed great bursting bubbles upon the surface .
He thrust a hollow reed into it and cried out with delight like a schoolboy then he was able , on touching it with a lighted match , to cause a sharp explosion and a blue flame at the far end of the tube .
Still more pleased was he when , inverting a leathern pouch over the end of the reed , and so filling it with the gas , he was able to send it soaring up into the air .
`` An inflammable gas , and one markedly lighter than the atmosphere .
I should say beyond doubt that it contained a considerable proportion of free hydrogen .
The resources of G. E. C. are not yet exhausted , my young friend .
I may yet show you how a great mind molds all Nature to its use . ''
He swelled with some secret purpose , but would say no more .
`` What in the world are you doing ? ''
`` But what do you want in the swamp ? ''
`` No offense , '' said I .
`` Midsummer madness ! ''
Never was our expedition in more imminent danger of complete annihilation .
The inflated membrane shot up with frightful velocity into the air .
In an instant Challenger was pulled off his feet and dragged after it .
I had just time to throw my arms round his ascending waist when I was myself whipped up into the air .
Lord John had me with a rat-trap grip round the legs , but I felt that he also was coming off the ground .
For a moment I had a vision of four adventurers floating like a string of sausages over the land that they had explored .
But , happily , there were limits to the strain which the rope would stand , though none apparently to the lifting powers of this infernal machine .
There was a sharp crack , and we were in a heap upon the ground with coils of rope all over us .
When we were able to stagger to our feet we saw far off in the deep blue sky one dark spot where the lump of basalt was speeding upon its way .
They were neatly done in charcoal upon the white surface , and looked to me at first sight like some sort of rough musical score .
`` Well , our rope is still more than a hundred feet long , '' I cried .
`` Surely we could get down . ''
`` How about the Indians in the cave ? ''
I looked at the mark to which his finger pointed , and I gave a sudden cry of joy .
And so , in humble and thankful mood , I close this account .
Our eyes have seen great wonders and our souls are chastened by what we have endured .
Each is in his own way a better and deeper man .
It may be that when we reach Para we shall stop to refit .
If we do , this letter will be a mail ahead .
If not , it will reach London on the very day that I do .
In either case , my dear Mr. McArdle , I hope very soon to shake you by the hand .
`` The much-discussed meeting of the Zoological Institute , convened to hear the report of the Committee of Investigation sent out last year to South America to test the assertions made by Professor Challenger as to the continued existence of prehistoric life upon that Continent , was held last night in the greater Queen 's Hall , and it is safe to say that it is likely to be a red letter date in the history of Science , for the proceedings were of so remarkable and sensational a character that no one present is ever likely to forget them . ''
( Oh , brother scribe Macdona , what a monstrous opening sentence ! )
`` The tickets were theoretically confined to members and their friends , but the latter is an elastic term , and long before eight o'clock , the hour fixed for the commencement of the proceedings , all parts of the Great Hall were tightly packed .
The general public , however , which most unreasonably entertained a grievance at having been excluded , stormed the doors at a quarter to eight , after a prolonged melee in which several people were injured , including Inspector Scoble of H. Division , whose leg was unfortunately broken .
After this unwarrantable invasion , which not only filled every passage , but even intruded upon the space set apart for the Press , it is estimated that nearly five thousand people awaited the arrival of the travelers .
When they eventually appeared , they took their places in the front of a platform which already contained all the leading scientific men , not only of this country , but of France and of Germany .
Sweden was also represented , in the person of Professor Sergius , the famous Zoologist of the University of Upsala .
The entrance of the four heroes of the occasion was the signal for a remarkable demonstration of welcome , the whole audience rising and cheering for some minutes .
An acute observer might , however , have detected some signs of dissent amid the applause , and gathered that the proceedings were likely to become more lively than harmonious .
It may safely be prophesied , however , that no one could have foreseen the extraordinary turn which they were actually to take .
`` DR. ILLINGWORTH : 'Your Grace , there must be an amendment . '
`` THE CHAIRMAN : 'Order !
Dr. Illingworth , I must direct you to bring your remarks to a conclusion and to move your amendment . '
`` PROFESSOR CHALLENGER : 'No doubt , sir , we have to bow to your scientific authority , although I must admit that the name is unfamiliar .
Passing , then , both the photographs and the entomological collection , I come to the varied and accurate information which we bring with us upon points which have never before been elucidated .
For example , upon the domestic habits of the pterodactyl -- ' ( A voice : 'Bosh , ' and uproar ) -- 'I say , that upon the domestic habits of the pterodactyl we can throw a flood of light .
I can exhibit to you from my portfolio a picture of that creature taken from life which would convince you -- -- '
`` PROFESSOR CHALLENGER : 'You would require to see the thing itself ? '
`` DR. ILLINGWORTH : 'Undoubtedly . '
`` DR. ILLINGWORTH ( laughing ) : 'Beyond a doubt . '
`` What is the matter ?
You are my Gladys , are you not -- little Gladys Hungerton ? ''
`` No , '' said she , `` I am Gladys Potts .
Let me introduce you to my husband . ''
How absurd life is !
I found myself mechanically bowing and shaking hands with a little ginger-haired man who was coiled up in the deep arm-chair which had once been sacred to my own use .
We bobbed and grinned in front of each other .
`` Oh , yes , '' said I .
`` It is quite clear , '' said I .
`` Have some refreshment , '' said the little man , and he added , in a confidential way , `` It 's always like this , ai n't it ?
And must be unless you had polygamy , only the other way round ; you understand . ''
He laughed like an idiot , while I made for the door .
`` Well , just one question , '' I cried .
`` What are you ?
What is your profession ? ''
said I , and vanished , like all disconsolate and broken-hearted heroes , into the darkness , with grief and rage and laughter all simmering within me like a boiling pot .
I fear I may misquote , for I have not `` The Ancient Mariner '' at my elbow , but even as it stands does it not elevate the horse-trough ?
We all do this , I suppose , in a small way for ourselves .
There are few men who have not some chosen quotations printed on their study mantelpieces , or , better still , in their hearts .
Carlyle's transcription of `` Rest !
Shall I not have all Eternity to rest in ! ''
is a pretty good spur to a weary man .
But what we need is a more general application of the same thing for public and not for private use , until people understand that a graven thought is as beautiful an ornament as any graven image , striking through the eye right deep down into the soul .
Our cousins across the Atlantic have the same blending of the comic with their most serious work .
Take the songs which they sang during the most bloody war which the Anglo-Celtic race has ever waged -- the only war in which it could have been said that they were stretched to their uttermost and showed their true form -- '' Tramp , tramp , tramp , '' `` John Brown 's Body , '' `` Marching through Georgia '' -- all had a playful humour running through them .
Only one exception do I know , and that is the most tremendous war-song I can recall .
Even an outsider in time of peace can hardly read it without emotion .
I mean , of course , Julia Ward Howe 's `` War-Song of the Republic , '' with the choral opening line : `` Mine eyes have seen the glory of the coming of the Lord . ''
If that were ever sung upon a battle-field the effect must have been terrific .
Personally , I have always had a very high opinion of a novel which the critics have used somewhat harshly , and which came almost the last from his tired pen .
I mean `` Count Robert of Paris . ''
I am convinced that if it had been the first , instead of the last , of the series it would have attracted as much attention as `` Waverley . ''
I can understand the state of mind of the expert , who cried out in mingled admiration and despair : `` I have studied the conditions of Byzantine Society all my life , and here comes a Scotch lawyer who makes the whole thing clear to me in a flash ! ''
Many men could draw with more or less success Norman England , or mediaeval France , but to reconstruct a whole dead civilization in so plausible a way , with such dignity and such minuteness of detail , is , I should think , a most wonderful tour de force .
His failing health showed itself before the end of the novel , but had the latter half equalled the first , and contained scenes of such humour as Anna Comnena reading aloud her father 's exploits , or of such majesty as the account of the muster of the Crusaders upon the shores of the Bosphorus , then the book could not have been gainsaid its rightful place in the very front rank of the novels .
For that reason his life is good reading , and there it is on the same shelf as the novels .
Lockhart was , of course , his son-in-law and his admiring friend .
The ideal biographer should be a perfectly impartial man , with a sympathetic mind , but a stern determination to tell the absolute truth .
One would like the frail , human side of a man as well as the other .
I can not believe that anyone in the world was ever quite so good as the subject of most of our biographies .
Surely these worthy people swore a little sometimes , or had a keen eye for a pretty face , or opened the second bottle when they would have done better to stop at the first , or did something to make us feel that they were men and brothers .
They need not go the length of the lady who began a biography of her deceased husband with the words -- '' D -- - was a dirty man , '' but the books certainly would be more readable , and the subjects more lovable too , if we had greater light and shade in the picture .
And to pursue this line of thought , is it possible that frail physical powers and an unstable nervous system , by keeping a man's materialism at its lowest , render him a more fitting agent for these spiritual uses ?
It is an old tag that
But , apart from genius , even a moderate faculty for imaginative work seems to me to weaken seriously the ties between the soul and the body .
Even those great men who are usually spoken of as if they had rounded off their career were really premature in their end .
Thackeray , for example , in spite of his snowy head , was only 52 ; Dickens attained the age of 58 ; on the whole , Sir Walter , with his 61 years of life , although he never wrote a novel until he was over 40 , had , fortunately for the world , a longer working career than most of his brethren .
It is all very well to pooh-pooh Boswell as Macaulay has done , but it is not by chance that a man writes the best biography in the language .
He had some great and rare literary qualities .
One was a clear and vivid style , more flexible and Saxon than that of his great model .
Another was a remarkable discretion which hardly once permitted a fault of taste in this whole enormous book where he must have had to pick his steps with pitfalls on every side of him .
They say that he was a fool and a coxcomb in private life .
He is never so with a pen in his hand .
Of all his numerous arguments with Johnson , where he ventured some little squeak of remonstrance , before the roaring `` No , sir ! ''
came to silence him , there are few in which his views were not , as experience proved , the wiser .
On the question of slavery he was in the wrong .
But I could quote from memory at least a dozen cases , including such vital subjects as the American Revolution , the Hanoverian Dynasty , Religious Toleration , and so on , where Boswell 's views were those which survived .
And his political opinions !
They sound now like a caricature .
I suppose even in those days they were reactionary .
`` A poor man has no honour . ''
`` Charles the Second was a good King . ''
`` Governments should turn out of the Civil Service all who were on the other side . ''
`` Judges in India should be encouraged to trade . ''
`` No country is the richer on account of trade . ''
( I wonder if Adam Smith was in the company when this proposition was laid down ! )
`` A landed proprietor should turn out those tenants who did not vote as he wished . ''
`` It is not good for a labourer to have his wages raised . ''
`` When the balance of trade is against a country , the margin must be paid in current coin . ''
Those were a few of his convictions .
It can not be said that these prejudices were founded on any strong principle , or that they could not be altered where his own personal interests demanded it .
This is one of the weak points of his record .
In his dictionary he abused pensions and pensioners as a means by which the State imposed slavery upon hirelings .
When he wrote the unfortunate definition a pension must have seemed a most improbable contingency , but when George III.
, either through policy or charity , offered him one a little later , he made no hesitation in accepting it .
One would have liked to feel that the violent expression of his convictions represented a real intensity of feeling , but the facts in this instance seem against it .
But once more to return to Gibbon .
What a mind it must have been which first planned , and then , with the incessant labour of twenty years , carried out that enormous work !
There was no classical author so little known , no Byzantine historian so diffuse , no monkish chronicle so crabbed , that they were not assimilated and worked into their appropriate place in the huge framework .
Great application , great perseverance , great attention to detail was needed in all this , but the coral polyp has all those qualities , and somehow in the heart of his own creation the individuality of the man himself becomes as insignificant and as much overlooked as that of the little creature that builds the reef .
A thousand know Gibbon 's work for one who cares anything for Gibbon .
But the one amazing thing which will never be explained about Pepys is what on earth induced him to go to the incredible labour of writing down in shorthand cipher not only all the trivialities of his life , but even his own very gross delinquencies which any other man would have been only too glad to forget .
The Diary was kept for about ten years , and was abandoned because the strain upon his eyes of the crabbed shorthand was helping to destroy his sight .
I suppose that he became so familiar with it that he wrote it and read it as easily as he did ordinary script .
But even so , it was a huge labour to compile these books of strange manuscript .
Was it an effort to leave some memorial of his own existence to single him out from all the countless sons of men ?
In such a case he would assuredly have left directions in somebody 's care with a reference to it in the deed by which he bequeathed his library to Cambridge .
In that way he could have ensured having his Diary read at any date he chose to name after his death .
But no allusion to it was left , and if it had not been for the ingenuity and perseverance of a single scholar the dusty volumes would still lie unread in some top shelf of the Pepysian Library .
Publicity , then , was not his object .
What could it have been ?
The only alternative is reference and self-information .
You will observe in his character a curious vein of method and order , by which he loved , to be for ever estimating his exact wealth , cataloguing his books , or scheduling his possessions .
It is conceivable that this systematic recording of his deeds -- even of his misdeeds -- was in some sort analogous , sprung from a morbid tidiness of mind .
It may be a weak explanation , but it is difficult to advance another one .
What national change is it which has driven music from the land ?
Has life become so serious that song has passed out of it ?
In Southern climes one hears poor folk sing for pure lightness of heart .
In England , alas , the sound of a poor man 's voice raised in song means only too surely that he is drunk .
And yet it is consoling to know that the germ of the old powers is always there ready to sprout forth if they be nourished and cultivated .
If our cathedral choirs were the best in the old Catholic days , it is equally true , I believe , that our orchestral associations are now the best in Europe .
So , at least , the German papers said on the occasion of the recent visit of a north of England choir .
But one can not read Pepys without knowing that the general musical habit is much less cultivated now than of old .
But , my word , what English the fellow could write !
What an organ-roll he could get into his sentences !
How nervous and vital and vivid it all is !
Now , that is a discriminating portrait -- a portrait which really helps you to see that which the writer sets out to describe .
After reading it one can understand why even in reminiscent sporting descriptions of those old days , amid all the Tonis and Bills and Jacks , it is always Mr. John Jackson .
He was the friend and instructor of Byron and of half the bloods in town .
Jackson it was who , in the heat of combat , seized the Jew Mendoza by the hair , and so ensured that the pugs for ever afterwards should be a close-cropped race .
Inside you see the square face of old Broughton , the supreme fighting man of the eighteenth century , the man whose humble ambition it was to begin with the pivot man of the Prussian Guard , and work his way through the regiment .
He had a chronicler , the good Captain Godfrey , who has written some English which would take some beating .
How about this passage ?
The latter days of the fighting men were often curious and unexpected , though as a rule they were short-lived , for the alternation of the excess of their normal existence and the asceticism of their training undermined their constitution .
Their popularity among both men and women was their undoing , and the king of the ring went down at last before that deadliest of light-weights , the microbe of tubercle , or some equally fatal and perhaps less reputable bacillus .
The crockiest of spectators had a better chance of life than the magnificent young athlete whom he had come to admire .
Jem Belcher died at 30 , Hooper at 31 , Pearce , the Game Chicken , at 32 , Turner at 35 , Hudson at 38 , Randall , the Nonpareil , at 34 .
Occasionally , when they did reach mature age , their lives took the strangest turns .
Gully , as is well known , became a wealthy man , and Member for Pontefract in the Reform Parliament .
Humphries developed into a successful coal merchant .
Jack Martin became a convinced teetotaller and vegetarian .
Jem Ward , the Black Diamond , developed considerable powers as an artist .
Cribb , Spring , Langan , and many others , were successful publicans .
Strangest of all , perhaps , was Broughton , who spent his old age haunting every sale of old pictures and bric-a-brac .
One who saw him has recorded his impression of the silent old gentleman , clad in old-fashioned garb , with his catalogue in his hand -- Broughton , once the terror of England , and now the harmless and gentle collector .
Talking of weird American stories , have you ever read any of the works of Ambrose Bierce ?
I have one of his works there , `` In the Midst of Life . ''
This man had a flavour quite his own , and was a great artist in his way .
It is not cheering reading , but it leaves its mark upon you , and that is the proof of good work .
It is not a subject to be dogmatic upon , for I can imagine that these three writers would appeal quite differently to every temperament , and that whichever one might desire to champion one could find arguments to sustain one 's choice .
Yet I can not think that any large section of the critical public could maintain that Smollett was on the same level as the other two .
Ethically he is gross , though his grossness is accompanied by a full-blooded humour which is more mirth-compelling than the more polished wit of his rivals .
I can remember in callow boyhood -- puris omnia pura -- reading `` Peregrine Pickle , '' and laughing until I cried over the Banquet in the Fashion of the Ancients .
I read it again in my manhood with the same effect , though with a greater appreciation of its inherent bestiality .
That merit , a gross primitive merit , he has in a high degree , but in no other respect can he challenge comparison with either Fielding or Richardson .
His view of life is far more limited , his characters less varied , his incidents less distinctive , and his thoughts less deep .
Assuredly I , for one , should award him the third place in the trio .
It was all attuned to the sedate life of that , the last of the quiet centuries .
In the lonely country-house , with few letters and fewer papers , do you suppose that the readers ever complained of the length of a book , or could have too much of the happy Pamela or of the unhappy Clarissa ?
It is only under extraordinary circumstances that one can now get into that receptive frame of mind which was normal then .
Such an occasion is recorded by Macaulay , when he tells how in some Indian hill station , where books were rare , he let loose a copy of `` Clarissa . ''
The effect was what might have been expected .
Richardson in a suitable environment went through the community like a mild fever .
They lived him , and dreamed him , until the whole episode passed into literary history , never to be forgotten by those who experienced it .
It is tuned , for every ear .
That beautiful style is so correct and yet so simple that there is no page which a scholar may not applaud nor a servant-maid understand .
What a wonderful description and example of style !
And how vivid is the impression left by such expressions as `` all the pages in a breeze . ''
As a comment on Carlyle , and as a sample of Meredith , the passage is equally perfect .
He has , as you see , a goodly line of his brothers beside him .
There are the Italian ones , `` Sandra Belloni , '' and `` Vittoria '' ; there is `` Rhoda Fleming , '' which carried Stevenson off his critical feet ; `` Beauchamp 's Career , '' too , dealing with obsolete politics .
No great writer should spend himself upon a temporary theme .
It is like the beauty who is painted in some passing fashion of gown .
She tends to become obsolete along with her frame .
Here also is the dainty `` Diana , '' the egoist with immortal Willoughby Pattern , eternal type of masculine selfishness , and `` Harry Richmond , '' the first chapters of which are , in my opinion , among the finest pieces of narrative prose in the language .
That great mind would have worked in any form which his age had favoured .
He is a novelist by accident .
As an Elizabethan he would have been a great dramatist ; under Queen Anne a great essayist .
But whatever medium he worked in , he must equally have thrown the image of a great brain and a great soul .
Here is Marbot at this end -- the first of all soldier books in the world .
This is the complete three-volume French edition , with red and gold cover , smart and debonnaire like its author .
Here he is in one frontispiece with his pleasant , round , boyish face , as a Captain of his beloved Chasseurs .
And here in the other is the grizzled old bull-dog as a full general , looking as full of fight as ever .
It was a real blow to me when some one began to throw doubts upon the authenticity of Marbot 's memoirs .
Homer may be dissolved into a crowd of skin-clad bards .
Even Shakespeare may be jostled in his throne of honour by plausible Baconians ; but the human , the gallant , the inimitable Marbot !
His book is that which gives us the best picture by far of the Napoleonic soldiers , and to me they are even more interesting than their great leader , though his must ever be the most singular figure in history .
But those soldiers , with their huge shakoes , their hairy knapsacks , and their hearts of steel -- what men they were !
And what a latent power there must be in this French nation which could go on pouring out the blood of its sons for twenty-three years with hardly a pause !
Portsmouth , Plymouth , and Sheerness in flames , with London either levelled to the ground or ransomed at his own figure -- that was a more feasible programme .
Then , with the united fleets of conquered Europe at his back , enormous armies and an inexhaustible treasury , swollen with the ransom of Britain , he could turn to that conquest of America which would win back the old colonies of France and leave him master of the world .
If the worst happened and he had met his Waterloo upon the South Downs , he would have done again what he did in Egypt and once more in Russia : hurried back to France in a swift vessel , and still had force enough to hold his own upon the Continent .
It would , no doubt , have been a big stake to lay upon the table -- 150,000 of his best -- but he could play again if he lost ; while , if he won , he cleared the board .
A fine game -- if little Nelson had not stopped it , and with one blow fixed the edge of salt water as the limit of Napoleon 's power .
What a load of moral responsibility upon one man !
But his mind was insensible to moral responsibility .
Surely if it had not been it must have been crushed beneath it .
Now , if you want to understand the character of Napoleon -- but surely I must take a fresh start before I launch on so portentous a subject as that .
But before I leave the military men let me , for the credit of my own country , after that infamous incident of the letters , indicate these six well-thumbed volumes of `` Napier 's History . ''
This is the story of the great Peninsular War , by one who fought through it himself , and in no history has a more chivalrous and manly account been given of one 's enemy .
Indeed , Napier seems to me to push it too far , for his admiration appears to extend not only to the gallant soldiers who opposed him , but to the character and to the ultimate aims of their leader .
He was , in fact , a political follower of Charles James Fox , and his heart seems to have been with the enemy even at the moment when he led his men most desperately against them .
In the verdict of history the action of those men who , in their honest zeal for freedom , inflamed somewhat by political strife , turned against their own country , when it was in truth the Champion of Freedom , and approved of a military despot of the most uncompromising kind , seems wildly foolish .
Parkman is worth reading , if it were only for his account of the Indians .
Perhaps the very strangest thing about them , and the most unaccountable , is their small numbers .
The Iroquois were one of the most formidable of tribes .
They were of the Five Nations , whose scalping-parties wandered over an expanse of thousands of square miles .
Yet there is good reason to doubt whether the whole five nations could have put as many thousand warriors in the field .
It was the same with all the other tribes of Northern Americans , both in the east , the north , and the west .
Their numbers were always insignificant .
And yet they had that huge country to themselves , the best of climates , and plenty of food .
Why was it that they did not people it thickly ?
It may be taken as a striking example of the purpose and design which run through the affairs of men , that at the very moment when the old world was ready to overflow the new world was empty to receive it .
Had North America been peopled as China is peopled , the Europeans might have founded some settlements , but could never have taken possession of the continent .
Buffon has made the striking remark that the creative power appeared to have never had great vigour in America .
He alluded to the abundance of the flora and fauna as compared with that of other great divisions of the earth 's surface .
Whether the numbers of the Indians are an illustration of the same fact , or whether there is some special cause , is beyond my very modest scientific attainments .
When one reflects upon the countless herds of bison which used to cover the Western plains , or marks in the present day the race statistics of the French Canadians at one end of the continent , and of the Southern negro at the other , it seems absurd to suppose that there is any geographical reason against Nature being as prolific here as elsewhere .
However , these be deeper waters , and with your leave we will get back into my usual six-inch wading-depth once more .
It was not what Lady Byron called `` the mimic woe '' of the poet , but it was rather the grand defiance of the Indian warrior at the stake , whose proud soul can hold in hand his quivering body .
There were two quite distinct veins of poetry in Henley , each the very extreme from the other .
The one was heroic , gigantic , running to large sweeping images and thundering words .
Such are the `` Song of the Sword '' and much more that he has written , like the wild singing of some Northern scald .
The other , and to my mind both the more characteristic and the finer side of his work , is delicate , precise , finely etched , with extraordinarily vivid little pictures drawn in carefully phrased and balanced English .
Such are the `` Hospital Verses , '' while the `` London Voluntaries '' stand midway between the two styles .
you have not read the `` Hospital Verses ! ''
Then get the `` Book of Verses '' and read them without delay .
You will surely find something there which , for good or ill , is unique .
You can name -- or at least I can name -- nothing to compare it with .
Goldsmith and Crabbe have written of indoor themes ; but their monotonous , if majestic metre , wearies the modern reader .
But this is so varied , so flexible , so dramatic .
It stands by itself .
Confound the weekly journals and all the other lightning conductors which caused such a man to pass away , and to leave a total output of about five booklets behind him !
However , all this is an absolute digression , for the books had no business in this shelf at all .
This corner is meant for chronicles of various sorts .
Here are three in a line , which carry you over a splendid stretch of French ( which usually means European ) history , each , as luck would have it , beginning just about the time when the other leaves off .
The first is Froissart , the second de Monstrelet , and the third de Comines .
When you have read the three you have the best contemporary account first hand of considerably more than a century -- a fair slice out of the total written record of the human race .
`` Critics kind -- never mind !
Critics flatter -- no matter !
Critics blame -- all the same !
Critics curse -- none the worse !
Do your best -- -- -- the rest ! ''
Another book which shows the romance and the heroism which still linger upon earth is that large copy of the `` Voyage of the Discovery in the Antarctic '' by Captain Scott .
Written in plain sailor fashion with no attempt at over-statement or colour , it none the less ( or perhaps all the more ) leaves a deep impression upon the mind .
As one reads it , and reflects on what one reads , one seems to get a clear view of just those qualities which make the best kind of Briton .
Every nation produces brave men .
Every nation has men of energy .
But there is a certain type which mixes its bravery and its energy with a gentle modesty and a boyish good-humour , and it is just this type which is the highest .
Here the whole expedition seem to have been imbued with the spirit of their commander .
No flinching , no grumbling , every discomfort taken as a jest , no thought of self , each working only for the success of the enterprise .
When you have read of such privations so endured and so chronicled , it makes one ashamed to show emotion over the small annoyances of daily life .
Read of Scott 's blinded , scurvy-struck party staggering on to their goal , and then complain , if you can , of the heat of a northern sun , or the dust of a country road .
The tradition of Arctic exploration is a noble one among Americans as well as ourselves .
The next book is a case in point .
It is Greely 's `` Arctic Service , '' and it is a worthy shelf-companion to Scott 's `` Account of the Voyage of the Discovery . ''
There are incidents in this book which one can never forget .
The episode of those twenty-odd men lying upon that horrible bluff , and dying one a day from cold and hunger and scurvy , is one which dwarfs all our puny tragedies of romance .
And the gallant starving leader giving lectures on abstract science in an attempt to take the thoughts of the dying men away from their sufferings -- what a picture !
It is bad to suffer from cold and bad to suffer from hunger , and bad to live in the dark ; but that men could do all these things for six months on end , and that some should live to tell the tale , is , indeed , a marvel .
What a world of feeling lies in the exclamation of the poor dying lieutenant : `` Well , this _is_ wretched , '' he groaned , as he turned his face to the wall .
I have said that `` Omoo '' and `` Typee , '' the books in which the sailor Melville describes his life among the Otaheitans , have sunk too rapidly into obscurity .
What a charming and interesting task there is for some critic of catholic tastes and sympathetic judgment to undertake rescue work among the lost books which would repay salvage !
A small volume setting forth their names and their claims to attention would be interesting in itself , and more interesting in the material to which it would serve as an introduction .
I am sure there are many good books , possibly there are some great ones , which have been swept away for a time in the rush .
What chance , for example , has any book by an unknown author which is published at a moment of great national excitement , when some public crisis arrests the popular mind ?
Hundreds have been still-born in this fashion , and are there none which should have lived among them ?
Now , there is a book , a modern one , and written by a youth under thirty .
It is Snaith 's `` Broke of Covenden , '' and it scarce attained a second edition .
I do not say that it is a Classic -- I should not like to be positive that it is not -- but I am perfectly sure that the man who wrote it has the possibility of a Classic within him .
Here is another novel -- '' Eight Days , '' by Forrest .
You ca n't buy it .
You are lucky even if you can find it in a library .
Yet nothing ever written will bring the Indian Mutiny home to you as this book will do .
Here 's another which I will warrant you never heard of .
It is Powell 's `` Animal Episodes . ''
No , it is not a collection of dog-and-cat anecdotes , but it is a series of very singularly told stories which deal with the animal side of the human , and which you will feel have an entirely new flavour if you have a discriminating palate .
The book came out ten years ago , and is utterly unknown .
If I can point to three in one small shelf , how many lost lights must be flitting in the outer darkness !
Let me hark back for a moment to the subject with which I began , the romance of travel and the frequent heroism of modern life .
I have two books of Scientific Exploration here which exhibit both these qualities as strongly as any I know .
I could not choose two better books to put into a young man 's hands if you wished to train him first in a gentle and noble firmness of mind , and secondly in a great love for and interest in all that pertains to Nature .
The one is Darwin 's `` Journal of the Voyage of the Beagle . ''
Any discerning eye must have detected long before the `` Origin of Species '' appeared , simply on the strength of this book of travel , that a brain of the first order , united with many rare qualities of character , had arisen .
Never was there a more comprehensive mind .
Nothing was too small and nothing too great for its alert observation .
One page is occupied in the analysis of some peculiarity in the web of a minute spider , while the next deals with the evidence for the subsidence of a continent and the extinction of a myriad animals .
And his sweep of knowledge was so great -- botany , geology , zoology , each lending its corroborative aid to the other .
How a youth of Darwin 's age -- he was only twenty-three when in the year 1831 he started round the world on the surveying ship Beagle -- could have acquired such a mass of information fills one with the same wonder , and is perhaps of the same nature , as the boy musician who exhibits by instinct the touch of the master .
Another quality which one would be less disposed to look for in the savant is a fine contempt for danger , which is veiled in such modesty that one reads between the lines in order to detect it .
When he was in the Argentina , the country outside the Settlements was covered with roving bands of horse Indians , who gave no quarter to any whites .
Yet Darwin rode the four hundred miles between Bahia and Buenos Ayres , when even the hardy Gauchos refused to accompany him .
Personal danger and a hideous death were small things to him compared to a new beetle or an undescribed fly .
Here we are at the final seance .
For the last time , my patient comrade , I ask you to make yourself comfortable upon the old green settee , to look up at the oaken shelves , and to bear with me as best you may while I preach about their contents .
And yet , as I look along the lines of the volumes , I have not mentioned one out of ten of those to which I owe a debt of gratitude , nor one in a hundred of the thoughts which course through my brain as I look at them .
As well perhaps , for the man who has said all that he has to say has invariably said too much .
No , I have not the Edinburgh edition .
If you think of a presentation -- but I should be the last to suggest it .
Perhaps on the whole I would prefer to have him in scattered books , rather than in a complete set .
The half is more than the whole of most authors , and not the least of him .
I am sure that his friends who reverenced his memory had good warrant and express instructions to publish this complete edition -- very possibly it was arranged before his lamented end .
Yet , speaking generally , I would say that an author was best served by being very carefully pruned before being exposed to the winds of time .
Let every weak twig , every immature shoot be shorn away , and nothing but strong , sturdy , well-seasoned branches left .
So shall the whole tree stand strong for years to come .
How false an impression of the true Stevenson would our critical grandchild acquire if he chanced to pick down any one of half a dozen of these volumes !
As we watched his hand stray down the rank , how we would pray that it might alight upon the ones we love , on the `` New Arabian Nights '' `` The Ebb-tide , '' `` The Wrecker , '' `` Kidnapped , '' or `` Treasure Island . ''
These can surely never lose their charm .
Had they any wrongs to tell ?
It is difficult to reach that height of philosophic detachment which enables the historian to deal absolutely impartially where his own country is a party to the quarrel .
But at least we may allow that there is a case for our adversary .
Our annexation of Natal had been by no means definite , and it was they and not we who first broke that bloodthirsty Zulu power which threw its shadow across the country .
It was hard after such trials and such exploits to turn their back upon the fertile land which they had conquered , and to return to the bare pastures of the upland veldt .
They carried out of Natal a heavy sense of injury , which has helped to poison our relations with them ever since .
It was , in a way , a momentous episode , this little skirmish of soldiers and emigrants , for it was the heading off of the Boer from the sea and the confinement of his ambition to the land .
Had it gone the other way , a new and possibly formidable flag would have been added to the maritime nations .
It can not be too often pointed out that in this annexation , the starting-point of our troubles , Great Britain , however mistaken she may have been , had no possible selfish interest in view .
There were no Rand mines in those days , nor was there anything in the country to tempt the most covetous .
An empty treasury and two expensive native wars were the reversion which we took over .
It was honestly considered that the country was in too distracted a state to govern itself , and had , by its weakness , become a scandal and a danger to its neighbours and to itself .
There was nothing sordid in the British action , though it may have been premature and injudicious .
There is some reason to think that if it had been delayed it would eventually have been done on the petition of the majority of the inhabitants .
An armistice was concluded on March 5 , 1881 , which led up to a peace on the 23rd of the same month .
The Government , after yielding to force what it had repeatedly refused to friendly representations , made a clumsy compromise in their settlement .
A policy of idealism and Christian morality should have been thorough if it were to be tried at all .
It was obvious that if the annexation were unjust , then the Transvaal should have reverted to the condition in which it was before the annexation , as defined by the Sand River Convention .
But the Government for some reason would not go so far as this .
They niggled and quibbled and bargained until the State was left as a curious hybrid thing such as the world has never seen .
It was a republic which was part of the system of a monarchy , dealt with by the Colonial Office , and included under the heading of 'Colonies ' in the news columns of the 'Times . '
It was autonomous , and yet subject to some vague suzerainty , the limits of which no one has ever been able to define .
Altogether , in its provisions and in its omissions , the Convention of Pretoria appears to prove that our political affairs were as badly conducted as our military in this unfortunate year of 1881 .
In 1884 a deputation from the Transvaal visited England , and at their solicitation the clumsy Treaty of Pretoria was altered into the still more clumsy Convention of London .
The changes in the provisions were all in favour of the Boers , and a second successful war could hardly have given them more than Lord Derby handed them in time of peace .
Their style was altered from the Transvaal to the South African Republic , a change which was ominously suggestive of expansion in the future .
The control of Great Britain over their foreign policy was also relaxed , though a power of veto was retained .
But the most important thing of all , and the fruitful cause of future trouble , lay in an omission .
A suzerainty is a vague term , but in politics , as in theology , the more nebulous a thing is the more does it excite the imagination and the passions of men .
This suzerainty was declared in the preamble of the first treaty , and no mention of it was made in the second .
Was it thereby abrogated or was it not ?
The British contention is that only the articles were changed , and that the preamble continued to hold good for both treaties .
They point out that not only the suzerainty , but also the independence , of the Transvaal is proclaimed in that preamble , and that if one lapses the other must do so also .
On the other hand , the Boers point to the fact that there is actually a preamble to the second convention , which would seem , therefore , to take the place of the first .
As a matter of fact , the discussion is a barren one , since both parties agree that Great Britain retained certain rights over the making of treaties by the Republic , which rights place her in a different position to an entirely independent state .
Whether this difference amounts to a suzerainty or not is a subject for the academic discussion of international jurists .
What is of importance is the fact , not the word .
That they had no control over education .
Mr. John Robinson , the Director-General of the Johannesburg Educational Council , has reckoned the sum spent on the Uitlander schools as 650_l._ out of 63,000_l._ allotted for education , making 1_s._ 10_d._ per head per annum on Uitlander children , and 8_l._ 6_s._ per head on Boer children -- the Uitlander , as always , paying seven-eighths of the original sum .
No power of municipal government .
Watercarts instead of pipes , filthy buckets instead of drains , a corrupt and violent police , a high death-rate in what should be a health resort -- all this in a city which they had built themselves .
But it is a poor cause which can not bear to fairly state and honestly consider the case of its opponents .
The Boers had made , as has been briefly shown , great efforts to establish a country of their own .
They had travelled far , worked hard , and fought bravely .
After all their efforts they were fated to see an influx of strangers into their country , some of them men of questionable character , who threatened to outnumber the original inhabitants .
If the franchise were granted to these , there could be no doubt that , though at first the Boers might control a majority of the votes , it was only a question of time before the new-comers would dominate the Raad and elect their own President , who might adopt a policy abhorrent to the original owners of the land .
Were the Boers to lose by the ballot-box the victory which they had won by their rifles ?
Was it fair to expect it ?
These new-comers came for gold .
They got their gold .
Their companies paid a hundred per cent .
Was not that enough to satisfy them ?
If they did not like the country , why did they not leave it ?
No one compelled them to stay there .
But if they stayed , let them be thankful that they were tolerated at all , and not presume to interfere with the laws of those by whose courtesy they were allowed to enter the country .
Again , the argument of the Boers would be more valid had they received no benefit from these immigrants .
If they had ignored them they might fairly have stated that they did not desire their presence .
But even while they protested they grew rich at the Uitlanders ' expense .
They could not have it both ways .
It would be consistent to discourage him and not profit by him , or to make him comfortable and build the State upon his money ; but to ill-treat him and at the same time grow strong by his taxation must surely be an injustice .
And again , the whole argument is based upon the narrow racial supposition that every naturalised citizen not of Boer extraction must necessarily be unpatriotic .
This is not borne out by the examples of history .
The new-comer soon becomes as proud of his country and as jealous of her liberty as the old .
Had President Kruger given the franchise generously to the Uitlander , his pyramid would have been firm upon its base and not balanced upon its apex .
It is true that the corrupt oligarchy would have vanished , and the spirit of a broader , more tolerant freedom influenced the counsels of the State .
But the republic would have become stronger and more permanent with a population who , if they differed in details , were united in essentials .
Whether such a solution would have been to the advantage of British interests in South Africa is quite another question .
In more ways than one President Kruger has been a good friend to the Empire .
In 1890 the inrush of outsiders alarmed the Boers , and the franchise was raised so as to be only attainable by those who had lived fourteen years in the country .
The Uitlanders , who were increasing rapidly in numbers and were suffering from the formidable list of grievances already enumerated , perceived that their wrongs were so numerous that it was hopeless to have them set right seriatim , and that only by obtaining the leverage of the franchise could they hope to move the heavy burden which weighed them down .
In 1893 a petition of 13,000 Uitlanders , couched in most respectful terms , was submitted to the Raad , but met with contemptuous neglect .
Undeterred , however , by this failure , the National Reform Union , an association which was not one of capitalists , came back to the attack in 1894 .
They drew up a petition which was signed by 35,000 adult male Uitlanders , as great a number probably as the total Boer male population of the country .
A small liberal body in the Raad supported this memorial and endeavoured in vain to obtain some justice for the new-comers .
Mr. Jeppe was the mouthpiece of this select band .
'They own half the soil , they pay at least three-quarters of the taxes , ' said he .
'They are men who in capital , energy , and education are at least our equals .
What will become of us or our children on that day when we may find ourselves in a minority of one in twenty without a single friend among the other nineteen , among those who will then tell us that they wished to be brothers , but that we by our own act have made them strangers to the republic ? '
Such reasonable and liberal sentiments were combated by members who asserted that the signatures could not belong to law-abiding citizens , since they were actually agitating against the law of the franchise , and others whose intolerance was expressed by the defiance of the member already quoted , who challenged the Uitlanders to come out and fight .
The champions of exclusiveness and racial hatred won the day .
The memorial was rejected by sixteen votes to eight , and the franchise law was , on the initiative of the President , actually made more stringent than ever , being framed in such a way that during the fourteen years of probation the applicant should give up his previous nationality , so that for that period he would belong to no country at all .
No hopes were held out that any possible attitude upon the part of the Uitlanders would soften the determination of the President and his burghers .
One who remonstrated was led outside the State buildings by the President , who pointed up at the national flag .
'You see that flag ? '
'If I grant the franchise , I may as well pull it down . '
His animosity against the immigrants was bitter .
'Burghers , friends , thieves , murderers , new-comers , and others , ' is the conciliatory opening of one of his public addresses .
Though Johannesburg is only thirty-two miles from Pretoria , and though the State of which he was the head depended for its revenue upon the goldfields , he paid it only three visits in nine years .
This settled animosity was deplorable , but not unnatural .
A man imbued with the idea of a chosen people , and unread in any book save the one which cultivates this very idea , could not be expected to have learned the historical lessons of the advantages which a State reaps from a liberal policy .
To him it was as if the Ammonites and Moabites had demanded admission into the twelve tribes .
He mistook an agitation against the exclusive policy of the State for one against the existence of the State itself .
A wide franchise would have made his republic firm-based and permanent .
It was a minority of the Uitlanders who had any desire to come into the British system .
They were a cosmopolitan crowd , only united by the bond of a common injustice .
The majority of the British immigrants had no desire to subvert the State .
But when every other method had failed , and their petition for the rights of freemen had been flung back at them , it was natural that their eyes should turn to that flag which waved to the north , the west , and the south of them -- the flag which means purity of government with equal rights and equal duties for all men .
Constitutional agitation was laid aside , arms were smuggled in , and everything prepared for an organised rising .
Determined attempts have been made to connect the British Government with this fiasco , and to pretend that the Colonial Secretary and other statesmen were cognisant of it .
Such an impression has been fostered by the apparent reluctance of the Commission of Inquiry to push their researches to the uttermost .
It is much to be regretted that every possible telegram and letter should not have been called for upon that occasion ; but the idea that this was not done for fear that Mr. Chamberlain and the British Government would be implicated , becomes absurd in the presence of the fact that the Commission included among its members Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman and Sir William Harcourt .
Is it conceivable that these gentlemen held their hands for fear of damaging the Government , or that Mr. Chamberlain could afterwards have the effrontery to publicly and solemnly deny all knowledge of the business in the presence of gentlemen who had connived at the suppression of the proofs that he _did_ know ?
Such a supposition is ridiculous , and yet it is involved in the theory that the Commission refrained from pushing their examination because they were afraid of showing their country to have been in the wrong .
But now to this debate , which had so little of urgency in it that seven months intervened between statement and reply , there came the bitterly vital question of the wrongs and appeal of the Uitlanders .
Sir Alfred Milner , the British Commissioner in South Africa , a man of liberal politics who had been appointed by a Conservative Government , commanded the respect and confidence of all parties .
His record was that of an able , clear-headed man , too just to be either guilty of or tolerant of injustice .
To him the matter was referred , and a conference was arranged between President Kruger and him at Bloemfontein , the capital of the Orange Free State .
They met on May 31 , 1899 .
Such were the grave and measured words with which the British pro-consul warned his countrymen of what was to come .
He saw the stormcloud piling in the north , but even his eyes had not yet discerned how near and how terrible was the tempest .
'_August 4 , 1899._ -- Communicate confidentially to the President that , having heard from the Transvaal Minister the English proposal of the International Commission , I recommend the President , in the interest of the country , not peremptorily to refuse that proposition . '
'_August 15 , 1899._ -- Please communicate confidentially to the President that the German Government entirely shares my opinion expressed in my despatch of August 4 , not to refuse the English proposal .
The German Government is , like myself , convinced that every approach to one of the Great Powers in this very critical moment will be without any results whatever , and very dangerous for the Republic . '
His new suggestions were put forward on August 12 .
In them the Joint Commission was put aside , and the proposal was made that the Boer Government should accede to the franchise proposals of Sir Alfred Milner on condition that the British Government withdrew or dropped her claim to a suzerainty , agreed to arbitration by a British and South African tribunal , and promised never again to interfere in the internal affairs of the Republic .
To this Great Britain answered that she would agree to such arbitration ; that she hoped never again to have occasion to interfere for the protection of her own subjects , but that with the grant of the franchise all occasion for such interference would pass away ; and , finally , that she would never consent to abandon her position as suzerain power .
Mr. Chamberlain 's despatch ended by reminding the Government of the Transvaal that there were other matters of dispute open between the two Governments apart from the franchise , and that it would be as well to have them settled at the same time .
By these he meant such questions as the position of the native races and the treatment of Anglo-Indians .
At the same time that they took these defensive measures , a message was sent to Pretoria , which even the opponents of the Government have acknowledged to be temperate , and offering the basis for a peaceful settlement .
It begins by repudiating emphatically the claim of the Transvaal to be a sovereign international State in the same sense in which the Orange Free State is one .
Any proposal made conditional upon such an acknowledgment could not be entertained .
The status of the Transvaal was settled by certain conventions agreed to by both Governments , and nothing had occurred to cause us to acquiesce in a radical change in it .
'I [ Paul Botha ] felt this as strongly , and never ceased fighting against closer union .
I remember once stating these arguments in the Volksraad , and wound up my speech by saying , `` May Heaven grant that I am wrong in what I fear , because , if I am right , then woe , woe to the Orange Free State . ''
It is evident that if the Free State rushed headlong to utter destruction it was not for want of wise voices which tried to guide her to some safer path .
But there seems to have been a complete hallucination as to the comparative strength of the two opponents , and as to the probable future of South Africa .
Under no possible future could the Free State be better off than it was already , a perfectly free and independent republic ; and yet the country was carried away by race-prejudice spread broadcast from a subsidised press and an unchristian pulpit .
'When I come to think of the abuse the pulpit made of its influence , ' says Paul Botha , 'I feel as if I can not find words strong enough to express my indignation .
God 's word was prostituted .
A religious people 's religion was used to urge them to their destruction .
A minister of God told me himself , with a wink , that he had to preach anti-English because otherwise he would lose favour with those in power . '
Such were the influences which induced the Free State to make an insane treaty , compelling it to wantonly take up arms against a State which had never injured it and which bore it nothing but good will .
In answer to the remonstrances of the Colonial Prime Minister the garrison of Natal was gradually increased , partly by troops from Europe , and partly by the despatch of 5,000 British troops from India .
Their arrival late in September raised the number of troops in South Africa to 22,000 , a force which was inadequate to a contest in the open field with the numerous , mobile , and gallant enemy to whom they were to be opposed , but which proved to be strong enough to stave off that overwhelming disaster which , with our fuller knowledge , we can now see to have been impending .
In the weeks which followed the despatch of the Cabinet message of September 8 , the military situation had ceased to be desperate , but was still precarious .
Twenty-two thousand regular troops were on the spot who might hope to be reinforced by some ten thousand Colonials , but these forces had to cover a great frontier , the attitude of Cape Colony was by no means whole-hearted and might become hostile , while the black population might conceivably throw in its weight against us .
Only half the regulars could be spared to defend Natal , and no reinforcements could reach them in less than a month from the outbreak of hostilities .
If Mr. Chamberlain was really playing a game of bluff , it must be confessed that he was bluffing from a very weak hand .
For purposes of comparison we may give some idea of the forces which Mr. Kruger and Mr. Steyn could put in the field .
The general press estimate of the forces of the two republics varied from 25,000 to 35,000 men .
B. Robinson , a personal friend of President Kruger 's and a man who had spent much of his life among the Boers , considered the latter estimate to be too high .
The calculation had no assured basis to start from .
A very scattered and isolated population , among whom large families were the rule , is a most difficult thing to estimate .
Some reckoned from the supposed natural increase during eighteen years , but the figure given at that date was itself an assumption .
Others took their calculation from the number of voters in the last presidential election ; but no one could tell how many abstentions there had been , and the fighting age is five years earlier than the voting age in the republics .
We recognise now that all calculations were far below the true figure .
It is probable , however , that the information of the British Intelligence Department was not far wrong .
No branch of the British Service has come better out of a very severe ordeal than this one , and its report before the war is so accurate , alike in facts and in forecast , as to be quite prophetic .
The desire upon the part of Great Britain to exclude outsiders from the arbitration tribunal was due to the fact that to admit them was to give away the case before going into Court .
The Transvaal claimed to be a sovereign international state .
Great Britain denied it .
If the Transvaal could appeal to arbitration as a peer among peers in a court of nations , she became _ipso facto_ an international state .
Therefore Great Britain refused such a court .
But why not refer all subjects to such a South African court as was finally accepted by both sides ?
The answer is that it is a monstrous hypocrisy to carry cases into an arbitration court , when you know beforehand that by their very nature they can not possibly be settled by such a court .
To quote Milner 's words , 'It is , of course , absurd to suggest that the question whether the South African Republic does or does not treat British residents in that country with justice , and the British Government with the consideration and respect due to any friendly , not to say suzerain power , is a question capable of being referred to arbitration .
You can not arbitrate on broad questions of policy any more than on questions of national honour . '
On this point of the limitation of arbitration the Transvaal leaders appear to have been as unanimous as the British , so that it is untrue to lay the blame of the restriction upon one side only .
Mr. Reitz , in his scheme of arbitration formulated upon June 9 , has the express clause 'That each side shall have the right to reserve and exclude points which appear to it to be too important to be submitted to arbitration . '
To this the British Government agreed , making the further very great concession that an Orange Free Stater should not be regarded as a foreigner .
The matter was in this state when the Transvaal sent its ultimatum .
Up to the firing of the first shot the British Government still offered the only form of arbitration which was possible without giving away the question at issue .
It was the Transvaal which , after agreeing to such a Court , turned suddenly to the arbitrament of the Mauser and the Creusot .
How this came about can not be expressed more clearly than in the words of Paul Botha , who , as I have already said , was a voortrekker like Kruger himself , and a Boer of the Boers , save that he seems to have been a man with wider and more liberal views than his fellows .
He was member for Kroonstadt in the Free State Raad .
'I am convinced , ' he says , 'that Kruger 's influence completely changed the character of the Afrikander Bond -- an organisation which I believe Hofmeyr started at the Cape with the legitimate purpose of securing certain political privileges , but which , under Kruger 's henchmen -- Sauer , Merriman , Te Water , and others -- raised unrest in the Cape Colony .
'_Myself_ : I see quite clearly that the ultimate object aimed at is the overthrow of the British power and the expulsion of the British flag from South Africa .
'_Reitz_ : We 'll see .
'MY DEAR HENRY , -- I taking my pen up to write you these few lines .
That we all are in good health , hoping to hear the same from you all .
And the letter of the 18th is handed to me .
And I feel very much obliged that I hear you are all in good health ... .
Here by us are the fields very dry , and the dams just by dry also .
_Dear Henry , the war are by us very much .
How is it there by you .
News is very scarce to write , but much to speak by ourselves._ I must now close with my letter because I see that you will be tired out to read it .
With best love to you and your family so I remain your faithfully friend ,
'The old chap was nearly raving about it , and said that the burghers wanted to tie his hands , and so , brother , the thing is simply war and nothing else .
He said we had gone too far , and help from oversea was positively promised , only unanimity of opinion must reign here or we could neither expect nor obtain assistance .
Brother , the old man and his Hollander dogs talk very easily about the thing ; but what shall we do , because if one speaks against it one is simply a rebel ?
So I remain dumb .
'It is rumoured here that our military officers work day and night to send old Victoria an ultimatum before she is ready . '
They were to go to the sea , and nothing but going to the sea would satisfy them .
The war would end when their flag flew over Cape Town .
But there came a turn of the tide .
The resistance of the garrisons , the tenacity of the relieving forces , and the genius of Lord Roberts altered the whole situation .
The Boers were driven back to the first of their capitals .
Then for the first time there came from them those proposals for peace , which were never heard when the game was going in their favour .
Here is President Kruger 's telegram :
'Bloemfontein : March 5 , 1900 .
-- The nature of future government of Colonies asked about .
He wanted more details than were given by Colonial Secretary , and I said that , subject to correction from home , I understood that when hostilities ceased military guard would be replaced by Crown Colony administration , consisting of nominated Executive , with elected assembly to advise administration , to be followed after a period by representative government .
He would have liked representative government at once , but seemed satisfied with above .
-- Whether a Boer would be able to have a rifle to protect him from native ?
I said I thought he would be by a licence and on registration .
-- The Kaffir question .
This turned at once on franchise of Kaffirs , and a solution seemed to be that franchise should not be given to Kaffirs until after representative government was granted to Colonies .
Orange Free State laws for Kaffirs were considered good .
-- Amnesty to all at end of war .
We spoke of Colonials who joined Republics , and he seemed not adverse to their being disfranchised .
There followed some correspondence between Lord Kitchener , Sir Alfred Milner , and Mr. Chamberlain upon the exact terms which could be given to Botha .
They ended in the following offer , which was submitted to him upon March 7 .
That , in consideration of a complete military surrender ,
That the Kaffirs should have the protection of the law , but should not have the vote .
'YOUR HONOUR , -- I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of Your Honour 's letter of 10th instant , and , in reply , beg to state that I can only deal with you and your superior officers in the field in regard to the cessation of hostilities , and that I do not recognise the official status of any other persons in the late Republics of the Orange River and Transvaal .
'If , however , Your Honour desires , with the object of bringing hostilities to a close , to consult with any person in Europe , I will forward any telegram Your Honour desires on the subject , and let you have the reply .
Should , however , Your Honour still desire to send messengers , and will inform me of their names and status , I will refer the matter to His Majesty 's Government for decision.
-- I have , & c. ,
It is only necessary to refer briefly to the unofficial Boer attempts at peace .
A considerable body of the Boers , including many men of influence and of intelligence , were disposed to accept the British flag and to settle down in peace .
The leaders of this party were the brave Piet de Wet , brother of Christian , Paul Botha of Kroonstad , Fraser of Bloemfontein , and others .
Piet de Wet , who had fought against us as hard as any man , wrote to his brother : 'Which is better , for the Republics to continue the struggle and run the risk of total ruin as a nation , or to submit ?
Could we for a moment think of taking back the country , if it were offered to us , with thousands of people to be supported by a Government which has not a farthing ?
Put passionate feeling aside for a moment and use common-sense , and you will then agree with me that the best thing for the people and the country is to give in , to be loyal to the new Government , and to get responsible government . '
Such were the sentiments of many of the best of the burghers , and they endeavoured to persuade their fellows .
Both in the Transvaal and in the Free State , Peace Committees were formed among the burghers , who sent deputies to lay the facts of the situation before their brethren on commando .
The results were tragic .
Two of the envoys , Morgendaal and de Koch , were shot in cold blood , the former having been first beaten .
Several of the others were beaten , and all were ill-used .
On May 19 , while Lord Roberts 's force was advancing on Pretoria , De Wet sent in a despatch to complain of the destruction of two farms , Paarde Kraal and Leeuw Kop .
Lord Roberts replied that these two farms were destroyed because , while a white flag was flying from the houses , the troops were fired upon from the farmsteads .
'I have had two farms near Kroonstad , ' he adds , 'destroyed for similar reasons , and shall continue to punish all such cases of treachery by the destruction of the farms where they occur . '
Here is a definite declaration of policy , quite distinct from wanton destruction , and it is difficult to see how any General could take any other steps , with justice to his own men .
These farms , and all which are included in this category , were justly and properly destroyed -- the families being removed without violence to a place of safety .
'The following circumstances induced me to give the order .
On entering the Transvaal I caused the attached Proclamation ( A ) to be widely distributed along my line of route .
We marched from Volksrust to Standerton practically unopposed .
Shortly after our arrival at Standerton our telegraph line was cut on several nights following , and attempts were made to damage the military line by placing dynamite cartridges with detonators attached upon it .
These attempts were all made on or in close vicinity to the estates above named .
A watch was kept and it was found that the attempts were made not by any formed force of the enemy , but by a few scattered banditti who were given shelter during the night in the houses I afterwards had destroyed , and who thence , when they could , tried to murder our patrols , and sallied out at night to damage the line .
It was further ascertained that these men came and usually returned through Varkenspruit .
I directed that copies of Proclamation ( A ) should be personally left at each house , and the inmates of each should be warned that these depredations could not be permitted , and that if people living under our protection allowed these sort of men to resort to their houses without informing us , they must take the consequences , and their houses would be destroyed .
This warning had some effect for a day or two , but on 1st and 2nd of July the nuisance recommenced , and on the 7th July , having acquired full proof that the houses were being regularly used as shelters for men who were hostile to us , and who were not under any proper command , in fact , who were only acting as banditti , I had the houses destroyed .
The orders I have at present issued , to give effect to these views , are that the farm nearest the scene of any attempt to injure the line or wreck a train is to be burnt , and that all farms within a radius of 10 miles are to be completely cleared of all their stock , supplies , & c . '
'Your Honour represents that well-disposed families living on their farms have been driven from their houses , and that their property has been taken away or destroyed .
This no doubt is true , but not in the sense which your letter would imply .
Burghers who are well-disposed towards the British Government , and anxious to submit to my authority , have had their property seized by the Boer commandos , and have been threatened with death if they refused to take up arms against the British forces .
Your Honour 's contention that a solemn oath of neutrality which the burghers have voluntarily taken in order to remain in unmolested occupation of their farms is null and void , because you have not consented to it , is hardly open to discussion .
I shall punish those who violate their oath and confiscate their property , no burgher having been forced to take the oath against his will . '
It must be confessed that the case of these houses is entirely different from the others which have been destroyed , because they were used for active warlike operations .
Of the 630 buildings which we know to have been destroyed , more than half have been used by snipers , or in some other direct fashion have brought themselves within the laws of warfare .
But it can not be said that these others have done so .
The cost of the average farmhouse is a mere trifle .
A hundred pounds would build a small one , and 300_l._ a large .
If we take the intermediate figure , then the expenditure of 50,000_l._ would compensate for those cases where military policy and international law may have been at variance with each other .
The burning of houses ceased in the year 1900 , and , save in very special instances , where there was an overwhelming military necessity , it has not been resorted to since .
In the sweeping of the country carried out by French in the Eastern Transvaal and by Blood to the north of the Delagoa Railway , no buildings appear to have been destroyed , although it was a military necessity to clear the farms of every sort of supply in order to hamper the movements of the commandos .
The destruction of the crops and herds of the Boers , distasteful as such work must be , is exactly analogous to the destruction by them of our supply trains on which the Army depended for their food .
Guerilla warfare can not enjoy all its own advantages and feel none of its own defects .
It is a two-edged weapon , and the responsibility for the consequences rests upon the combatant who first employs it .
Such camps as refuges were no new things , for the British refugees from Johannesburg have been living for over a year in precisely such places .
As no political capital and no international sentiment could be extracted from their sufferings , and as they have borne their troubles with dignity and restraint , we have heard little of the condition of their lives , which is in many ways more deplorable than that of the Boers .
To every child under six , a bottle of milk
There seems to be a consensus of opinion from all the camps that the defects in sanitation are due to the habits of the inmates , against which commandants and doctors are perpetually fighting .
Camp life without cleanliness must become unhygienic .
The medical reports are filled with instances of the extreme difficulty which has been experienced in enforcing discipline upon those who have been accustomed to the absolute liberty of the lonely veldt .
'What is the use of persons ignorant of the life and customs of the Boers coming to investigate these burgher camps ?
I have seen , and do not hesitate to say , that most of them are better housed , better clothed , and better fed than in their own homes of wattle and daub , and mud floors . '
'I am glad to see that you are not giving credence to the tales of brutality and cruelty which are being freely circulated by disloyal agitators about the treatment of the Boer refugees .
But one point on which you ask for more information is worth being noticed -- the difference of treatment between families of those on commando and others .
I am in a position to state that the whole difference made amounted to two ounces of coffee and four ounces of sugar per week , and that even this distinction totally disappeared by the middle of March .
As a set-off to this , the local Dutch Committee , in distributing some sixty cases of clothing , & c. , sent out by the charitable , refused to give any help to the families of some who were not on commando , on the ground that these articles were for the benefit of those who were fighting for their country . '
'The Boer women and children get as much food as they require , and have all sorts of medical comforts , such as beef-tea , extracts of meat , jellies , brandy and wine , and the advantage of fully qualified attendants .
Not only are their absolute requirements provided for , but even their `` fads '' are considered . '
-- ( Reuter 's Special Service . )
-- Commandant Alberts , commanding the Boers near Krugersdorp , has sent a letter to the officer commanding the British forces at Krugersdorp , stating that as he has with him on commando several families whose male relatives have recently surrendered , he wishes to know if he will receive these families , as they would like to go to Krugersdorp .
The officer replied that he would be pleased to receive them , and they are expected to arrive to-day .
'I to-day visited the Boer Refugee Camp here , containing 2,700 inmates .
The camp is splendidly situated , and well laid out .
I spoke to several refugees , and met with no complaint , all being satisfied with the treatment received .
The hospital arrangements are excellent , and there is very little sickness in the camp . '
' ( Signed ) H. ALBERTS , Commandant . '
A Boer woman , writing from Pietermaritzburg , says :
'Those who complain of anything must lie , for we are in good circumstances . '
Mrs. Blignant , writing from the Port Elizabeth Refugee Camp , says :
An inmate of the Springfontein Refugee Camp , Mr. Maltman , of Philippolis , writes : 'All the Boer women here speak in the highest terms of the treatment they have received at the hands of soldiers . '
'During halts , Tommy was the best and readiest creature imaginable ; he got the water boiled , laid himself out to attend to the children in a thousand ways , and comforted the broken-hearted mothers .
His hand was ready with help for every invalid .
At our farm he helped of his own free will in saving a drowning beast , or in removing a fat pig that had been killed , sometimes even in rounding-in cattle that had strayed out of bounds , and so on , giving help in a thousand ways .
For all that he wanted no reward .
Rewards he refused altogether simply because it was good-feeling which made him do these things .
A long and curious letter appears in the 'Suisse Liberale ' from a young Swiss who spent the whole time of the war upon a farm in the Thabanchu district of the Orange Free State .
It is very impartial in its judgments , and remarks , among other things -- talking of the life of the local garrison :
'We ourselves saw nothing which we could not tell to a gathering of schoolgirls .
'A story of reported outrage at a Dutch mission-house in the slums of a large town was found after personal investigation to have been anything but an outrage as the result proved .
The young soldiers who entered the house when the door was opened in answer to their knock , withdrew after they had discovered that the ladies who occupied the house were missionaries , nor had anything been removed or injured .
But the garbled story , with its misuse of the word `` outrage , '' reached a district in Cape Colony where it did no little mischief in fanning the flames of animosity and rebellion .
Thus the reported `` outrage '' was not even a common assault .
' '' Why ? ''
I asked , fearing to hear words of hatred .
But war may have brutalised the combatants , and so it is of interest to have Nurse Bron 's impressions at the end of 1901 .
She gives her conversation with a Boer :
She proceeds to show how they were treated .
The patients , it may be observed , were not Boer combatants but Cape rebels , liable to instant execution .
This is the diet after operations :
The British troops have been accused of shooting women .
It is wonderful that many women have not been shot , for it has not been unusual for farmhouses to be defended by the men when there were women within .
As a matter of fact , however , very few cases have occurred where a woman has been injured .
One amazon was killed in the fighting line , rifle in hand , outside Ladysmith .
A second victim furnished the famous Eloff myth , which gave material for many cartoons and editorials .
The accusation was that in cold blood we had shot Kruger 's niece , and a Berlin morning paper told the story , with many artistic embellishments , as follows :
'As the Boer saw his wife down , just able to raise herself , he made an attempt to run to her assistance , but the inhumans held him fast .
The officer assured him that she was shot through the temples and must anyhow die , and they left her therefore lying .
In the evening he heard his name called .
It was his wife who still lived after twelve hours' agony .
When they reached Rustenburg she was dead .
This woman was Frau Eloff , Kruger 's niece .
In addition to the sympathy for the loss Kruger has suffered , this report will renew the bitter feeling of all against the brutality of English warfare . '
I have endeavoured also to test the statement as it concerns the troops to the north of Mafeking .
The same high authority says : 'With regard to the northern force , it is just possible that a few sportsmen in the Rhodesian column may have had some sporting bullets , but I certainly never heard of them . '
A friend of mine who was in Lobatsi during the first week of the war assures me that he never saw anything but the solid bullet .
It must be remembered that the state of things was very exceptional with the Rhodesian force .
Their communications to the south were cut on the second day of the war , and for seven months they were dependent upon the long and circuitous Beira route for any supplies which reached them .
One could imagine that under such circumstances uniformity of armament would be more difficult to maintain than in the case of an army with an assured base .
The expansive bullet is not , as a matter of fact , contrary to the Conventions of The Hague .
It was expressly held from being so by the representatives of the United States and of Great Britain .
In taking this view I can not but think that these two enlightened and humanitarian Powers were ill-advised .
Those Conventions were of course only binding on those who signed them , and therefore in fighting desperate savages the man-stopping bullet could still have been used .
Whatever our motives in taking the view that we did , a swift retribution has come upon us , for it has prevented us from exacting any retribution , or even complaining , when the Boers have used these weapons against us .
Explosive bullets are , however , as my distinguished correspondent points out , upon a different footing , and if the Boers claim the advantages of the Conventions of The Hague , then every burgher found with these weapons in his bandolier is liable to punishment .
On this count , also , the British soldiers have been exposed to attacks , both at home and abroad , which are as unfounded and as shameful as most of those which have been already treated .
'The Boer officers said , speaking for ourselves and men , we have nothing at all to complain of .
As prisoners of war we could not be better treated , and Major Dickenson ' ( this they wished specially to be inserted ) , 'is as kind and considerate as it is possible to be . '
Mr. John J. O'Rorke writes to the 'New York Times , ' saying , 'That in view of the many misrepresentations regarding the treatment of the Boer prisoners in Bermuda , he recently obtained a trustworthy opinion from one of his correspondents there. '
The correspondent 's name is Musson Wainwright , and Mr. O'Rorke describes him 'as one of the influential residents in the island . '
He says , 'That the Boers in Bermuda are better off than many residents in New York .
They have plenty of beef , plenty of bread , plenty of everything except liberty .
There are good hospitals and good doctors .
It is true that some of the Boers are short of clothing , but these are very few , and the Government is issuing clothing to them .
On the whole , ' says Mr. Wainwright , 'Great Britain is treating the Boers far better than most people would . '
At the beginning of the war 90 per cent .
of the farmers in the northern district of Cape Colony joined the invaders .
Upon the expulsion of the Boers these men for the most part surrendered .
The British Government , recognising that pressure had been put upon them and that their position had been a difficult one , inflicted no penalty upon the rank-and-file beyond depriving them of the franchise for a few years .
A few who , like the Douglas rebels , were taken red-handed upon the field of battle , were condemned to periods of imprisonment which varied from one to five years .
The British , however , were very long-suffering .
Many hundreds of these rebels passed into their hands , and most of them escaped with fine and imprisonment .
The ringleaders , and those who were convicted of capital penal offences , were put to death .
I have been at some pains to make a list of the executions in 1901 , including those already mentioned .
It is at least approximately correct :
THE OTHER SIDE OF THE QUESTION
Writing in November 1900 , after hearing an expression of opinion from many officers from various parts of the seat of war , I stated in 'The Great Boer War ' : 'The Boers have been the victims of a great deal of cheap slander in the press .
The men who have seen most of the Boers in the field are the most generous in estimating their character .
That the white flag was hoisted by the Boers as a cold-blooded device for luring our men into the open , is an absolute calumny .
To discredit their valour is to discredit our victory . '
My own opinion would have been worthless , but this was , as I say , the result of considerable inquiry .
General Porter said : 'On a few occasions the white flag was abused , but in what large community would you not find a few miscreants ? '
General Lyttelton said : 'The Boers are brave men , and I do not think that the atrocities which have been reported are the acts of the regular Dutch burghers , but of the riff-raff who get into all armies . '
At this latter period of the war began that systematic murdering of the Kaffirs by the Boers which has been the most savage and terrible feature in the whole business .
On both sides Kaffirs have been used as teamsters , servants , and scouts , but on neither side as soldiers .
The British could with the greatest ease have swamped the whole Boer resistance at the beginning of the war by letting loose the Basutos , the Zulus , and the Swazis , all of whom have blood-feuds with the Boers .
It is very certain that the Boers would have had no such compunctions , for when in 1857 the Transvaalers had a quarrel with the Free State we have Paul Botha 's evidence for the fact that they intrigued with a Kaffir chief to attack their kinsmen from the rear .
'I have particular knowledge of this matter , because I took part in the commando which our Government sent to meet the Transvaal forces .
The dispute was eventually amicably settled , but , incredible as it may seem , the Transvaal had actually sent five persons , headed by the notorious Karel Geere , to Moshesh , the Basuto chief , to prevail upon him to attack _us_ , their kinsmen , in the rear !
I was one of the patrol that captured Geere and his companions , some of whom I got to know subsequently , and who revealed to me the whole dastardly plot . '
This will give some idea as to what we might have had to expect had native sympathy gone the other way .
In the letter already quoted , written by Snyman to his brother , he asserts that Kruger told him that he relied upon the assistance of the Swazis and Zulus .
As it was , however , beyond allowing natives to defend their own lives and property when attacked , as in the case of the Baralongs at Mafeking , and the Kaffirs in the Transkei , we have only employed Kaffirs in the pages of the continental cartoons .
'I had a telegram from Sir A. Milner in confirmation of the reports from various quarters that have reached me .
The High Commissioner states that the name of the district surgeon who reported the mal-treatment of the coloured man is Foote .
Sir A. Milner adds : `` There is absolutely no doubt about the murder of Esau . ''
' -- From Mr. Brodrick 's reply to Mr. Dillon in House of Commons , February 22 .
( 'Times , ' February 23 , 1901 ) .
This scandal of the murder of the Kaffirs , a scandal against which no protest seems to have been raised by the pro-Boer press in England or the Continent , has reached terrible proportions .
I append some of the evidence from recent official reports from the front :
Report of Resident Magistrate , Barkly West , January 28 , 1900.
-- Native despatch rider shot and mutilated .
-- Native , Philip , shot at Vlakplaats , eight miles south-west of Pretoria , by J. Johnson and J. Dilmar , of J. Joubert's commando .
-- Three natives with Colonel Plumer 's column captured and shot near Paardeberg .
Report of Resident Magistrate , Aliwal North , July 30 , 1901.
-- Shooting of natives at refugee camp .
-- Four natives with Colonel Dawkins 's column captured in Fauresmith district and shot by order of Judge Hertzog .
Report of Resident Magistrate , Riversdale , September 4 , 1901.
-- Two coloured despatch riders severely flogged .
Report of Intelligence , South Cape Colony , September 18 , 1901.
-- Natives murdered by Theron 's orders .
The official intimation was as follows :
Of the general demoralisation here is the evidence of a witness in that very action at Graspan on June 6 , which has been made so much of by the slanderers of our Army :
4703 Lance-Corporal James Hanshaw , 2nd Batt .
Bedfordshire Regiment , being duly sworn , states : 'At Graspan on June 6 , 1901 , I was present when we were attacked by the Boers , having previously captured a convoy from them .
On going towards the wagons I found the Boers already there ; finding we were outnumbered and resistance hopeless , we threw down our arms and held our hands up .
Private Blunt , who was with me , shouted .
`` Do n't shoot me , I have thrown down my rifle . ''
The Boers then shot Private Blunt dead .
He was holding his hands above his head at the time .
Lieutenant Mair then shouted , `` Have mercy , you cowards . ''
The Boers then deliberately shot Lieutenant Mair dead as he was standing with his hands above his head .
They then shot at Privates Pearse and Harvey , who were both standing with their hands up , the same bullet hitting Private Pearse in the nose , and killing Private Harvey .
Two Boers then rushed from the wagons and threatened to shoot me , kicked me , and told me to lie down . '
Corporal Sargent , 1st Batt .
Derbyshire Regiment , being duly sworn , states : 'While lying wounded behind a rock I saw a Boer shoot a Yeomanry officer who was walking away , wounded in the hand . '
Private A. C. Bell , 69th Company Imperial Yeomanry , being duly sworn , states : 'I heard a Boer call to one of our men to put up his hands , and when he did so the Boer shot him from about fifteen yards off ; I was about twenty yards off . '
Things of this sort are progressive .
Here is what occurred at Brakenlaagte when the rear of Benson 's column was destroyed .
Major Young , who made the inquiries into the charges of cruelty in accordance with Lord Kitchener 's instructions , says :
Major Young , in concluding his report , says : --
'I was impressed with the idea that the statements made to me were true and not wilfully exaggerated , so simply were they made .
There seems no doubt that though the Boer commandants have the will they have no longer the power to repress outrage and murder on the part of their subordinates . '
'The major part of your population consists of females , cripples , epileptics , consumptives , cancerous people , invalids , and lunatics of all kinds . '
At first this unexpected phenomenon merely surprised the British people , then it pained them , and , finally , after two years of it , it has roused a deep and enduring anger in their minds .
There is a rumour which crops up from time to time , and which appears to have some foundation , that there is a secret agreement by which the Triple Alliance can , under certain circumstances , claim the use of the British fleet .
There are , probably , only a few men in Europe who know whether this is so or not .
But if it is , it would be only fair to denounce such a treaty as soon as may be , for very many years must pass before it would be possible for the public to forget and forgive the action of Germany .
Nor can we entirely exonerate the German Government , for we know the Germans to be a well-disciplined people ; and we can not believe that Anglophobia could have reached the point of mania without some official encouragement -- or , at least , in the face of any official discouragement .
`` Not at all .
The 'G ' with the small 't ' stands for 'Gesellschaft , ' which is the German for 'Company . '
It is a customary contraction like our 'Co . '
'P , ' of course , stands for 'Papier . '
Now for the 'Eg . '
Let us glance at our Continental Gazetteer . ''
He took down a heavy brown volume from his shelves .
`` Eglow , Eglonitz -- here we are , Egria .
It is in a German-speaking country -- in Bohemia , not far from Carlsbad .
'Remarkable as being the scene of the death of Wallenstein , and for its numerous glass-factories and paper-mills . '
Ha , ha , my boy , what do you make of that ? ''
His eyes sparkled , and he sent up a great blue triumphant cloud from his cigarette .
`` Not a bit , Doctor .
Stay where you are .
I am lost without my Boswell .
And this promises to be interesting .
It would be a pity to miss it . ''
`` Never mind him .
I may want your help , and so may he .
Sit down in that armchair , Doctor , and give us your best attention . ''
`` Come in ! ''
`` If your Majesty would condescend to state your case , '' he remarked , `` I should be better able to advise you . ''
`` Then I fail to follow your Majesty .
If this young person should produce her letters for blackmailing or other purposes , how is she to prove their authenticity ? ''
`` Pooh , pooh !
`` My private note-paper . ''
`` To ruin me . ''
`` I am sure . ''
`` Then , as to money ? ''
`` You have carte blanche . ''
`` Is Briony Lodge , Serpentine Avenue , St. John 's Wood . ''
`` Well , really ! ''
he cried , and then he choked and laughed again until he was obliged to lie back , limp and helpless , in the chair .
`` What is it ? ''
`` Quite so ; but the sequel was rather unusual .
I will tell you , however .
I left the house a little after eight o'clock this morning in the character of a groom out of work .
There is a wonderful sympathy and freemasonry among horsey men .
Be one of them , and you will know all that there is to know .
I soon found Briony Lodge .
It is a bijou villa , with a garden at the back , but built out in front right up to the road , two stories .
Chubb lock to the door .
Large sitting-room on the right side , well furnished , with long windows almost to the floor , and those preposterous English window fasteners which a child could open .
Behind there was nothing remarkable , save that the passage window could be reached from the top of the coach-house .
I walked round it and examined it closely from every point of view , but without noting anything else of interest .
`` I am following you closely , '' I answered .
`` My cabby drove fast .
I do n't think I ever drove faster , but the others were there before us .
The cab and the landau with their steaming horses were in front of the door when I arrived .
I paid the man and hurried into the church .
There was not a soul there save the two whom I had followed and a surpliced clergyman , who seemed to be expostulating with them .
They were all three standing in a knot in front of the altar .
I lounged up the side aisle like any other idler who has dropped into a church .
Suddenly , to my surprise , the three at the altar faced round to me , and Godfrey Norton came running as hard as he could towards me .
`` I shall be delighted . ''
`` Oh , the cause is excellent ! ''
`` And what then ? ''
`` It is nothing very formidable , '' he said , taking a long cigar-shaped roll from his pocket .
`` It is an ordinary plumber 's smoke-rocket , fitted with a cap at either end to make it self-lighting .
Your task is confined to that .
When you raise your cry of fire , it will be taken up by quite a number of people .
You may then walk to the end of the street , and I will rejoin you in ten minutes .
I hope that I have made myself clear ? ''
`` I am to remain neutral , to get near the window , to watch you , and at the signal to throw in this object , then to raise the cry of fire , and to wait you at the corner of the street . ''
`` It is most unlikely that she carries it about with her .
It is cabinet size .
Too large for easy concealment about a woman's dress .
She knows that the King is capable of having her waylaid and searched .
Two attempts of the sort have already been made .
We may take it , then , that she does not carry it about with her . ''
`` But it has twice been burgled . ''
`` But how will you look ? ''
Bring him into the sitting-room .
There is a comfortable sofa .
This way , please ! ''
Slowly and solemnly he was borne into Briony Lodge and laid out in the principal room , while I still observed the proceedings from my post by the window .
The lamps had been lit , but the blinds had not been drawn , so that I could see Holmes as he lay upon the couch .
I do not know whether he was seized with compunction at that moment for the part he was playing , but I know that I never felt more heartily ashamed of myself in my life than when I saw the beautiful creature against whom I was conspiring , or the grace and kindliness with which she waited upon the injured man .
And yet it would be the blackest treachery to Holmes to draw back now from the part which he had intrusted to me .
I hardened my heart , and took the smoke-rocket from under my ulster .
After all , I thought , we are not injuring her .
We are but preventing her from injuring another .
`` I know where it is . ''
`` She showed me , as I told you she would . ''
`` Then , when the row broke out , I had a little moist red paint in the palm of my hand .
I rushed forward , fell down , clapped my hand to my face , and became a piteous spectacle .
It is an old trick . ''
`` That also I could fathom . ''
`` And now ? ''
`` Our quest is practically finished .
I shall call with the King to-morrow , and with you , if you care to come with us .
We will be shown into the sitting-room to wait for the lady , but it is probable that when she comes she may find neither us nor the photograph .
It might be a satisfaction to his Majesty to regain it with his own hands . ''
`` I have hopes . ''
`` Then that will simplify matters . ''
We descended and started off once more for Briony Lodge .
`` It is true .
And yet -- Well !
I wish she had been of my own station !
What a queen she would have made ! ''
He relapsed into a moody silence , which was not broken until we drew up in Serpentine Avenue .
`` We both thought the best resource was flight , when pursued by so formidable an antagonist ; so you will find the nest empty when you call to-morrow .
As to the photograph , your client may rest in peace .
I love and am loved by a better man than he .
The King may do what he will without hindrance from one whom he has cruelly wronged .
I keep it only to safeguard myself , and to preserve a weapon which will always secure me from any steps which he might take in the future .
I leave a photograph which he might care to possess ; and I remain , dear Mr. Sherlock Holmes ,
`` On the contrary , my dear sir , '' cried the King ; `` nothing could be more successful .
I know that her word is inviolate .
The photograph is now as safe as if it were in the fire . ''
`` I thank your Majesty .
Then there is no more to be done in the matter .
I have the honour to wish you a very good-morning . ''
He bowed , and , turning away without observing the hand which the King had stretched out to him , he set off in my company for his chambers .
`` Then I can wait in the next room . ''
`` You will remember that I remarked the other day , just before we went into the very simple problem presented by Miss Mary Sutherland , that for strange effects and extraordinary combinations we must go to life itself , which is always far more daring than any effort of the imagination . ''
Holmes chuckled and wriggled in his chair , as was his habit when in high spirits .
`` It is a little off the beaten track , is n't it ? ''
`` And now , Mr. Wilson , off you go at scratch and tell us all about yourself , your household , and the effect which this advertisement had upon your fortunes .
You will first make a note , Doctor , of the paper and the date . ''
`` Oh , he has his faults , too , '' said Mr. Wilson .
`` Never was such a fellow for photography .
Snapping away with a camera when he ought to be improving his mind , and then diving down into the cellar like a rabbit into its hole to develop his pictures .
That is his main fault , but on the whole he 's a good worker .
There 's no vice in him . ''
`` Now , it is a fact , gentlemen , as you may see for yourselves , that my hair is of a very full and rich tint , so that it seemed to me that if there was to be any competition in the matter I stood as good a chance as any man that I had ever met .
Vincent Spaulding seemed to know so much about it that I thought he might prove useful , so I just ordered him to put up the shutters for the day and to come right away with me .
He was very willing to have a holiday , so we shut the business up and started off for the address that was given us in the advertisement .
`` I never hope to see such a sight as that again , Mr. Holmes .
From north , south , east , and west every man who had a shade of red in his hair had tramped into the city to answer the advertisement .
Fleet Street was choked with red-headed folk , and Pope 's Court looked like a coster 's orange barrow .
I should not have thought there were so many in the whole country as were brought together by that single advertisement .
Every shade of colour they were -- straw , lemon , orange , brick , Irish-setter , liver , clay ; but , as Spaulding said , there were not many who had the real vivid flame-coloured tint .
When I saw how many were waiting , I would have given it up in despair ; but Spaulding would not hear of it .
How he did it I could not imagine , but he pushed and pulled and butted until he got me through the crowd , and right up to the steps which led to the office .
There was a double stream upon the stair , some going up in hope , and some coming back dejected ; but we wedged in as well as we could and soon found ourselves in the office . ''
`` 'It would be injustice to hesitate , ' said he .
'You will , however , I am sure , excuse me for taking an obvious precaution . '
With that he seized my hair in both his hands , and tugged until I yelled with the pain .
'There is water in your eyes , ' said he as he released me .
'I perceive that all is as it should be .
But we have to be careful , for we have twice been deceived by wigs and once by paint .
I could tell you tales of cobbler 's wax which would disgust you with human nature . '
He stepped over to the window and shouted through it at the top of his voice that the vacancy was filled .
A groan of disappointment came up from below , and the folk all trooped away in different directions until there was not a red-head to be seen except my own and that of the manager .
`` 'Is 4 pounds a week . '
`` 'And the work ? '
`` Yes , sir .
And no later than this morning .
I went to my work as usual at ten o'clock , but the door was shut and locked , with a little square of cardboard hammered on to the middle of the panel with a tack .
Here it is , and you can read for yourself . ''
He held up a piece of white cardboard about the size of a sheet of note-paper .
It read in this fashion :
Sherlock Holmes and I surveyed this curt announcement and the rueful face behind it , until the comical side of the affair so completely overtopped every other consideration that we both burst out into a roar of laughter .
`` I was staggered , sir .
I did not know what to do .
Then I called at the offices round , but none of them seemed to know anything about it .
Finally , I went to the landlord , who is an accountant living on the ground-floor , and I asked him if he could tell me what had become of the Red-headed League .
He said that he had never heard of any such body .
Then I asked him who Mr. Duncan Ross was .
He answered that the name was new to him .
`` And you did very wisely , '' said Holmes .
`` Your case is an exceedingly remarkable one , and I shall be happy to look into it .
From what you have told me I think that it is possible that graver issues hang from it than might at first sight appear . ''
`` I make nothing of it , '' I answered frankly .
`` It is a most mysterious business . ''
`` Third right , fourth left , '' answered the assistant promptly , closing the door .
The road in which we found ourselves as we turned round the corner from the retired Saxe-Coburg Square presented as great a contrast to it as the front of a picture does to the back .
It was one of the main arteries which conveyed the traffic of the City to the north and west .
The roadway was blocked with the immense stream of commerce flowing in a double tide inward and outward , while the footpaths were black with the hurrying swarm of pedestrians .
It was difficult to realise as we looked at the line of fine shops and stately business premises that they really abutted on the other side upon the faded and stagnant square which we had just quitted .
And , I say , Doctor , there may be some little danger , so kindly put your army revolver in your pocket . ''
He waved his hand , turned on his heel , and disappeared in an instant among the crowd .
`` John Clay , the murderer , thief , smasher , and forger .
He 's a young man , Mr. Merryweather , but he is at the head of his profession , and I would rather have my bracelets on him than on any criminal in London .
He 's a remarkable man , is young John Clay .
His grandfather was a royal duke , and he himself has been to Eton and Oxford .
His brain is as cunning as his fingers , and though we meet signs of him at every turn , we never know where to find the man himself .
He 'll crack a crib in Scotland one week , and be raising money to build an orphanage in Cornwall the next .
I 've been on his track for years and have never set eyes on him yet . ''
`` I hope that I may have the pleasure of introducing you to-night .
I 've had one or two little turns also with Mr. John Clay , and I agree with you that he is at the head of his profession .
It is past ten , however , and quite time that we started .
If you two will take the first hansom , Watson and I will follow in the second . ''
`` Your French gold ? ''
I placed my revolver , cocked , upon the top of the wooden case behind which I crouched .
Holmes shot the slide across the front of his lantern and left us in pitch darkness -- such an absolute darkness as I have never before experienced .
The smell of hot metal remained to assure us that the light was still there , ready to flash out at a moment 's notice .
To me , with my nerves worked up to a pitch of expectancy , there was something depressing and subduing in the sudden gloom , and in the cold dank air of the vault .
`` Then we have stopped all the holes .
And now we must be silent and wait . ''
Its disappearance , however , was but momentary .
With a rending , tearing sound , one of the broad , white stones turned over upon its side and left a square , gaping hole , through which streamed the light of a lantern .
Over the edge there peeped a clean-cut , boyish face , which looked keenly about it , and then , with a hand on either side of the aperture , drew itself shoulder-high and waist-high , until one knee rested upon the edge .
In another instant he stood at the side of the hole and was hauling after him a companion , lithe and small like himself , with a pale face and a shock of very red hair .
Sherlock Holmes had sprung out and seized the intruder by the collar .
The other dived down the hole , and I heard the sound of rending cloth as Jones clutched at his skirts .
The light flashed upon the barrel of a revolver , but Holmes ' hunting crop came down on the man 's wrist , and the pistol clinked upon the stone floor .
`` So far I had got when we went to visit the scene of action .
I surprised you by beating upon the pavement with my stick .
I was ascertaining whether the cellar stretched out in front or behind .
It was not in front .
Then I rang the bell , and , as I hoped , the assistant answered it .
We have had some skirmishes , but we had never set eyes upon each other before .
I hardly looked at his face .
His knees were what I wished to see .
You must yourself have remarked how worn , wrinkled , and stained they were .
They spoke of those hours of burrowing .
The only remaining point was what they were burrowing for .
I walked round the corner , saw the City and Suburban Bank abutted on our friend 's premises , and felt that I had solved my problem .
When you drove home after the concert I called upon Scotland Yard and upon the chairman of the bank directors , with the result that you have seen . ''
I smiled and shook my head .
`` I can quite understand your thinking so , '' I said .
`` Of course , in your position of unofficial adviser and helper to everybody who is absolutely puzzled , throughout three continents , you are brought in contact with all that is strange and bizarre .
But here '' -- I picked up the morning paper from the ground -- '' let us put it to a practical test .
Here is the first heading upon which I come .
'A husband 's cruelty to his wife . '
There is half a column of print , but I know without reading it that it is all perfectly familiar to me .
There is , of course , the other woman , the drink , the push , the blow , the bruise , the sympathetic sister or landlady .
The crudest of writers could invent nothing more crude . ''
He held out his snuffbox of old gold , with a great amethyst in the centre of the lid .
Its splendour was in such contrast to his homely ways and simple life that I could not help commenting upon it .
`` Ah , '' said he , `` I forgot that I had not seen you for some weeks .
It is a little souvenir from the King of Bohemia in return for my assistance in the case of the Irene Adler papers . ''
`` Your own little income , '' he asked , `` does it come out of the business ? ''
A flush stole over Miss Sutherland 's face , and she picked nervously at the fringe of her jacket .
`` I met him first at the gasfitters ' ball , '' she said .
`` They used to send father tickets when he was alive , and then afterwards they remembered us , and sent them to mother .
Mr. Windibank did not wish us to go .
He never did wish us to go anywhere .
He would get quite mad if I wanted so much as to join a Sunday-school treat .
But this time I was set on going , and I would go ; for what right had he to prevent ?
He said the folk were not fit for us to know , when all father 's friends were to be there .
And he said that I had nothing fit to wear , when I had my purple plush that I had never so much as taken out of the drawer .
At last , when nothing else would do , he went off to France upon the business of the firm , but we went , mother and I , with Mr. Hardy , who used to be our foreman , and it was there I met Mr. Hosmer Angel . ''
`` I suppose , '' said Holmes , `` that when Mr. Windibank came back from France he was very annoyed at your having gone to the ball . ''
Then at the gasfitters ' ball you met , as I understand , a gentleman called Mr. Hosmer Angel . ''
`` But how about Mr. Hosmer Angel ?
Did he make no attempt to see you ? ''
`` It was most suggestive , '' said Holmes .
`` It has long been an axiom of mine that the little things are infinitely the most important .
Can you remember any other little things about Mr. Hosmer Angel ? ''
`` Yes , sir ; for he had started to England just before it arrived . ''
`` Yes , sir .
I believe that he foresaw some danger , or else he would not have talked so .
And then I think that what he foresaw happened . ''
`` But you have no notion as to what it could have been ? ''
You have made your statement very clearly .
You will leave the papers here , and remember the advice which I have given you .
Let the whole incident be a sealed book , and do not allow it to affect your life . ''
`` Missing , '' it said , `` on the morning of the fourteenth , a gentleman named Hosmer Angel .
About five ft. seven in .
in height ; strongly built , sallow complexion , black hair , a little bald in the centre , bushy , black side-whiskers and moustache ; tinted glasses , slight infirmity of speech .
Was dressed , when last seen , in black frock-coat faced with silk , black waistcoat , gold Albert chain , and grey Harris tweed trousers , with brown gaiters over elastic-sided boots .
Known to have been employed in an office in Leadenhall Street .
I had had so many reasons to believe in my friend 's subtle powers of reasoning and extraordinary energy in action that I felt that he must have some solid grounds for the assured and easy demeanour with which he treated the singular mystery which he had been called upon to fathom .
Once only had I known him to fail , in the case of the King of Bohemia and of the Irene Adler photograph ; but when I looked back to the weird business of the Sign of Four , and the extraordinary circumstances connected with the Study in Scarlet , I felt that it would be a strange tangle indeed which he could not unravel .
`` It was only a joke at first , '' groaned our visitor .
`` We never thought that she would have been so carried away . ''
`` It may be so , or it may not , Mr. Holmes , '' said he , `` but if you are so very sharp you ought to be sharp enough to know that it is you who are breaking the law now , and not me .
I have done nothing actionable from the first , but as long as you keep that door locked you lay yourself open to an action for assault and illegal constraint . ''
`` There 's a cold-blooded scoundrel ! ''
said Holmes , laughing , as he threw himself down into his chair once more .
`` That fellow will rise from crime to crime until he does something very bad , and ends on a gallows .
The case has , in some respects , been not entirely devoid of interest . ''
`` I am afraid , '' said I , `` that the facts are so obvious that you will find little credit to be gained out of this case . ''
`` It was a confession , '' I ejaculated .
He picked out from his bundle a copy of the local Herefordshire paper , and having turned down the sheet he pointed out the paragraph in which the unfortunate young man had given his own statement of what had occurred .
I settled myself down in the corner of the carriage and read it very carefully .
It ran in this way :
`` The Coroner : What did you understand by that ?
`` The Coroner : What was the point upon which you and your father had this final quarrel ?
`` 'How far from the body ? '
`` It was very nice and complimentary of you , '' Holmes answered .
`` It is entirely a question of barometric pressure . ''
`` I hope we may clear him , Miss Turner , '' said Sherlock Holmes .
`` You may rely upon my doing all that I can . ''
`` But you have read the evidence .
You have formed some conclusion ?
Do you not see some loophole , some flaw ?
Do you not yourself think that he is innocent ? ''
`` It is no time for me to hide anything .
James and his father had many disagreements about me .
Mr. McCarthy was very anxious that there should be a marriage between us .
James and I have always loved each other as brother and sister ; but of course he is young and has seen very little of life yet , and -- and -- well , he naturally did not wish to do anything like that yet .
So there were quarrels , and this , I am sure , was one of them . ''
`` No , he was averse to it also .
No one but Mr. McCarthy was in favour of it . ''
A quick blush passed over her fresh young face as Holmes shot one of his keen , questioning glances at her .
`` Yes , have you not heard ?
Poor father has never been strong for years back , but this has broken him down completely .
He has taken to his bed , and Dr. Willows says that he is a wreck and that his nervous system is shattered .
Mr. McCarthy was the only man alive who had known dad in the old days in Victoria . ''
`` I am ashamed of you , Holmes , '' said Lestrade with dignity after a few minutes ' silence .
`` Why should you raise up hopes which you are bound to disappoint ?
I am not over-tender of heart , but I call it cruel . ''
`` Yes , but only for you and me . ''
`` I can not admire his taste , '' I remarked , `` if it is indeed a fact that he was averse to a marriage with so charming a young lady as this Miss Turner . ''
`` An elderly man , I presume ? ''
`` You are right , '' said Holmes demurely ; `` you do find it very hard to tackle the facts . ''
Sherlock Holmes was transformed when he was hot upon such a scent as this .
Men who had only known the quiet thinker and logician of Baker Street would have failed to recognise him .
His face flushed and darkened .
His brows were drawn into two hard black lines , while his eyes shone out from beneath them with a steely glitter .
His face was bent downward , his shoulders bowed , his lips compressed , and the veins stood out like whipcord in his long , sinewy neck .
His nostrils seemed to dilate with a purely animal lust for the chase , and his mind was so absolutely concentrated upon the matter before him that a question or remark fell unheeded upon his ears , or , at the most , only provoked a quick , impatient snarl in reply .
Swiftly and silently he made his way along the track which ran through the meadows , and so by way of the woods to the Boscombe Pool .
It was damp , marshy ground , as is all that district , and there were marks of many feet , both upon the path and amid the short grass which bounded it on either side .
Sometimes Holmes would hurry on , sometimes stop dead , and once he made quite a little detour into the meadow .
Lestrade and I walked behind him , the detective indifferent and contemptuous , while I watched my friend with the interest which sprang from the conviction that every one of his actions was directed towards a definite end .
`` What did you go into the pool for ? ''
`` I fished about with a rake .
I thought there might be some weapon or other trace .
But how on earth -- ''
`` Oh , tut , tut !
I have no time !
That left foot of yours with its inward twist is all over the place .
A mole could trace it , and there it vanishes among the reeds .
Oh , how simple it would all have been had I been here before they came like a herd of buffalo and wallowed all over it .
Here is where the party with the lodge-keeper came , and they have covered all tracks for six or eight feet round the body .
But here are three separate tracks of the same feet . ''
He drew out a lens and lay down upon his waterproof to have a better view , talking all the time rather to himself than to us .
`` These are young McCarthy 's feet .
Twice he was walking , and once he ran swiftly , so that the soles are deeply marked and the heels hardly visible .
That bears out his story .
He ran when he saw his father on the ground .
Then here are the father 's feet as he paced up and down .
What is this , then ?
It is the butt-end of the gun as the son stood listening .
What have we here ?
Square , too , quite unusual boots !
They come , they go , they come again -- of course that was for the cloak .
Now where did they come from ? ''
He ran up and down , sometimes losing , sometimes finding the track until we were well within the edge of the wood and under the shadow of a great beech , the largest tree in the neighbourhood .
Holmes traced his way to the farther side of this and lay down once more upon his face with a little cry of satisfaction .
For a long time he remained there , turning over the leaves and dried sticks , gathering up what seemed to me to be dust into an envelope and examining with his lens not only the ground but even the bark of the tree as far as he could reach .
A jagged stone was lying among the moss , and this also he carefully examined and retained .
Then he followed a pathway through the wood until he came to the highroad , where all traces were lost .
`` There are none . ''
Lestrade shrugged his shoulders .
`` I am a practical man , '' he said , `` and I really can not undertake to go about the country looking for a left-handed gentleman with a game leg .
I should become the laughing-stock of Scotland Yard . ''
`` Well , now , in considering this case there are two points about young McCarthy 's narrative which struck us both instantly , although they impressed me in his favour and you against him .
One was the fact that his father should , according to his account , cry 'Cooee ! '
The other was his singular dying reference to a rat .
He mumbled several words , you understand , but that was all that caught the son 's ear .
Now from this double point our research must commence , and we will begin it by presuming that what the lad says is absolutely true . ''
`` But how did you gain them ? ''
`` His height I know that you might roughly judge from the length of his stride .
His boots , too , might be told from their traces . ''
`` Mr. John Turner , '' cried the hotel waiter , opening the door of our sitting-room , and ushering in a visitor .
`` Yes , the lodge-keeper brought it up .
You said that you wished to see me here to avoid scandal . ''
`` And why did you wish to see me ? ''
He looked across at my companion with despair in his weary eyes , as though his question was already answered .
Holmes rose and sat down at the table with his pen in his hand and a bundle of paper before him .
`` Just tell us the truth , '' he said .
`` I shall jot down the facts .
You will sign it , and Watson here can witness it .
Then I could produce your confession at the last extremity to save young McCarthy .
I promise you that I shall not use it unless it is absolutely needed . ''
`` You did n't know this dead man , McCarthy .
He was a devil incarnate .
I tell you that .
God keep you out of the clutches of such a man as he .
His grip has been upon me these twenty years , and he has blasted my life .
I 'll tell you first how I came to be in his power .
`` I had gone up to town about an investment , and I met him in Regent Street with hardly a coat to his back or a boot to his foot .
`` God help us ! ''
said Holmes after a long silence .
`` Why does fate play such tricks with poor , helpless worms ?
I never hear of such a case as this that I do not think of Baxter 's words , and say , 'There , but for the grace of God , goes Sherlock Holmes . '
ADVENTURE V. THE FIVE ORANGE PIPS
`` Come in ! ''
`` He said that you could solve anything . ''
`` It is no ordinary one . ''
The young man pulled his chair up and pushed his wet feet out towards the blaze .
`` He did n't mind me ; in fact , he took a fancy to me , for at the time when he saw me first I was a youngster of twelve or so .
This would be in the year 1878 , after he had been eight or nine years in England .
He begged my father to let me live with him and he was very kind to me in his way .
When he was sober he used to be fond of playing backgammon and draughts with me , and he would make me his representative both with the servants and with the tradespeople , so that by the time that I was sixteen I was quite master of the house .
I kept all the keys and could go where I liked and do what I liked , so long as I did not disturb him in his privacy .
There was one singular exception , however , for he had a single room , a lumber-room up among the attics , which was invariably locked , and which he would never permit either me or anyone else to enter .
With a boy 's curiosity I have peeped through the keyhole , but I was never able to see more than such a collection of old trunks and bundles as would be expected in such a room .
`` 'From Dundee , ' I answered , glancing at the postmark .
`` 'I should certainly speak to the police , ' I said .
`` Has he come with you to-night ? ''
`` Why did you come to me , '' he cried , `` and , above all , why did you not come at once ? ''
`` Thank you ! ''
said Holmes , folding up the paper and returning it to our visitor .
`` And now you must on no account lose another instant .
We can not spare time even to discuss what you have told me .
You must get home instantly and act . ''
`` From East London .
What do you deduce from that ? ''
`` Then I do not see the point . ''
`` Have you never -- '' said Sherlock Holmes , bending forward and sinking his voice -- '' have you never heard of the Ku Klux Klan ? ''
`` Is such as we might expect .
It ran , if I remember right , 'sent the pips to A , B , and C ' -- that is , sent the society 's warning to them .
Then there are successive entries that A and B cleared , or left the country , and finally that C was visited , with , I fear , a sinister result for C. Well , I think , Doctor , that we may let some light into this dark place , and I believe that the only chance young Openshaw has in the meantime is to do what I have told him .
There is nothing more to be said or to be done to-night , so hand me over my violin and let us try to forget for half an hour the miserable weather and the still more miserable ways of our fellow-men . ''
`` You will not go there first ? ''
`` Holmes , '' I cried , `` you are too late . ''
`` My eye caught the name of Openshaw , and the heading 'Tragedy Near Waterloo Bridge . '
Here is the account :
`` That hurts my pride , Watson , '' he said at last .
`` It is a petty feeling , no doubt , but it hurts my pride .
It becomes a personal matter with me now , and , if God sends me health , I shall set my hand upon this gang .
That he should come to me for help , and that I should send him away to his death -- ! ''
He sprang from his chair and paced about the room in uncontrollable agitation , with a flush upon his sallow cheeks and a nervous clasping and unclasping of his long thin hands .
`` No ; I shall be my own police .
When I have spun the web they may take the flies , but not before . ''
It had escaped my memory .
I have had nothing since breakfast . ''
`` And how have you succeeded ? ''
`` What do you mean ? ''
`` And who is this Captain Calhoun ? ''
He took a large sheet of paper from his pocket , all covered with dates and names .
`` Why , '' said my wife , pulling up her veil , `` it is Kate Whitney .
How you startled me , Kate !
I had not an idea who you were when you came in . ''
But there was no great difficulty in the first stage of my adventure .
Upper Swandam Lane is a vile alley lurking behind the high wharves which line the north side of the river to the east of London Bridge .
Between a slop-shop and a gin-shop , approached by a steep flight of steps leading down to a black gap like the mouth of a cave , I found the den of which I was in search .
Ordering my cab to wait , I passed down the steps , worn hollow in the centre by the ceaseless tread of drunken feet ; and by the light of a flickering oil-lamp above the door I found the latch and made my way into a long , low room , thick and heavy with the brown opium smoke , and terraced with wooden berths , like the forecastle of an emigrant ship .
There was a movement and an exclamation from my right , and peering through the gloom , I saw Whitney , pale , haggard , and unkempt , staring out at me .
`` I tell you that it is Friday , man .
Your wife has been waiting this two days for you .
You should be ashamed of yourself ! ''
`` Ay , bodies , Watson .
We should be rich men if we had 1000 pounds for every poor devil who has been done to death in that den .
It is the vilest murder-trap on the whole riverside , and I fear that Neville St. Clair has entered it never to leave it more .
But our trap should be here . ''
He put his two forefingers between his teeth and whistled shrilly -- a signal which was answered by a similar whistle from the distance , followed shortly by the rattle of wheels and the clink of horses ' hoofs .
`` Oh , a trusty comrade is always of use ; and a chronicler still more so .
My room at The Cedars is a double-bedded one . ''
`` You have a grand gift of silence , Watson , '' said he .
`` It makes you quite invaluable as a companion .
'Pon my word , it is a great thing for me to have someone to talk to , for my own thoughts are not over-pleasant .
I was wondering what I should say to this dear little woman to-night when she meets me at the door . ''
`` I shall just have time to tell you the facts of the case before we get to Lee .
It seems absurdly simple , and yet , somehow I can get nothing to go upon .
There 's plenty of thread , no doubt , but I ca n't get the end of it into my hand .
Now , I 'll state the case clearly and concisely to you , Watson , and maybe you can see a spark where all is dark to me . ''
`` Last Monday Mr. Neville St. Clair went into town rather earlier than usual , remarking before he started that he had two important commissions to perform , and that he would bring his little boy home a box of bricks .
Now , by the merest chance , his wife received a telegram upon this same Monday , very shortly after his departure , to the effect that a small parcel of considerable value which she had been expecting was waiting for her at the offices of the Aberdeen Shipping Company .
Now , if you are well up in your London , you will know that the office of the company is in Fresno Street , which branches out of Upper Swandam Lane , where you found me to-night .
Mrs. St. Clair had her lunch , started for the City , did some shopping , proceeded to the company 's office , got her packet , and found herself at exactly 4:35 walking through Swandam Lane on her way back to the station .
Have you followed me so far ? ''
`` Convinced that something was amiss with him , she rushed down the steps -- for the house was none other than the opium den in which you found me to-night -- and running through the front room she attempted to ascend the stairs which led to the first floor .
At the foot of the stairs , however , she met this Lascar scoundrel of whom I have spoken , who thrust her back and , aided by a Dane , who acts as assistant there , pushed her out into the street .
Filled with the most maddening doubts and fears , she rushed down the lane and , by rare good-fortune , met in Fresno Street a number of constables with an inspector , all on their way to their beat .
The inspector and two men accompanied her back , and in spite of the continued resistance of the proprietor , they made their way to the room in which Mr. St. Clair had last been seen .
There was no sign of him there .
In fact , in the whole of that floor there was no one to be found save a crippled wretch of hideous aspect , who , it seems , made his home there .
Both he and the Lascar stoutly swore that no one else had been in the front room during the afternoon .
So determined was their denial that the inspector was staggered , and had almost come to believe that Mrs. St. Clair had been deluded when , with a cry , she sprang at a small deal box which lay upon the table and tore the lid from it .
Out there fell a cascade of children 's bricks .
It was the toy which he had promised to bring home .
`` No , sir , but the facts might be met speciously enough .
Suppose that this man Boone had thrust Neville St. Clair through the window , there is no human eye which could have seen the deed .
What would he do then ?
It would of course instantly strike him that he must get rid of the tell-tale garments .
He would seize the coat , then , and be in the act of throwing it out , when it would occur to him that it would swim and not sink .
He has little time , for he has heard the scuffle downstairs when the wife tried to force her way up , and perhaps he has already heard from his Lascar confederate that the police are hurrying up the street .
There is not an instant to be lost .
He rushes to some secret hoard , where he has accumulated the fruits of his beggary , and he stuffs all the coins upon which he can lay his hands into the pockets to make sure of the coat 's sinking .
He throws it out , and would have done the same with the other garments had not he heard the rush of steps below , and only just had time to close the window when the police appeared . ''
`` We are on the outskirts of Lee , '' said my companion .
`` We have touched on three English counties in our short drive , starting in Middlesex , passing over an angle of Surrey , and ending in Kent .
See that light among the trees ?
That is The Cedars , and beside that lamp sits a woman whose anxious ears have already , I have little doubt , caught the clink of our horse 's feet . ''
`` My dear madam , '' said I , `` I am an old campaigner , and if I were not I can very well see that no apology is needed .
If I can be of any assistance , either to you or to my friend here , I shall be indeed happy . ''
`` Now , Mr. Sherlock Holmes , '' said the lady as we entered a well-lit dining-room , upon the table of which a cold supper had been laid out , `` I should very much like to ask you one or two plain questions , to which I beg that you will give a plain answer . ''
`` I do n't say that .
`` And on what day did he meet his death ? ''
Sherlock Holmes sprang out of his chair as if he had been galvanised .
`` Yes , to-day . ''
She stood smiling , holding up a little slip of paper in the air .
`` And on Monday he made no remarks before leaving you ? ''
`` But it might have been a cry of surprise .
Astonishment at the unexpected sight of you might cause him to throw up his hands ? ''
`` He might have leaped back .
You did not see anyone else in the room ? ''
`` No , but this horrible man confessed to having been there , and the Lascar was at the foot of the stairs . ''
`` Had he ever showed any signs of having taken opium ? ''
`` Thank you , Mrs. St. Clair .
Those are the principal points about which I wished to be absolutely clear .
We shall now have a little supper and then retire , for we may have a very busy day to-morrow . ''
A large and comfortable double-bedded room had been placed at our disposal , and I was quickly between the sheets , for I was weary after my night of adventure .
Sherlock Holmes was a man , however , who , when he had an unsolved problem upon his mind , would go for days , and even for a week , without rest , turning it over , rearranging his facts , looking at it from every point of view until he had either fathomed it or convinced himself that his data were insufficient .
It was soon evident to me that he was now preparing for an all-night sitting .
He took off his coat and waistcoat , put on a large blue dressing-gown , and then wandered about the room collecting pillows from his bed and cushions from the sofa and armchairs .
With these he constructed a sort of Eastern divan , upon which he perched himself cross-legged , with an ounce of shag tobacco and a box of matches laid out in front of him .
In the dim light of the lamp I saw him sitting there , an old briar pipe between his lips , his eyes fixed vacantly upon the corner of the ceiling , the blue smoke curling up from him , silent , motionless , with the light shining upon his strong-set aquiline features .
So he sat as I dropped off to sleep , and so he sat when a sudden ejaculation caused me to wake up , and I found the summer sun shining into the apartment .
The pipe was still between his lips , the smoke still curled upward , and the room was full of a dense tobacco haze , but nothing remained of the heap of shag which I had seen upon the previous night .
`` Awake , Watson ? ''
`` I want to test a little theory of mine , '' said he , pulling on his boots .
`` I think , Watson , that you are now standing in the presence of one of the most absolute fools in Europe .
I deserve to be kicked from here to Charing Cross .
But I think I have the key of the affair now . ''
`` And where is it ? ''
I asked , smiling .
Come this way , if you please . ''
He led us down a passage , opened a barred door , passed down a winding stair , and brought us to a whitewashed corridor with a line of doors on each side .
We both put our eyes to the grating .
The prisoner lay with his face towards us , in a very deep sleep , breathing slowly and heavily .
He was a middle-sized man , coarsely clad as became his calling , with a coloured shirt protruding through the rent in his tattered coat .
He was , as the inspector had said , extremely dirty , but the grime which covered his face could not conceal its repulsive ugliness .
A broad wheal from an old scar ran right across it from eye to chin , and by its contraction had turned up one side of the upper lip , so that three teeth were exposed in a perpetual snarl .
A shock of very bright red hair grew low over his eyes and forehead .
`` He 's a beauty , is n't he ? ''
`` He certainly needs a wash , '' remarked Holmes .
`` I had an idea that he might , and I took the liberty of bringing the tools with me . ''
He opened the Gladstone bag as he spoke , and took out , to my astonishment , a very large bath-sponge .
`` God bless you ! ''
cried the prisoner passionately .
`` I would have endured imprisonment , ay , even execution , rather than have left my miserable secret as a family blot to my children .
`` I wrote my articles and thought little more of the matter until , some time later , I backed a bill for a friend and had a writ served upon me for 25 pounds .
I was at my wit 's end where to get the money , but a sudden idea came to me .
I begged a fortnight's grace from the creditor , asked for a holiday from my employers , and spent the time in begging in the City under my disguise .
In ten days I had the money and had paid the debt .
`` I do not know that there is anything else for me to explain .
I was determined to preserve my disguise as long as possible , and hence my preference for a dirty face .
Knowing that my wife would be terribly anxious , I slipped off my ring and confided it to the Lascar at a moment when no constable was watching me , together with a hurried scrawl , telling her that she had no cause to fear . ''
`` It must stop here , however , '' said Bradstreet .
`` If the police are to hush this thing up , there must be no more of Hugh Boone . ''
`` In that case I think that it is probable that no further steps may be taken .
But if you are found again , then all must come out .
I am sure , Mr. Holmes , that we are very much indebted to you for having cleared the matter up .
I wish I knew how you reach your results . ''
`` I reached this one , '' said my friend , `` by sitting upon five pillows and consuming an ounce of shag .
I think , Watson , that if we drive to Baker Street we shall just be in time for breakfast . ''
For answer Holmes clapped the hat upon his head .
It came right over the forehead and settled upon the bridge of his nose .
`` It is a question of cubic capacity , '' said he ; `` a man with so large a brain must have something in it . ''
`` This hat is three years old .
These flat brims curled at the edge came in then .
It is a hat of the very best quality .
Look at the band of ribbed silk and the excellent lining .
If this man could afford to buy so expensive a hat three years ago , and has had no hat since , then he has assuredly gone down in the world . ''
`` Well , it is very ingenious , '' said I , laughing ; `` but since , as you said just now , there has been no crime committed , and no harm done save the loss of a goose , all this seems to be rather a waste of energy . ''
What of it , then ?
Has it returned to life and flapped off through the kitchen window ? ''
Holmes twisted himself round upon the sofa to get a fairer view of the man 's excited face .
`` That is the reward , and I have reason to know that there are sentimental considerations in the background which would induce the Countess to part with half her fortune if she could but recover the gem . ''
`` What will you say ? ''
`` Well , then , do you imagine that this other one , Henry Baker , had anything to do with the matter ? ''
`` Mr. Henry Baker , I believe , '' said he , rising from his armchair and greeting his visitor with the easy air of geniality which he could so readily assume .
`` Pray take this chair by the fire , Mr. Baker .
It is a cold night , and I observe that your circulation is more adapted for summer than for winter .
Ah , Watson , you have just come at the right time .
Is that your hat , Mr .
Our visitor gave a rather shamefaced laugh .
`` Shillings have not been so plentiful with me as they once were , '' he remarked .
`` I had no doubt that the gang of roughs who assaulted me had carried off both my hat and the bird .
I did not care to spend more money in a hopeless attempt at recovering them . ''
`` Yes , it would have been of no use to anyone had we not done so .
But I presume that this other goose upon the sideboard , which is about the same weight and perfectly fresh , will answer your purpose equally well ? ''
The man burst into a hearty laugh .
`` They might be useful to me as relics of my adventure , '' said he , `` but beyond that I can hardly see what use the disjecta membra of my late acquaintance are going to be to me .
No , sir , I think that , with your permission , I will confine my attentions to the excellent bird which I perceive upon the sideboard . ''
`` So much for Mr. Henry Baker , '' said Holmes when he had closed the door behind him .
`` It is quite certain that he knows nothing whatever about the matter .
Are you hungry , Watson ? ''
`` Well , I got the two dozen from a salesman in Covent Garden . ''
`` Breckinridge is his name . ''
It 's a cold night , '' said Holmes .
To my surprise the question provoked a burst of anger from the salesman .
`` Now , then , mister , '' said he , with his head cocked and his arms akimbo , `` what are you driving at ?
Let 's have it straight , now . ''
`` It is straight enough .
I should like to know who sold you the geese which you supplied to the Alpha . ''
Holmes turned to the page indicated .
`` Here you are , 'Mrs .
Oakshott , 117 , Brixton Road , egg and poultry supplier . '
`` 'Sold to Mr. Windigate of the Alpha , at 12s . '
`` My name is Sherlock Holmes .
It is my business to know what other people do n't know . ''
The man hesitated for an instant .
`` My name is John Robinson , '' he answered with a sidelong glance .
`` It came here . ''
For a moment he had staggered and nearly fallen , but the brandy brought a tinge of colour into his cheeks , and he sat staring with frightened eyes at his accuser .
`` I see -- her ladyship 's waiting-maid .
Well , the temptation of sudden wealth so easily acquired was too much for you , as it has been for better men before you ; but you were not very scrupulous in the means you used .
It seems to me , Ryder , that there is the making of a very pretty villain in you .
You knew that this man Horner , the plumber , had been concerned in some such matter before , and that suspicion would rest the more readily upon him .
What did you do , then ?
You made some small job in my lady's room -- you and your confederate Cusack -- and you managed that he should be the man sent for .
Then , when he had left , you rifled the jewel-case , raised the alarm , and had this unfortunate man arrested .
`` Get back into your chair ! ''
`` It is very well to cringe and crawl now , but you thought little enough of this poor Horner in the dock for a crime of which he knew nothing . ''
`` I will fly , Mr. Holmes .
I will leave the country , sir .
Then the charge against him will break down . ''
Ryder passed his tongue over his parched lips .
`` I will tell you it just as it happened , sir , '' said he .
`` When Horner had been arrested , it seemed to me that it would be best for me to get away with the stone at once , for I did not know at what moment the police might not take it into their heads to search me and my room .
There was no place about the hotel where it would be safe .
I went out , as if on some commission , and I made for my sister's house .
She had married a man named Oakshott , and lived in Brixton Road , where she fattened fowls for the market .
All the way there every man I met seemed to me to be a policeman or a detective ; and , for all that it was a cold night , the sweat was pouring down my face before I came to the Brixton Road .
My sister asked me what was the matter , and why I was so pale ; but I told her that I had been upset by the jewel robbery at the hotel .
Then I went into the back yard and smoked a pipe and wondered what it would be best to do .
`` 'Gone to the dealer 's , Jem . '
`` 'Which dealer 's ? '
`` 'Breckinridge , of Covent Garden . '
`` Good-morning , madam , '' said Holmes cheerily .
`` My name is Sherlock Holmes .
This is my intimate friend and associate , Dr. Watson , before whom you can speak as freely as before myself .
I am glad to see that Mrs. Hudson has had the good sense to light the fire .
Pray draw up to it , and I shall order you a cup of hot coffee , for I observe that you are shivering . ''
`` You must not fear , '' said he soothingly , bending forward and patting her forearm .
`` We shall soon set matters right , I have no doubt .
You have come in by train this morning , I see . ''
replied our visitor , `` the very horror of my situation lies in the fact that my fears are so vague , and my suspicions depend so entirely upon small points , which might seem trivial to another , that even he to whom of all others I have a right to look for help and advice looks upon all that I tell him about it as the fancies of a nervous woman .
He does not say so , but I can read it from his soothing answers and averted eyes .
But I have heard , Mr. Holmes , that you can see deeply into the manifold wickedness of the human heart .
You may advise me how to walk amid the dangers which encompass me . ''
`` I am all attention , madam . ''
`` My name is Helen Stoner , and I am living with my stepfather , who is the last survivor of one of the oldest Saxon families in England , the Roylotts of Stoke Moran , on the western border of Surrey . ''
`` But a terrible change came over our stepfather about this time .
Instead of making friends and exchanging visits with our neighbours , who had at first been overjoyed to see a Roylott of Stoke Moran back in the old family seat , he shut himself up in his house and seldom came out save to indulge in ferocious quarrels with whoever might cross his path .
Violence of temper approaching to mania has been hereditary in the men of the family , and in my stepfather 's case it had , I believe , been intensified by his long residence in the tropics .
A series of disgraceful brawls took place , two of which ended in the police-court , until at last he became the terror of the village , and the folks would fly at his approach , for he is a man of immense strength , and absolutely uncontrollable in his anger .
`` The windows of the three rooms open out upon the lawn .
That fatal night Dr. Roylott had gone to his room early , though we knew that he had not retired to rest , for my sister was troubled by the smell of the strong Indian cigars which it was his custom to smoke .
She left her room , therefore , and came into mine , where she sat for some time , chatting about her approaching wedding .
At eleven o'clock she rose to leave me , but she paused at the door and looked back .
`` 'Never , ' said I .
And yet if it were on the lawn , I wonder that you did not hear it also . '
`` The doctors examined her for it , but without success . ''
`` Miss Roylott , you have not .
You are screening your stepfather . ''
For answer Holmes pushed back the frill of black lace which fringed the hand that lay upon our visitor 's knee .
Five little livid spots , the marks of four fingers and a thumb , were printed upon the white wrist .
`` And you may expect us early in the afternoon .
I have myself some small business matters to attend to .
Will you not wait and breakfast ? ''
You put me off , do you ? ''
said our new visitor , taking a step forward and shaking his hunting-crop .
`` I know you , you scoundrel !
I have heard of you before .
You are Holmes , the meddler . ''
It was nearly one o'clock when Sherlock Holmes returned from his excursion .
He held in his hand a sheet of blue paper , scrawled over with notes and figures .
`` Yes , sir , that be the house of Dr. Grimesby Roylott , '' remarked the driver .
The building was of grey , lichen-blotched stone , with a high central portion and two curving wings , like the claws of a crab , thrown out on each side .
In one of these wings the windows were broken and blocked with wooden boards , while the roof was partly caved in , a picture of ruin .
The central portion was in little better repair , but the right-hand block was comparatively modern , and the blinds in the windows , with the blue smoke curling up from the chimneys , showed that this was where the family resided .
Some scaffolding had been erected against the end wall , and the stone-work had been broken into , but there were no signs of any workmen at the moment of our visit .
Holmes walked slowly up and down the ill-trimmed lawn and examined with deep attention the outsides of the windows .
`` This , I take it , belongs to the room in which you used to sleep , the centre one to your sister 's , and the one next to the main building to Dr. Roylott 's chamber ? ''
`` There were none .
I believe that it was an excuse to move me from my room . ''
`` Very strange ! ''
muttered Holmes , pulling at the rope .
`` There are one or two very singular points about this room .
For example , what a fool a builder must be to open a ventilator into another room , when , with the same trouble , he might have communicated with the outside air ! ''
`` I shall most certainly do so . ''
Both Miss Stoner and I gazed at him in astonishment .
`` We shall spend the night in your room , and we shall investigate the cause of this noise which has disturbed you . ''
`` Perhaps I have . ''
`` No , I do not think so .
I think that there was probably some more tangible cause .
And now , Miss Stoner , we must leave you for if Dr. Roylott returned and saw us our journey would be in vain .
Good-bye , and be brave , for if you will do what I have told you , you may rest assured that we shall soon drive away the dangers that threaten you . ''
`` It was clamped to the floor .
Did you ever see a bed fastened like that before ? ''
`` I can not say that I have . ''
`` It is a nice household , '' he murmured .
`` That is the baboon . ''
But I saw nothing .
At the moment when Holmes struck the light I heard a low , clear whistle , but the sudden glare flashing into my weary eyes made it impossible for me to tell what it was at which my friend lashed so savagely .
I could , however , see that his face was deadly pale and filled with horror and loathing .
He had ceased to strike and was gazing up at the ventilator when suddenly there broke from the silence of the night the most horrible cry to which I have ever listened .
It swelled up louder and louder , a hoarse yell of pain and fear and anger all mingled in the one dreadful shriek .
They say that away down in the village , and even in the distant parsonage , that cry raised the sleepers from their beds .
It struck cold to our hearts , and I stood gazing at Holmes , and he at me , until the last echoes of it had died away into the silence from which it rose .
I took a step forward .
In an instant his strange headgear began to move , and there reared itself from among his hair the squat diamond-shaped head and puffed neck of a loathsome serpent .
As he spoke he drew the dog-whip swiftly from the dead man 's lap , and throwing the noose round the reptile 's neck he drew it from its horrid perch and , carrying it at arm 's length , threw it into the iron safe , which he closed upon it .
`` With the result of driving it through the ventilator . ''
Of all the problems which have been submitted to my friend , Mr. Sherlock Holmes , for solution during the years of our intimacy , there were only two which I was the means of introducing to his notice -- that of Mr. Hatherley 's thumb , and that of Colonel Warburton 's madness .
Of these the latter may have afforded a finer field for an acute and original observer , but the other was so strange in its inception and so dramatic in its details that it may be the more worthy of being placed upon record , even if it gave my friend fewer openings for those deductive methods of reasoning by which he achieved such remarkable results .
The story has , I believe , been told more than once in the newspapers , but , like all such narratives , its effect is much less striking when set forth en bloc in a single half-column of print than when the facts slowly evolve before your own eyes , and the mystery clears gradually away as each new discovery furnishes a step which leads on to the complete truth .
At the time the circumstances made a deep impression upon me , and the lapse of two years has hardly served to weaken the effect .
`` An accident , I presume ? ''
cried I , `` if it is anything in the nature of a problem which you desire to see solved , I should strongly recommend you to come to my friend , Mr. Sherlock Holmes , before you go to the official police . ''
`` I should be immensely obliged to you . ''
`` 'Do you promise , then ? '
said he at last .
`` 'That 's all right , ' said he , coming back .
'I know that clerks are sometimes curious as to their master 's affairs .
Now we can talk in safety . '
He drew up his chair very close to mine and began to stare at me again with the same questioning and thoughtful look .
`` 'Yes , our little place is quite out in the country .
It is a good seven miles from Eyford Station . '
`` 'Then we can hardly get there before midnight .
I suppose there would be no chance of a train back .
I should be compelled to stop the night . '
`` 'Yes , we could easily give you a shake-down . '
`` 'That is very awkward .
Could I not come at some more convenient hour ? '
`` I thought of the fifty guineas , and of how very useful they would be to me .
'Not at all , ' said I , 'I shall be very happy to accommodate myself to your wishes .
I should like , however , to understand a little more clearly what it is that you wish me to do . '
`` 'Then the matter stands thus .
You are probably aware that fuller's-earth is a valuable product , and that it is only found in one or two places in England ? '
`` At Reading I had to change not only my carriage but my station .
However , I was in time for the last train to Eyford , and I reached the little dim-lit station after eleven o'clock .
I was the only passenger who got out there , and there was no one upon the platform save a single sleepy porter with a lantern .
As I passed out through the wicket gate , however , I found my acquaintance of the morning waiting in the shadow upon the other side .
Without a word he grasped my arm and hurried me into a carriage , the door of which was standing open .
He drew up the windows on either side , tapped on the wood-work , and away we went as fast as the horse could go . ''
`` 'Perhaps you will have the kindness to wait in this room for a few minutes , ' said he , throwing open another door .
It was a quiet , little , plainly furnished room , with a round table in the centre , on which several German books were scattered .
Colonel Stark laid down the lamp on the top of a harmonium beside the door .
'I shall not keep you waiting an instant , ' said he , and vanished into the darkness .
`` I glanced at the books upon the table , and in spite of my ignorance of German I could see that two of them were treatises on science , the others being volumes of poetry .
Then I walked across to the window , hoping that I might catch some glimpse of the country-side , but an oak shutter , heavily barred , was folded across it .
It was a wonderfully silent house .
There was an old clock ticking loudly somewhere in the passage , but otherwise everything was deadly still .
A vague feeling of uneasiness began to steal over me .
Who were these German people , and what were they doing living in this strange , out-of-the-way place ?
And where was the place ?
I was ten miles or so from Eyford , that was all I knew , but whether north , south , east , or west I had no idea .
For that matter , Reading , and possibly other large towns , were within that radius , so the place might not be so secluded , after all .
Yet it was quite certain , from the absolute stillness , that we were in the country .
I paced up and down the room , humming a tune under my breath to keep up my spirits and feeling that I was thoroughly earning my fifty-guinea fee .
`` I took the lamp from him , and I examined the machine very thoroughly .
It was indeed a gigantic one , and capable of exercising enormous pressure .
When I passed outside , however , and pressed down the levers which controlled it , I knew at once by the whishing sound that there was a slight leakage , which allowed a regurgitation of water through one of the side cylinders .
An examination showed that one of the india-rubber bands which was round the head of a driving-rod had shrunk so as not quite to fill the socket along which it worked .
This was clearly the cause of the loss of power , and I pointed it out to my companions , who followed my remarks very carefully and asked several practical questions as to how they should proceed to set it right .
When I had made it clear to them , I returned to the main chamber of the machine and took a good look at it to satisfy my own curiosity .
It was obvious at a glance that the story of the fuller's-earth was the merest fabrication , for it would be absurd to suppose that so powerful an engine could be designed for so inadequate a purpose .
The walls were of wood , but the floor consisted of a large iron trough , and when I came to examine it I could see a crust of metallic deposit all over it .
I had stooped and was scraping at this to see exactly what it was when I heard a muttered exclamation in German and saw the cadaverous face of the colonel looking down at me .
`` Half dazed , I went into the station and asked about the morning train .
There would be one to Reading in less than an hour .
The same porter was on duty , I found , as had been there when I arrived .
I inquired of him whether he had ever heard of Colonel Lysander Stark .
The name was strange to him .
Had he observed a carriage the night before waiting for me ?
No , he had not .
Was there a police-station anywhere near ?
There was one about three miles off .
`` And I say east , '' said my patient .
`` Yes , sir ! ''
`` When did it break out ? ''
`` Whose house is it ? ''
`` And from a noble client ? ''
`` He says four o'clock .
It is three now .
He will be here in an hour . ''
`` Anything else ? ''
asked Holmes , yawning .
`` Oh , yes ; plenty .
Then there is another note in the Morning Post to say that the marriage would be an absolutely quiet one , that it would be at St. George 's , Hanover Square , that only half a dozen intimate friends would be invited , and that the party would return to the furnished house at Lancaster Gate which has been taken by Mr. Aloysius Doran .
Two days later -- that is , on Wednesday last -- there is a curt announcement that the wedding had taken place , and that the honeymoon would be passed at Lord Backwater 's place , near Petersfield .
Those are all the notices which appeared before the disappearance of the bride . ''
`` Before the what ? ''
asked Holmes with a start .
`` At the wedding breakfast . ''
`` Such as they are , they are set forth in a single article of a morning paper of yesterday , which I will read to you .
It is headed , 'Singular Occurrence at a Fashionable Wedding ' :
`` And is that all ? ''
`` You can understand , '' said Holmes suavely , `` that I extend to the affairs of my other clients the same secrecy which I promise to you in yours . ''
I have already learned all that is in the public prints , nothing more .
I presume that I may take it as correct -- this article , for example , as to the disappearance of the bride . ''
Lord St. Simon glanced over it .
`` Yes , it is correct , as far as it goes . ''
`` Very naturally not .
Did you see Miss Doran on the day before the wedding ? ''
`` Oh , it is childish .
She dropped her bouquet as we went towards the vestry .
She was passing the front pew at the time , and it fell over into the pew .
There was a moment 's delay , but the gentleman in the pew handed it up to her again , and it did not appear to be the worse for the fall .
Yet when I spoke to her of the matter , she answered me abruptly ; and in the carriage , on our way home , she seemed absurdly agitated over this trifling cause . ''
You say that there was a gentleman in the pew .
Some of the general public were present , then ? ''
`` Lady St. Simon , then , returned from the wedding in a less cheerful frame of mind than she had gone to it .
What did she do on re-entering her father 's house ? ''
`` Lady St. Simon said something about 'jumping a claim . '
She was accustomed to use slang of the kind .
I have no idea what she meant . ''
`` American slang is very expressive sometimes .
And what did your wife do when she finished speaking to her maid ? ''
Lord St. Simon shrugged his shoulders and raised his eyebrows .
`` We have been on a friendly footing for some years -- I may say on a very friendly footing .
She used to be at the Allegro .
I have not treated her ungenerously , and she had no just cause of complaint against me , but you know what women are , Mr. Holmes .
Flora was a dear little thing , but exceedingly hot-headed and devotedly attached to me .
She wrote me dreadful letters when she heard that I was about to be married , and , to tell the truth , the reason why I had the marriage celebrated so quietly was that I feared lest there might be a scandal in the church .
She came to Mr. Doran 's door just after we returned , and she endeavoured to push her way in , uttering very abusive expressions towards my wife , and even threatening her , but I had foreseen the possibility of something of the sort , and I had two police fellows there in private clothes , who soon pushed her out again .
She was quiet when she saw that there was no good in making a row . ''
`` Did your wife hear all this ? ''
`` I did not say a probable one .
But you do not yourself look upon this as likely ? ''
`` Well , really , when I consider that she has turned her back -- I will not say upon me , but upon so much that many have aspired to without success -- I can hardly explain it in any other fashion . ''
`` Where , then , is my wife ? ''
`` But I have heard all that you have heard . ''
`` And I feel dissatisfied .
It is this infernal St. Simon marriage case .
I can make neither head nor tail of the business . ''
`` Who ever heard of such a mixed affair ?
Every clue seems to slip through my fingers .
I have been at work upon it all day . ''
`` Then perhaps you will kindly explain how it is that we found this in it ? ''
He opened his bag as he spoke , and tumbled onto the floor a wedding-dress of watered silk , a pair of white satin shoes and a bride 's wreath and veil , all discoloured and soaked in water .
`` There , '' said he , putting a new wedding-ring upon the top of the pile .
`` There is a little nut for you to crack , Master Holmes . ''
They were found floating near the margin by a park-keeper .
They have been identified as her clothes , and it seemed to me that if the clothes were there the body would not be far off . ''
I congratulate you warmly . ''
`` It is the purest accident .
I can not allow that there is any humiliation . ''
`` Oh , yes , I know that I have treated you real bad and that I should have spoken to you before I went ; but I was kind of rattled , and from the time when I saw Frank here again I just did n't know what I was doing or saying .
I only wonder I didn't fall down and do a faint right there before the altar . ''
`` Then we had a talk as to what we should do , and Frank was all for openness , but I was so ashamed of it all that I felt as if I should like to vanish away and never see any of them again -- just sending a line to pa , perhaps , to show him that I was alive .
It was awful to me to think of all those lords and ladies sitting round that breakfast-table and waiting for me to come back .
So Frank took my wedding-clothes and things and made a bundle of them , so that I should not be traced , and dropped them away somewhere where no one could find them .
It is likely that we should have gone on to Paris to-morrow , only that this good gentleman , Mr. Holmes , came round to us this evening , though how he found us is more than I can think , and he showed us very clearly and kindly that I was wrong and that Frank was right , and that we should be putting ourselves in the wrong if we were so secret .
Then he offered to give us a chance of talking to Lord St. Simon alone , and so we came right away round to his rooms at once .
Now , Robert , you have heard it all , and I am very sorry if I have given you pain , and I hope that you do not think very meanly of me . ''
`` I had hoped , '' suggested Holmes , `` that you would have joined us in a friendly supper . ''
THE ADVENTURE OF THE BERYL CORONET
`` What on earth can be the matter with him ? ''
`` He is looking up at the numbers of the houses . ''
`` No doubt you think me mad ? ''
`` My name , '' answered our visitor , `` is probably familiar to your ears .
I am Alexander Holder , of the banking firm of Holder & Stevenson , of Threadneedle Street . ''
`` 'One of the most precious public possessions of the empire , ' said I .
`` 'You understand , Mr. Holder , that I am giving you a strong proof of the confidence which I have in you , founded upon all that I have heard of you .
I rely upon you not only to be discreet and to refrain from all gossip upon the matter but , above all , to preserve this coronet with every possible precaution because I need not say that a great public scandal would be caused if any harm were to befall it .
Any injury to it would be almost as serious as its complete loss , for there are no beryls in the world to match these , and it would be impossible to replace them .
I leave it with you , however , with every confidence , and I shall call for it in person on Monday morning . '
`` And , indeed , I could not wonder that such a man as Sir George Burnwell should gain an influence over him , for he has frequently brought him to my house , and I have found myself that I could hardly resist the fascination of his manner .
He is older than Arthur , a man of the world to his finger-tips , one who had been everywhere , seen everything , a brilliant talker , and a man of great personal beauty .
Yet when I think of him in cold blood , far away from the glamour of his presence , I am convinced from his cynical speech and the look which I have caught in his eyes that he is one who should be deeply distrusted .
So I think , and so , too , thinks my little Mary , who has a woman 's quick insight into character .
`` 'Well , I hope to goodness the house wo n't be burgled during the night . '
`` 'Oh , any old key will fit that bureau .
When I was a youngster I have opened it myself with the key of the box-room cupboard . '
`` I am endeavouring to tell you everything , Mr. Holmes , which may have any bearing upon the case , but I beg that you will question me upon any point which I do not make clear . ''
`` On the contrary , your statement is singularly lucid . ''
`` 'That you may get away , or perhaps that you may conceal what you have stolen , ' said I .
And then , realising the dreadful position in which I was placed , I implored him to remember that not only my honour but that of one who was far greater than I was at stake ; and that he threatened to raise a scandal which would convulse the nation .
He might avert it all if he would but tell me what he had done with the three missing stones .
Sherlock Holmes sat silent for some few minutes , with his brows knitted and his eyes fixed upon the fire .
`` Do you receive much company ? ''
`` None save my partner with his family and an occasional friend of Arthur 's .
Sir George Burnwell has been several times lately .
No one else , I think . ''
`` Do you go out much in society ? ''
`` God bless you !
You are doing what you can for him and for me .
But it is too heavy a task .
What was he doing there at all ?
If his purpose were innocent , why did he not say so ? ''
`` I shall never let it drop until the gems are found -- never , Mary !
Your affection for Arthur blinds you as to the awful consequences to me .
Far from hushing the thing up , I have brought a gentleman down from London to inquire more deeply into it . ''
`` You shut up the windows and doors the night before .
Did you fasten all the windows ? ''
`` You have a maid who has a sweetheart ?
I think that you remarked to your uncle last night that she had been out to see him ? ''
`` Yes , he did . ''
Something like fear sprang up in the young lady 's expressive black eyes .
`` Why , you are like a magician , '' said she .
`` How do you know that ? ''
She smiled , but there was no answering smile in Holmes ' thin , eager face .
`` Have you it here ? ''
`` It is a noiseless lock , '' said he .
`` It is no wonder that it did not wake you .
This case , I presume , contains the coronet .
We must have a look at it . ''
He opened the case , and taking out the diadem he laid it upon the table .
It was a magnificent specimen of the jeweller 's art , and the thirty-six stones were the finest that I have ever seen .
At one side of the coronet was a cracked edge , where a corner holding three gems had been torn away .
`` Now , Mr. Holder , '' said Holmes , `` here is the corner which corresponds to that which has been so unfortunately lost .
Might I beg that you will break it off . ''
`` But perhaps it may grow lighter as we go .
What do you think , Miss Holder ? ''
`` I do not know what I have done to be so severely tried , '' said he .
`` Only two days ago I was a happy and prosperous man , without a care in the world .
Now I am left to a lonely and dishonoured age .
One sorrow comes close upon the heels of another .
My niece , Mary , has deserted me . ''
With a dazed face the banker made out the required check .
Holmes walked over to his desk , took out a little triangular piece of gold with three gems in it , and threw it down upon the table .
`` As long as she was on the scene he could not take any action without a horrible exposure of the woman whom he loved .
But the instant that she was gone he realised how crushing a misfortune this would be for you , and how all-important it was to set it right .
He rushed down , just as he was , in his bare feet , opened the window , sprang out into the snow , and ran down the lane , where he could see a dark figure in the moonlight .
Sir George Burnwell tried to get away , but Arthur caught him , and there was a struggle between them , your lad tugging at one side of the coronet , and his opponent at the other .
In the scuffle , your son struck Sir George and cut him over the eye .
Then something suddenly snapped , and your son , finding that he had the coronet in his hands , rushed back , closed the window , ascended to your room , and had just observed that the coronet had been twisted in the struggle and was endeavouring to straighten it when you appeared upon the scene . ''
`` You then roused his anger by calling him names at a moment when he felt that he had deserved your warmest thanks .
He could not explain the true state of affairs without betraying one who certainly deserved little enough consideration at his hands .
He took the more chivalrous view , however , and preserved her secret . ''
`` It is an old maxim of mine that when you have excluded the impossible , whatever remains , however improbable , must be the truth .
Now , I knew that it was not you who had brought it down , so there only remained your niece and the maids .
But if it were the maids , why should your son allow himself to be accused in their place ?
There could be no possible reason .
As he loved his cousin , however , there was an excellent explanation why he should retain her secret -- the more so as the secret was a disgraceful one .
When I remembered that you had seen her at that window , and how she had fainted on seeing the coronet again , my conjecture became a certainty .
`` A day which has saved England from a great public scandal , '' said the banker , rising .
`` Sir , I can not find words to thank you , but you shall not find me ungrateful for what you have done .
Your skill has indeed exceeded all that I have heard of it .
And now I must fly to my dear boy to apologise to him for the wrong which I have done him .
As to what you tell me of poor Mary , it goes to my very heart .
Not even your skill can inform me where she is now . ''
THE ADVENTURE OF THE COPPER BEECHES
`` No , it is not selfishness or conceit , '' said he , answering , as was his wont , my thoughts rather than my words .
`` If I claim full justice for my art , it is because it is an impersonal thing -- a thing beyond myself .
Therefore it is upon the logic rather than upon the crime that you should dwell .
You have degraded what should have been a course of lectures into a series of tales . ''
It was dated from Montague Place upon the preceding evening , and ran thus :
`` 'Or to cut your hair quite short before you come to us ? '
`` I could hardly believe my ears .
As you may observe , Mr. Holmes , my hair is somewhat luxuriant , and of a rather peculiar tint of chestnut .
It has been considered artistic .
I could not dream of sacrificing it in this offhand fashion .
`` 'I am afraid that it is quite essential , ' said he .
'It is a little fancy of my wife 's , and ladies ' fancies , you know , madam , ladies ' fancies must be consulted .
And so you wo n't cut your hair ? '
`` 'Do you desire your name to be kept upon the books ? '
`` Well , Mr. Holmes , when I got back to my lodgings and found little enough in the cupboard , and two or three bills upon the table , I began to ask myself whether I had not done a very foolish thing .
After all , if these people had strange fads and expected obedience on the most extraordinary matters , they were at least ready to pay for their eccentricity .
Very few governesses in England are getting 100 pounds a year .
Besides , what use was my hair to me ?
Many people are improved by wearing it short and perhaps I should be among the number .
Next day I was inclined to think that I had made a mistake , and by the day after I was sure of it .
I had almost overcome my pride so far as to go back to the agency and inquire whether the place was still open when I received this letter from the gentleman himself .
I have it here and I will read it to you :
`` 'The Copper Beeches , near Winchester .
`` 'DEAR MISS HUNTER : -- Miss Stoper has very kindly given me your address , and I write from here to ask you whether you have reconsidered your decision .
My wife is very anxious that you should come , for she has been much attracted by my description of you .
We are willing to give 30 pounds a quarter , or 120 pounds a year , so as to recompense you for any little inconvenience which our fads may cause you .
They are not very exacting , after all .
My wife is fond of a particular shade of electric blue and would like you to wear such a dress indoors in the morning .
You need not , however , go to the expense of purchasing one , as we have one belonging to my dear daughter Alice ( now in Philadelphia ) , which would , I should think , fit you very well .
Then , as to sitting here or there , or amusing yourself in any manner indicated , that need cause you no inconvenience .
As regards your hair , it is no doubt a pity , especially as I could not help remarking its beauty during our short interview , but I am afraid that I must remain firm upon this point , and I only hope that the increased salary may recompense you for the loss .
Your duties , as far as the child is concerned , are very light .
Now do try to come , and I shall meet you with the dog-cart at Winchester .
Let me know your train .
Yours faithfully , JEPHRO RUCASTLE . '
`` That is the letter which I have just received , Mr. Holmes , and my mind is made up that I will accept it .
I thought , however , that before taking the final step I should like to submit the whole matter to your consideration . ''
`` Well , there seems to me to be only one possible solution .
Mr. Rucastle seemed to be a very kind , good-natured man .
Is it not possible that his wife is a lunatic , that he desires to keep the matter quiet for fear she should be taken to an asylum , and that he humours her fancies in every way in order to prevent an outbreak ? ''
`` Well , yes , of course the pay is good -- too good .
That is what makes me uneasy .
Why should they give you 120 pounds a year , when they could have their pick for 40 pounds ?
There must be some strong reason behind . ''
`` At least , '' said I as we heard her quick , firm steps descending the stairs , `` she seems to be a young lady who is very well able to take care of herself . ''
`` Just look up the trains in Bradshaw , '' said he , and turned back to his chemical studies .
The summons was a brief and urgent one .
`` Will you come with me ? ''
asked Holmes , glancing up .
`` Are they not fresh and beautiful ? ''
I cried with all the enthusiasm of a man fresh from the fogs of Baker Street .
`` Good heavens ! ''
`` Who would associate crime with these dear old homesteads ? ''
`` But the reason is very obvious .
The pressure of public opinion can do in the town what the law can not accomplish .
There is no lane so vile that the scream of a tortured child , or the thud of a drunkard 's blow , does not beget sympathy and indignation among the neighbours , and then the whole machinery of justice is ever so close that a word of complaint can set it going , and there is but a step between the crime and the dock .
But look at these lonely houses , each in its own fields , filled for the most part with poor ignorant folk who know little of the law .
Think of the deeds of hellish cruelty , the hidden wickedness which may go on , year in , year out , in such places , and none the wiser .
Had this lady who appeals to us for help gone to live in Winchester , I should never have had a fear for her .
It is the five miles of country which makes the danger .
Still , it is clear that she is not personally threatened . ''
`` I have devised seven separate explanations , each of which would cover the facts as far as we know them .
But which of these is correct can only be determined by the fresh information which we shall no doubt find waiting for us .
Well , there is the tower of the cathedral , and we shall soon learn all that Miss Hunter has to tell . ''
`` I am so delighted that you have come , '' she said earnestly .
`` It is so very kind of you both ; but indeed I do not know what I should do .
Your advice will be altogether invaluable to me . ''
`` I will do so , and I must be quick , for I have promised Mr. Rucastle to be back before three .
I got his leave to come into town this morning , though he little knew for what purpose . ''
Kindly turn round and motion to him to go away . '
`` I did as I was told , and at the same instant Mrs. Rucastle drew down the blind .
That was a week ago , and from that time I have not sat again in the window , nor have I worn the blue dress , nor seen the man in the road . ''
`` You will find it rather disconnected , I fear , and there may prove to be little relation between the different incidents of which I speak .
On the very first day that I was at the Copper Beeches , Mr. Rucastle took me to a small outhouse which stands near the kitchen door .
As we approached it I heard the sharp rattling of a chain , and the sound as of a large animal moving about .
`` 'Look in here ! '
said Mr. Rucastle , showing me a slit between two planks .
'Is he not a beauty ? '
`` I looked through and was conscious of two glowing eyes , and of a vague figure huddled up in the darkness .
`` Yes , the wine-cellar . ''
`` We must be circumspect , for we are dealing with a very cunning man .
We can do nothing until seven o'clock .
At that hour we shall be with you , and it will not be long before we solve the mystery . ''
`` You have done well indeed ! ''
cried Holmes with enthusiasm .
`` Now lead the way , and we shall soon see the end of this black business . ''
It was an old rickety door and gave at once before our united strength .
Together we rushed into the room .
There was no furniture save a little pallet bed , a small table , and a basketful of linen .
The skylight above was open , and the prisoner gone .
`` But it is impossible , '' said Miss Hunter ; `` the ladder was not there when the Rucastles went away . ''
`` Yes , sir , I do , and I am ready enough to tell what I know . ''
`` Ah , '' said Holmes , `` I think that what you have been good enough to tell us makes the matter fairly clear , and that I can deduce all that remains .
Mr. Rucastle then , I presume , took to this system of imprisonment ? ''
`` Yes , sir . ''
`` You have it , sir , just as it happened . ''
`` On the contrary , '' he answered , `` it would prevent me from taking a second dose of cocaine .
I should be delighted to look into any problem which you might submit to me . ''
`` You are right , '' I answered .
`` It was cleaned before being sent to me . ''
In my heart I accused my companion of putting forward a most lame and impotent excuse to cover his failure .
What data could he expect from an uncleaned watch ?
`` No , no : I never guess .
It is a shocking habit , -- destructive to the logical faculty .
What seems strange to you is only so because you do not follow my train of thought or observe the small facts upon which large inferences may depend .
For example , I began by stating that your brother was careless .
When you observe the lower part of that watch-case you notice that it is not only dinted in two places , but it is cut and marked all over from the habit of keeping other hard objects , such as coins or keys , in the same pocket .
Surely it is no great feat to assume that a man who treats a fifty-guinea watch so cavalierly must be a careless man .
Neither is it a very far-fetched inference that a man who inherits one article of such value is pretty well provided for in other respects . ''
Holmes rubbed his hands , and his eyes glistened .
He leaned forward in his chair with an expression of extraordinary concentration upon his clear-cut , hawklike features .
`` State your case , '' said he , in brisk , business tones .
I felt that my position was an embarrassing one .
`` You will , I am sure , excuse me , '' I said , rising from my chair .
`` The date ? ''
asked Holmes , opening his note-book .
`` Remained at the hotel .
There was nothing in it to suggest a clue , -- some clothes , some books , and a considerable number of curiosities from the Andaman Islands .
He had been one of the officers in charge of the convict-guard there . ''
`` Your statement is most interesting , '' said Sherlock Holmes .
`` Has anything else occurred to you ? ''
`` You are both very kind , '' she answered .
`` I have led a retired life , and have no friends whom I could appeal to .
If I am here at six it will do , I suppose ? ''
`` I may be very obtuse , Holmes , but I fail to see what this suggests . ''
`` It is paper of native Indian manufacture , '' he remarked .
`` It has at some time been pinned to a board .
The diagram upon it appears to be a plan of part of a large building with numerous halls , corridors , and passages .
At one point is a small cross done in red ink , and above it is '3.37 from left , ' in faded pencil-writing .
In the left-hand corner is a curious hieroglyphic like four crosses in a line with their arms touching .
Beside it is written , in very rough and coarse characters , 'The sign of the four , -- Jonathan Small , Mahomet Singh , Abdullah Khan , Dost Akbar . '
No , I confess that I do not see how this bears upon the matter .
Yet it is evidently a document of importance .
It has been kept carefully in a pocket-book ; for the one side is as clean as the other . ''
He gave a shrill whistle , on which a street Arab led across a four-wheeler and opened the door .
The man who had addressed us mounted to the box , while we took our places inside .
We had hardly done so before the driver whipped up his horse , and we plunged away at a furious pace through the foggy streets .
The situation was a curious one .
We were driving to an unknown place , on an unknown errand .
Yet our invitation was either a complete hoax , -- which was an inconceivable hypothesis , -- or else we had good reason to think that important issues might hang upon our journey .
Miss Morstan 's demeanor was as resolute and collected as ever .
I endeavored to cheer and amuse her by reminiscences of my adventures in Afghanistan ; but , to tell the truth , I was myself so excited at our situation and so curious as to our destination that my stories were slightly involved .
To this day she declares that I told her one moving anecdote as to how a musket looked into my tent at the dead of night , and how I fired a double-barrelled tiger cub at it .
At first I had some idea as to the direction in which we were driving ; but soon , what with our pace , the fog , and my own limited knowledge of London , I lost my bearings , and knew nothing , save that we seemed to be going a very long way .
Sherlock Holmes was never at fault , however , and he muttered the names as the cab rattled through squares and in and out by tortuous by-streets .
We had , indeed , reached a questionable and forbidding neighborhood .
Long lines of dull brick houses were only relieved by the coarse glare and tawdry brilliancy of public houses at the corner .
Then came rows of two-storied villas each with a fronting of miniature garden , and then again interminable lines of new staring brick buildings , -- the monster tentacles which the giant city was throwing out into the country .
At last the cab drew up at the third house in a new terrace .
None of the other houses were inhabited , and that at which we stopped was as dark as its neighbors , save for a single glimmer in the kitchen window .
On our knocking , however , the door was instantly thrown open by a Hindoo servant clad in a yellow turban , white loose-fitting clothes , and a yellow sash .
There was something strangely incongruous in this Oriental figure framed in the commonplace door-way of a third-rate suburban dwelling-house .
`` When I first determined to make this communication to you , '' said he , `` I might have given you my address , but I feared that you might disregard my request and bring unpleasant people with you .
I took the liberty , therefore , of making an appointment in such a way that my man Williams might be able to see you first .
I have complete confidence in his discretion , and he had orders , if he were dissatisfied , to proceed no further in the matter .
You will excuse these precautions , but I am a man of somewhat retiring , and I might even say refined , tastes , and there is nothing more unaesthetic than a policeman .
I have a natural shrinking from all forms of rough materialism .
I seldom come in contact with the rough crowd .
I live , as you see , with some little atmosphere of elegance around me .
I may call myself a patron of the arts .
It is my weakness .
The landscape is a genuine Corot , and , though a connoisseur might perhaps throw a doubt upon that Salvator Rosa , there can not be the least question about the Bouguereau .
I am partial to the modern French school . ''
`` 'For a long time I sat half distracted , wondering what I should do .
My first impulse was , of course , to call for assistance ; but I could not but recognize that there was every chance that I would be accused of his murder .
His death at the moment of a quarrel , and the gash in his head , would be black against me .
Again , an official inquiry could not be made without bringing out some facts about the treasure , which I was particularly anxious to keep secret .
He had told me that no soul upon earth knew where he had gone .
There seemed to be no necessity why any soul ever should know .
`` We searched the garden that night , but found no sign of the intruder , save that just under the window a single footmark was visible in the flower-bed .
But for that one trace , we might have thought that our imaginations had conjured up that wild , fierce face .
We soon , however , had another and a more striking proof that there were secret agencies at work all round us .
The window of my father 's room was found open in the morning , his cupboards and boxes had been rifled , and upon his chest was fixed a torn piece of paper , with the words 'The sign of the four ' scrawled across it .
What the phrase meant , or who our secret visitor may have been , we never knew .
As far as we can judge , none of my father 's property had been actually stolen , though everything had been turned out .
My brother and I naturally associated this peculiar incident with the fear which haunted my father during his life ; but it is still a complete mystery to us . ''
`` It was a kindly thought , '' said our companion , earnestly .
`` It was extremely good of you . ''
Mr. Thaddeus Sholto ceased , and sat twitching on his luxurious settee .
We all remained silent , with our thoughts upon the new development which the mysterious business had taken .
Holmes was the first to spring to his feet .
Our new acquaintance very deliberately coiled up the tube of his hookah , and produced from behind a curtain a very long befrogged topcoat with Astrakhan collar and cuffs .
This he buttoned tightly up , in spite of the extreme closeness of the night , and finished his attire by putting on a rabbit-skin cap with hanging lappets which covered the ears , so that no part of him was visible save his mobile and peaky face .
`` My health is somewhat fragile , '' he remarked , as he led the way down the passage .
`` I am compelled to be a valetudinarian . ''
`` This , Miss Morstan , is Pondicherry Lodge , '' said Mr. Thaddeus Sholto , as he handed her out .
Pondicherry Lodge stood in its own grounds , and was girt round with a very high stone wall topped with broken glass .
A single narrow iron-clamped door formed the only means of entrance .
On this our guide knocked with a peculiar postman-like rat-tat .
Our guide had left us the lantern .
Holmes swung it slowly round , and peered keenly at the house , and at the great rubbish-heaps which cumbered the grounds .
Miss Morstan and I stood together , and her hand was in mine .
A wondrous subtle thing is love , for here were we two who had never seen each other before that day , between whom no word or even look of affection had ever passed , and yet now in an hour of trouble our hands instinctively sought for each other .
I have marvelled at it since , but at the time it seemed the most natural thing that I should go out to her so , and , as she has often told me , there was in her also the instinct to turn to me for comfort and protection .
So we stood hand in hand , like two children , and there was peace in our hearts for all the dark things that surrounded us .
`` There is something amiss with Bartholomew ! ''
`` I am frightened !
My nerves can not stand it . ''
He was , indeed , half blubbering with fear , and his twitching feeble face peeping out from the great Astrakhan collar had the helpless appealing expression of a terrified child .
We all followed him into the housekeeper 's room , which stood upon the left-hand side of the passage .
The old woman was pacing up and down with a scared look and restless picking fingers , but the sight of Miss Morstan appeared to have a soothing effect upon her .
`` Master has locked himself in and will not answer me , '' she explained .
`` All day I have waited to hear from him , for he often likes to be alone ; but an hour ago I feared that something was amiss , so I went up and peeped through the key-hole .
You must go up , Mr. Thaddeus , -- you must go up and look for yourself .
I have seen Mr. Bartholomew Sholto in joy and in sorrow for ten long years , but I never saw him with such a face on him as that . ''
`` The door must come down , '' he answered , and , springing against it , he put all his weight upon the lock .
It creaked and groaned , but did not yield .
Together we flung ourselves upon it once more , and this time it gave way with a sudden snap , and we found ourselves within Bartholomew Sholto 's chamber .
`` This is all an insoluble mystery to me , '' said I .
`` It grows darker instead of clearer . ''
`` It was ten o'clock .
And now he is dead , and the police will be called in , and I shall be suspected of having had a hand in it .
Oh , yes , I am sure I shall .
But you do n't think so , gentlemen ?
Surely you don't think that it was I ?
Is it likely that I would have brought you here if it were I ?
I know that I shall go mad ! ''
He jerked his arms and stamped his feet in a kind of convulsive frenzy .
`` How came he , then ? ''
`` The door is locked , the window is inaccessible .
Was it through the chimney ? ''
`` He came through the hole in the roof , '' I cried .
He held down the lamp to the floor , and as he did so I saw for the second time that night a startled , surprised look come over his face .
For myself , as I followed his gaze my skin was cold under my clothes .
The floor was covered thickly with the prints of a naked foot , -- clear , well defined , perfectly formed , but scarce half the size of those of an ordinary man .
`` Why , we have got him , that 's all , '' said he .
`` I know a dog that would follow that scent to the world 's end .
If a pack can track a trailed herring across a shire , how far can a specially-trained hound follow so pungent a smell as this ?
It sounds like a sum in the rule of three .
The answer should give us the -- But halloo !
here are the accredited representatives of the law . ''
`` Death from some powerful vegetable alkaloid , '' I answered , -- '' some strychnine-like substance which would produce tetanus . ''
`` Is that an English thorn ? ''
`` Oh , this is hardly a case for me to theorize over , '' said Holmes , dryly .
`` Well , well , if it was fastened the steps could have nothing to do with the matter .
That 's common sense .
Man might have died in a fit ; but then the jewels are missing .
I have a theory .
These flashes come upon me at times.
-- Just step outside , sergeant , and you , Mr. Sholto .
-- What do you think of this , Holmes ?
Sholto was , on his own confession , with his brother last night .
The brother died in a fit , on which Sholto walked off with the treasure .
`` On which the dead man very considerately got up and locked the door on the inside . ''
`` Do n't trouble yourself about it , Mr. Sholto , '' said Holmes .
`` I think that I can engage to clear you of the charge . ''
`` By no means .
I do n't think I could rest until I know more of this fantastic business .
I have seen something of the rough side of life , but I give you my word that this quick succession of strange surprises to-night has shaken my nerve completely .
I should like , however , to see the matter through with you , now that I have got so far . ''
`` Yes , -- a queer mongrel , with a most amazing power of scent .
I would rather have Toby 's help than that of the whole detective force of London . ''
`` Go on , you drunken vagabone , '' said the face .
`` If you kick up any more row I 'll open the kennels and let out forty-three dogs upon you . ''
Holmes was standing on the door-step , with his hands in his pockets , smoking his pipe .
`` They belong , '' I said , `` to a child or a small woman . ''
`` This is the place .
What is that black thing down there ? ''
`` Do not imagine , '' said Holmes , `` that I depend for my success in this case upon the mere chance of one of these fellows having put his foot in the chemical .
I have knowledge now which would enable me to trace them in many different ways .
This , however , is the readiest and , since fortune has put it into our hands , I should be culpable if I neglected it .
It has , however , prevented the case from becoming the pretty little intellectual problem which it at one time promised to be .
There might have been some credit to be gained out of it , but for this too palpable clue . ''
`` Now , what could Jonathan Small do ?
He could only continue to keep a secret watch upon the efforts made to find the treasure .
Possibly he leaves England and only comes back at intervals .
Then comes the discovery of the garret , and he is instantly informed of it .
We again trace the presence of some confederate in the household .
Jonathan , with his wooden leg , is utterly unable to reach the lofty room of Bartholomew Sholto .
He takes with him , however , a rather curious associate , who gets over this difficulty , but dips his naked foot into creasote , whence comes Toby , and a six-mile limp for a half-pay officer with a damaged tendo Achillis . ''
We had during this time been following the guidance of Toby down the half-rural villa-lined roads which lead to the metropolis .
Now , however , we were beginning to come among continuous streets , where laborers and dockmen were already astir , and slatternly women were taking down shutters and brushing door-steps .
At the square-topped corner public houses business was just beginning , and rough-looking men were emerging , rubbing their sleeves across their beards after their morning wet .
Strange dogs sauntered up and stared wonderingly at us as we passed , but our inimitable Toby looked neither to the right nor to the left , but trotted onwards with his nose to the ground and an occasional eager whine which spoke of a hot scent .
`` We must get on the main scent again , I suppose . ''
`` We are out of luck , '' said Holmes .
`` They have taken to a boat here . ''
Several small punts and skiffs were lying about in the water and on the edge of the wharf .
We took Toby round to each in turn , but , though he sniffed earnestly , he made no sign .
`` This looks bad , '' said he .
`` These fellows are sharper than I expected .
They seem to have covered their tracks .
There has , I fear , been preconcerted management here . ''
He was approaching the door of the house , when it opened , and a little , curly-headed lad of six came running out , followed by a stoutish , red-faced woman with a large sponge in her hand .
`` Nothing you would like better ? ''
`` No , sir .
Black with a white band . ''
`` The main thing with people of that sort , '' said Holmes , as we sat in the sheets of the wherry , `` is never to let them think that their information can be of the slightest importance to you .
If you do , they will instantly shut up like an oyster .
If you listen to them under protest , as it were , you are very likely to get what you want . ''
`` Worse and worse !
Our men would know that the chase was hot at their heels , and they would be off out of the country .
As it is , they are likely enough to leave , but as long as they think they are perfectly safe they will be in no hurry .
Jones 's energy will be of use to us there , for his view of the case is sure to push itself into the daily press , and the runaways will think that every one is off on the wrong scent . ''
`` Take this hansom , drive home , have some breakfast , and get an hour's sleep .
It is quite on the cards that we may be afoot to-night again .
Stop at a telegraph-office , cabby !
We will keep Toby , for he may be of use to us yet . ''
`` About twelve o'clock last night , '' said the Standard , `` Mr. Bartholomew Sholto , of Pondicherry Lodge , Upper Norwood , was found dead in his room under circumstances which point to foul play .
As far as we can learn , no actual traces of violence were found upon Mr. Sholto 's person , but a valuable collection of Indian gems which the deceased gentleman had inherited from his father has been carried off .
The discovery was first made by Mr. Sherlock Holmes and Dr. Watson , who had called at the house with Mr. Thaddeus Sholto , brother of the deceased .
By a singular piece of good fortune , Mr. Athelney Jones , the well-known member of the detective police force , happened to be at the Norwood Police Station , and was on the ground within half an hour of the first alarm .
His trained and experienced faculties were at once directed towards the detection of the criminals , with the gratifying result that the brother , Thaddeus Sholto , has already been arrested , together with the housekeeper , Mrs. Bernstone , an Indian butler named Lal Rao , and a porter , or gatekeeper , named McMurdo .
It is quite certain that the thief or thieves were well acquainted with the house , for Mr. Jones's well-known technical knowledge and his powers of minute observation have enabled him to prove conclusively that the miscreants could not have entered by the door or by the window , but must have made their way across the roof of the building , and so through a trap-door into a room which communicated with that in which the body was found .
This fact , which has been very clearly made out , proves conclusively that it was no mere haphazard burglary .
The prompt and energetic action of the officers of the law shows the great advantage of the presence on such occasions of a single vigorous and masterful mind .
We can not but think that it supplies an argument to those who would wish to see our detectives more decentralized , and so brought into closer and more effective touch with the cases which it is their duty to investigate . ''
`` Is n't it gorgeous ! ''
said Holmes , grinning over his coffee-cup .
`` What do you think of it ? ''
`` No , it 's not quite so bad as that .
It is the unofficial force , -- the Baker Street irregulars . ''
`` South American , '' I hazarded .
`` Ah , that is more than I can tell .
Since , however , we had already determined that Small had come from the Andamans , it is not so very wonderful that this islander should be with him .
No doubt we shall know all about it in time .
Look here , Watson ; you look regularly done .
Lie down there on the sofa , and see if I can put you to sleep . ''
`` I heard nothing , '' I answered .
`` Have you had fresh news , then ? ''
`` No , we can do nothing .
We can only wait .
If we go ourselves , the message might come in our absence , and delay be caused .
You can do what you will , but I must remain on guard . ''
But , I say , if you are crossing the river you may as well return Toby , for I do n't think it is at all likely that we shall have any use for him now . ''
At breakfast-time he looked worn and haggard , with a little fleck of feverish color upon either cheek .
`` You are knocking yourself up , old man , '' I remarked .
`` I heard you marching about in the night . ''
`` I have considered that possibility too , and there is a search-party who will work up as far as Richmond .
If no news comes to-day , I shall start off myself to-morrow , and go for the men rather than the boat .
But surely , surely , we shall hear something . ''
`` I am off down the river , Watson , '' said he .
`` I have been turning it over in my mind , and I can see only one way out of it .
It is worth trying , at all events . ''
`` Thank you ; I do n't mind if I do , '' said he , mopping his face with a red bandanna handkerchief .
`` I remember that you expressed one . ''
`` We all need help sometimes , '' said I .
He looked about him in the slow methodical fashion of old age .
`` But I tell you that I am acting for him .
Was it about Mordecai Smith 's boat ? ''
He came across sullenly enough , and seated himself with his face resting on his hands .
Jones and I resumed our cigars and our talk .
Suddenly , however , Holmes 's voice broke in upon us .
`` I have been working in that get-up all day , '' said he , lighting his cigar .
`` You see , a good many of the criminal classes begin to know me , -- especially since our friend here took to publishing some of my cases : so I can only go on the war-path under some simple disguise like this .
You got my wire ? ''
`` It has all come to nothing .
I have had to release two of my prisoners , and there is no evidence against the other two . ''
When the cloth was cleared , Holmes glanced at his watch , and filled up three glasses with port .
`` One bumper , '' said he , `` to the success of our little expedition .
And now it is high time we were off .
Have you a pistol , Watson ? ''
Our craft was evidently a very fast one .
We shot past the long lines of loaded barges as though they were stationary .
Holmes smiled with satisfaction as we overhauled a river steamer and left her behind us .
`` No , I hardly think so .
This lair of his would be too valuable a retreat in case of need for him to give it up until he was sure that he could do without it .
But a second consideration struck me .
Jonathan Small must have felt that the peculiar appearance of his companion , however much he may have top-coated him , would give rise to gossip , and possibly be associated with this Norwood tragedy .
He was quite sharp enough to see that .
They had started from their head-quarters under cover of darkness , and he would wish to get back before it was broad light .
Now , it was past three o'clock , according to Mrs. Smith , when they got the boat .
It would be quite bright , and people would be about in an hour or so .
Therefore , I argued , they did not go very far .
They paid Smith well to hold his tongue , reserved his launch for the final escape , and hurried to their lodgings with the treasure-box .
In a couple of nights , when they had time to see what view the papers took , and whether there was any suspicion , they would make their way under cover of darkness to some ship at Gravesend or in the Downs , where no doubt they had already arranged for passages to America or the Colonies . ''
`` It is just these very simple things which are extremely liable to be overlooked .
However , I determined to act on the idea .
I started at once in this harmless seaman 's rig and inquired at all the yards down the river .
I drew blank at fifteen , but at the sixteenth -- Jacobson 's -- I learned that the Aurora had been handed over to them two days ago by a wooden-legged man , with some trivial directions as to her rudder .
'There ai n't naught amiss with her rudder , ' said the foreman .
'There she lies , with the red streaks . '
At that moment who should come down but Mordecai Smith , the missing owner ?
He was rather the worse for liquor .
I should not , of course , have known him , but he bellowed out his name and the name of his launch .
'I want her to-night at eight o'clock , ' said he , -- 'eight o'clock sharp , mind , for I have two gentlemen who wo n't be kept waiting . '
They had evidently paid him well , for he was very flush of money , chucking shillings about to the men .
I followed him some distance , but he subsided into an ale-house : so I went back to the yard , and , happening to pick up one of my boys on the way , I stationed him as a sentry over the launch .
He is to stand at water 's edge and wave his handkerchief to us when they start .
We shall be lying off in the stream , and it will be a strange thing if we do not take men , treasure , and all . ''
`` Some one calls him a soul concealed in an animal , '' I suggested .
`` Pile it on , men , pile it on ! ''
cried Holmes , looking down into the engine-room , while the fierce glow from below beat upon his eager , aquiline face .
`` Get every pound of steam you can . ''
`` I am sure of it , '' said I .
`` We shall be up with her in a very few minutes . ''
Our captive sat in the cabin opposite to the iron box which he had done so much and waited so long to gain .
He was a sunburned , reckless-eyed fellow , with a net-work of lines and wrinkles all over his mahogany features , which told of a hard , open-air life .
There was a singular prominence about his bearded chin which marked a man who was not to be easily turned from his purpose .
His age may have been fifty or thereabouts , for his black , curly hair was thickly shot with gray .
His face in repose was not an unpleasing one , though his heavy brows and aggressive chin gave him , as I had lately seen , a terrible expression when moved to anger .
He sat now with his handcuffed hands upon his lap , and his head sunk upon his breast , while he looked with his keen , twinkling eyes at the box which had been the cause of his ill-doings .
It seemed to me that there was more sorrow than anger in his rigid and contained countenance .
Once he looked up at me with a gleam of something like humor in his eyes .
`` You are under the charge of Mr. Athelney Jones , of Scotland Yard .
He is going to bring you up to my rooms , and I shall ask you for a true account of the matter .
You must make a clean breast of it , for if you do I hope that I may be of use to you .
I think I can prove that the poison acts so quickly that the man was dead before ever you reached the room . ''
`` Yes , this is the great Agra treasure .
Half of it is yours and half is Thaddeus Sholto 's .
You will have a couple of hundred thousand each .
An annuity of ten thousand pounds .
There will be few richer young ladies in England .
Is it not glorious ? ''
`` The treasure is lost , '' said Miss Morstan , calmly .
`` Yes , I have put it away where you shall never lay hand upon it , '' he cried , exultantly .
`` It is my treasure ; and if I ca n't have the loot I 'll take darned good care that no one else does .
I tell you that no living man has any right to it , unless it is three men who are in the Andaman convict-barracks and myself .
I know now that I can not have the use of it , and I know that they can not .
I have acted all through for them as much as for myself .
It 's been the sign of four with us always .
Well I know that they would have had me do just what I have done , and throw the treasure into the Thames rather than let it go to kith or kin of Sholto or of Morstan .
It was not to make them rich that we did for Achmet .
You 'll find the treasure where the key is , and where little Tonga is .
When I saw that your launch must catch us , I put the loot away in a safe place .
There are no rupees for you this journey . ''
`` You forget that we know nothing of all this , '' said Holmes quietly .
`` We have not heard your story , and we can not tell how far justice may originally have been on your side . ''
`` I am a Worcestershire man myself , -- born near Pershore .
I dare say you would find a heap of Smalls living there now if you were to look .
I have often thought of taking a look round there , but the truth is that I was never much of a credit to the family , and I doubt if they would be so very glad to see me .
They were all steady , chapel-going folk , small farmers , well known and respected over the country-side , while I was always a bit of a rover .
At last , however , when I was about eighteen , I gave them no more trouble , for I got into a mess over a girl , and could only get out of it again by taking the queen 's shilling and joining the 3d Buffs , which was just starting for India .
`` I was , as you can imagine , pretty down on my luck at this time , for I was a useless cripple though not yet in my twentieth year .
However , my misfortune soon proved to be a blessing in disguise .
A man named Abelwhite , who had come out there as an indigo-planter , wanted an overseer to look after his coolies and keep them up to their work .
He happened to be a friend of our colonel 's , who had taken an interest in me since the accident .
To make a long story short , the colonel recommended me strongly for the post and , as the work was mostly to be done on horseback , my leg was no great obstacle , for I had enough knee left to keep good grip on the saddle .
What I had to do was to ride over the plantation , to keep an eye on the men as they worked , and to report the idlers .
The pay was fair , I had comfortable quarters , and altogether I was content to spend the remainder of my life in indigo-planting .
Mr. Abelwhite was a kind man , and he would often drop into my little shanty and smoke a pipe with me , for white folk out there feel their hearts warm to each other as they never do here at home .
`` The third night of my watch was dark and dirty , with a small , driving rain .
It was dreary work standing in the gate-way hour after hour in such weather .
I tried again and again to make my Sikhs talk , but without much success .
At two in the morning the rounds passed , and broke for a moment the weariness of the night .
Finding that my companions would not be led into conversation , I took out my pipe , and laid down my musket to strike the match .
In an instant the two Sikhs were upon me .
One of them snatched my firelock up and levelled it at my head , while the other held a great knife to my throat and swore between his teeth that he would plunge it into me if I moved a step .
`` 'Then my comrade and I will swear that you shall have a quarter of the treasure which shall be equally divided among the four of us . '
`` 'Here they are ! '
He stopped , and held out his manacled hands for the whiskey-and-water which Holmes had brewed for him .
For myself , I confess that I had now conceived the utmost horror of the man , not only for this cold-blooded business in which he had been concerned , but even more for the somewhat flippant and careless way in which he narrated it .
Whatever punishment was in store for him , I felt that he might expect no sympathy from me .
Sherlock Holmes and Jones sat with their hands upon their knees , deeply interested in the story , but with the same disgust written upon their faces .
He may have observed it , for there was a touch of defiance in his voice and manner as he proceeded .
`` 'To government , Small , ' he stammered , -- 'to government . '
But he said it in a halting fashion , and I knew in my heart that I had got him .
`` Two nights later he and his friend Captain Morstan came to my hut in the dead of the night with a lantern .
`` 'I want you just to let Captain Morstan hear that story from your own lips , Small , ' said he .
`` 'It would come to fifty thousand apiece , ' said I .
`` Well , gentlemen , I weary you with my long story , and I know that my friend Mr. Jones is impatient to get me safely stowed in chokey .
I'll make it as short as I can .
The villain Sholto went off to India , but he never came back again .
Captain Morstan showed me his name among a list of passengers in one of the mail-boats very shortly afterwards .
His uncle had died , leaving him a fortune , and he had left the army , yet he could stoop to treat five men as he had treated us .
Morstan went over to Agra shortly afterwards , and found , as we expected , that the treasure was indeed gone .
The scoundrel had stolen it all , without carrying out one of the conditions on which we had sold him the secret .
From that day I lived only for vengeance .
I thought of it by day and I nursed it by night .
It became an overpowering , absorbing passion with me .
I cared nothing for the law , -- nothing for the gallows .
To escape , to track down Sholto , to have my hand upon his throat , -- that was my one thought .
Even the Agra treasure had come to be a smaller thing in my mind than the slaying of Sholto .
`` He was stanch and true , was little Tonga .
No man ever had a more faithful mate .
At the night named he had his boat at the wharf .
As it chanced , however , there was one of the convict-guard down there , -- a vile Pathan who had never missed a chance of insulting and injuring me .
I had always vowed vengeance , and now I had my chance .
It was as if fate had placed him in my way that I might pay my debt before I left the island .
He stood on the bank with his back to me , and his carbine on his shoulder .
I looked about for a stone to beat out his brains with , but none could I see .
Then a queer thought came into my head and showed me where I could lay my hand on a weapon .
I sat down in the darkness and unstrapped my wooden leg .
With three long hops I was on him .
He put his carbine to his shoulder , but I struck him full , and knocked the whole front of his skull in .
You can see the split in the wood now where I hit him .
We both went down together , for I could not keep my balance , but when I got up I found him still lying quiet enough .
I made for the boat , and in an hour we were well out at sea .
Tonga had brought all his earthly possessions with him , his arms and his gods .
Among other things , he had a long bamboo spear , and some Andaman cocoa-nut matting , with which I made a sort of sail .
For ten days we were beating about , trusting to luck , and on the eleventh we were picked up by a trader which was going from Singapore to Jiddah with a cargo of Malay pilgrims .
They were a rum crowd , and Tonga and I soon managed to settle down among them .
They had one very good quality : they let you alone and asked no questions .
`` He had lost them all , sir , except the one which was in his blow-pipe at the time . ''
`` I trust , '' said I , laughing , `` that my judgment may survive the ordeal .
But you look weary . ''
`` Yes , '' he answered , `` there are in me the makings of a very fine loafer and also of a pretty spry sort of fellow .
I often think of those lines of old Goethe , --
THE NEW REVELATION BY ARTHUR CONAN DOYLE Dedication To all the brave men and women , humble or learned , who have the moral courage during seventy years to face ridicule or worldly disadvantage in order to testify to an all-important truth .
March , 1918 PREFACE Many more philosophic minds than mine have thought over the religious side of this subject and many more scientific brains have turned their attention to its phenomenal aspect .
So far as I know , however , there has been no former attempt to show the exact relation of the one to the other .
I feel that if I should succeed in making this a little more clear I shall have helped in what I regard as far the most important question with which the human race is concerned .
A celebrated Psychic , Mrs. Piper , uttered , in the year 1899 words which were recorded by Dr. Hodgson at the time .
She was speaking in trance upon the future of spiritual religion , and she said : `` In the next century this will be astonishingly perceptible to the minds of men .
I will also make a statement which you will surely see verified .
Before the clear revelation of spirit communication there will be a terrible war in different parts of the world .
The entire world must be purified and cleansed before mortal can see , through his spiritual vision , his friends on this side and it will take just this line of action to bring about a state of perfection .
Friend , kindly think of this . ''
We have had `` the terrible war in different parts of the world . ''
The second half remains to be fulfilled .
A. C. D. 1918 .
CONTENTS CHAPTER I THE SEARCH II THE REVELATION III THE COMING LIFE IV PROBLEMS AND LIMITATIONS SUPPLEMENTARY DOCUMENTS I THE NEXT PHASE OF LIFE II AUTOMATIC WRITING III THE CHERITON DUGOUT THE NEW REVELATION CHAPTER I .
THE SEARCH The subject of psychical research is one upon which I have thought more and about which I have been slower to form my opinion , than upon any other subject whatever .
Every now and then as one jogs along through life some small incident happens which very forcibly brings home the fact that time passes and that first youth and then middle age are slipping away .
Such a one occurred the other day .
There is a column in that excellent little paper , Light , which is devoted to what was recorded on the corresponding date a generation -- that is thirty years -- ago .
As I read over this column recently I had quite a start as I saw my own name , and read the reprint of a letter which I had written in 1887 , detailing some interesting spiritual experience which had occurred in a seance .
Thus it is manifest that my interest in the subject is of some standing , and also , since it is only within the last year or two that I have finally declared myself to be satisfied with the evidence , that I have not been hasty in forming my opinion .
If I set down some of my experiences and difficulties my readers will not , I hope , think it egotistical upon my part , but will realise that it is the most graphic way in which to sketch out the points which are likely to occur to any other inquirer .
When I have passed over this ground , it will be possible to get on to something more general and impersonal in its nature .
When I had finished my medical education in 1882 , I found myself , like many young medical men , a convinced materialist as regards our personal destiny .
I had never ceased to be an earnest theist , because it seemed to me that Napoleon 's question to the atheistic professors on the starry night as he voyaged to Egypt : `` Who was it , gentlemen , who made these stars ? ''
has never been answered .
To say that the Universe was made by immutable laws only put the question one degree further back as to who made the laws .
I did not , of course , believe in an anthropomorphic God , but I believed then , as I believe now , in an intelligent Force behind all the operations of Nature -- a force so infinitely complex and great that my finite brain could get no further than its existence .
Right and wrong I saw also as great obvious facts which needed no divine revelation .
But when it came to a question of our little personalities surviving death , it seemed to me that the whole analogy of Nature was against it .
When the candle burns out the light disappears .
When the electric cell is shattered the current stops .
When the body dissolves there is an end of the matter .
Each man in his egotism may feel that he ought to survive , but let him look , we will say , at the average loafer -- of high or low degree -- would anyone contend that there was any obvious reason why THAT personality should carry on ?
It seemed to be a delusion , and I was convinced that death did indeed end all , though I saw no reason why that should affect our duty towards humanity during our transitory existence .
This was my frame of mind when Spiritual phenomena first came before my notice .
I had always regarded the subject as the greatest nonsense upon earth , and I had read of the conviction of fraudulent mediums and wondered how any sane man could believe such things .
I met some friends , however , who were interested in the matter , and I sat with them at some table-moving seances .
We got connected messages .
I am afraid the only result that they had on my mind was that I regarded these friends with some suspicion .
They were long messages very often , spelled out by tilts , and it was quite impossible that they came by chance .
Someone then , was moving the table .
I thought it was they .
They probably thought that I did it .
I was puzzled and worried over it , for they were not people whom I could imagine as cheating -- and yet I could not see how the messages could come except by conscious pressure .
About this time -- it would be in 1886 -- I came across a book called The Reminiscences of Judge Edmunds .
He was a judge of the U.S. High Courts and a man of high standing .
The book gave an account of how his wife had died , and how he had been able for many years to keep in touch with her .
All sorts of details were given .
I read the book with interest , and absolute scepticism .
It seemed to me an example of how a hard practical man might have a weak side to his brain , a sort of reaction , as it were , against those plain facts of life with which he had to deal .
Where was this spirit of which he talked ?
Suppose a man had an accident and cracked his skull ; his whole character would change , and a high nature might become a low one .
With alcohol or opium or many other drugs one could apparently quite change a man 's spirit .
The spirit then depended upon matter .
These were the arguments which I used in those days .
I did not realise that it was not the spirit that was changed in such cases , but the body through which the spirit worked , just as it would be no argument against the existence of a musician if you tampered with his violin so that only discordant notes could come through .
I was sufficiently interested to continue to read such literature as came in my way .
I was amazed to find what a number of great men -- men whose names were to the fore in science -- thoroughly believed that spirit was independent of matter and could survive it .
When I regarded Spiritualism as a vulgar delusion of the uneducated , I could afford to look down upon it ; but when it was endorsed by men like Crookes , whom I knew to be the most rising British chemist , by Wallace , who was the rival of Darwin , and by Flammarion , the best known of astronomers , I could not afford to dismiss it .
It was all very well to throw down the books of these men which contained their mature conclusions and careful investigations , and to say `` Well , he has one weak spot in his brain , '' but a man has to be very self-satisfied if the day does not come when he wonders if the weak spot is not in his own brain .
For some time I was sustained in my scepticism by the consideration that many famous men , such as Darwin himself , Huxley , Tyndall and Herbert Spencer , derided this new branch of knowledge ; but when I learned that their derision had reached such a point that they would not even examine it , and that Spencer had declared in so many words that he had decided against it on a priori grounds , while Huxley had said that it did not interest him , I was bound to admit that , however great , they were in science , their action in this respect was most unscientific and dogmatic , while the action of those who studied the phenomena and tried to find out the laws that governed them , was following the true path which has given us all human advance and knowledge .
So far I had got in my reasoning , so my sceptical position was not so solid as before .
It was somewhat reinforced , however , by my own experiences .
It is to be remembered that I was working without a medium , which is like an astronomer working without a telescope .
I have no psychical powers myself , and those who worked with me had little more .
Among us we could just muster enough of the magnetic force , or whatever you will call it , to get the table movements with their suspicious and often stupid messages .
I still have notes of those sittings and copies of some , at least , of the messages .
They were not always absolutely stupid .
For example , I find that on one occasion , on my asking some test question , such as how many coins I had in my pocket , the table spelt out : `` We are here to educate and to elevate , not to guess riddles . ''
And then : `` The religious frame of mind , not the critical , is what we wish to inculcate . ''
Now , no one could say that that was a puerile message .
On the other hand , I was always haunted by the fear of involuntary pressure from the hands of the sitters .
Then there came an incident which puzzled and disgusted me very much .
We had very good conditions one evening , and an amount of movement which seemed quite independent of our pressure .
Long and detailed messages came through , which purported to be from a spirit who gave his name and said he was a commercial traveller who bad lost his life in a recent fire at a theatre at Exeter .
All the details were exact , and he implored us to write to his family , who lived , he said , at a place called Slattenmere , in Cumberland .
I did so , but my letter came back , appropriately enough , through the dead letter office .
To this day I do not know whether we were deceived , or whether there was some mistake in the name of the place ; but there are the facts , and I was so disgusted that for some time my interest in the whole subject waned .
It was one thing to study a subject , but when the subject began to play elaborate practical jokes it seemed time to call a halt .
If there is such a place as Slattenmere in the world I should even now be glad to know it .
This , I may remark , seemed rather in conflict with his assertion that he had not suffered through being a free-thinker , and yet , of course , many men neglect prayer who are not free-thinkers .
One other incident of the early war days stands out in my memory .
A lady in whom I was interested had died in a provincial town .
She was a chronic invalid and morphia was found by her bedside .
There was an inquest with an open verdict .
Eight days later I went to have a sitting with Mr. Vout Peters .
After giving me a good deal which was vague and irrelevant , he suddenly said : `` There is a lady here .
She is leaning upon an older woman .
She keeps saying 'Morphia . '
Three times she has said it .
Her mind was clouded .
She did not mean it .
Those were almost his exact words .
Telepathy was out of the question , for I had entirely other thoughts in my mind at the time and was expecting no such message .
There are some theologians who are not only opposed to such a cult , but who go the length of saying that the phenomena and messages come from fiends who personate our dead , or pretend to be heavenly teachers .
It is difficult to think that those who hold this view have ever had any personal experience of the consoling and uplifting effect of such communications upon the recipient .
Ruskin has left it on record that his conviction of a future life came from Spiritualism , though he somewhat ungratefully and illogically added that having got that , he wished to have no more to do with it .
There are many , however -- quorum pars parva su -- who without any reserve can declare that they were turned from materialism to a belief in future life , with all that that implies , by the study of this subject .
If this be the devil 's work one can only say that the devil seems to be a very bungling workman and to get results very far from what he might be expected to desire .
It has been asserted by men for whose opinion I have a deep regard -- notably by Sir William Barratt -- that psychical research is quite distinct from religion .
Certainly it is so , in the sense that a man might be a very good psychical researcher but a very bad man .
But the results of psychical research , the deductions which we may draw , and the lessons we may learn , teach us of the continued life of the soul , of the nature of that life , and of how it is influenced by our conduct here .
If this is distinct from religion , I must confess that I do not understand the distinction .
To me it IS religion -- the very essence of it .
But that does not mean that it will necessarily crystallise into a new religion .
Personally I trust that it will not do so .
Surely we are disunited enough already ?
Rather would I see it the great unifying force , the one provable thing connected with every religion , Christian or non-Christian , forming the common solid basis upon which each raises , if it must needs raise , that separate system which appeals to the varied types of mind .
The Southern races will always demand what is less austere than the North , the West will always be more critical than the East .
One can not shape all to a level conformity .
But if the broad premises which are guaranteed by this teaching from beyond are accepted , then the human race has made a great stride towards religious peace and unity .
The question which faces us , then , is how will this influence bear upon the older organised religions and philosophies which have influenced the actions of men .
In connection with the general subject of life after death , people may say we have got this knowledge already through faith .
But faith , however beautiful in the individual , has always in collective bodies been a very two-edged quality .
All would be well if every faith were alike and the intuitions of the human race were constant .
We know that it is not so .
Faith means to say that you entirely believe a thing which you can not prove .
One man says : `` My faith is THIS . ''
Another says : `` My faith is THAT . ''
Neither can prove it , so they wrangle for ever , either mentally or in the old days physically .
If one is stronger than the other , he is inclined to persecute him just to twist him round to the true faith .
Because Philip the Second 's faith was strong and clear he , quite logically , killed a hundred thousand Lowlanders in the hope that their fellow countrymen would be turned to the all-important truth .
Now , if it were recognised that it is by no means virtuous to claim what you could not prove , we should then be driven to observe facts , to reason from them , and perhaps reach common agreement .
That is why this psychical movement appears so valuable .
Its feet are on something more solid than texts or traditions or intuitions .
It is religion from the double point of view of both worlds up to date , instead of the ancient traditions of one world .
We can not look upon this coming world as a tidy Dutch garden of a place which is so exact that it can easily be described .
It is probable that those messengers who come back to us are all , more or less , in one state of development and represent the same wave of life as it recedes from our shores .
Communications usually come from those who have not long passed over , and tend to grow fainter , as one would expect .
It is instructive in this respect to notice that Christ 's reappearances to his disciples or to Paul , are said to have been within a very few years of his death , and that there is no claim among the early Christians to have seen him later .
The cases of spirits who give good proof of authenticity and yet have passed some time are not common .
There is , in Mr. Dawson Roger 's life , a very good case of a spirit who called himself Manton , and claimed to have been born at Lawrence Lydiard and buried at Stoke Newington in 1677 .
It was clearly shown afterwards that there was such a man , and that he was Oliver Cromwell 's chaplain .
So far as my own reading goes , this is the oldest spirit who is on record as returning , and generally they are quite recent .
Hence , one gets all one 's views from the one generation , as it were , and we can not take them as final , but only as partial .
How spirits may see things in a different light as they progress in the other world is shown by Miss Julia Ames , who was deeply impressed at first by the necessity of forming a bureau of communication , but admitted , after fifteen years , that not one spirit in a million among the main body upon the further side ever wanted to communicate with us at all since their own loved ones had come over .
She had been misled by the fact that when she first passed over everyone she met was newly arrived like herself .
Thus the account we give may be partial , but still such as it is it is very consistent and of extraordinary interest , since it refers to our own destiny and that of those we love .
All agree that life beyond is for a limited period , after which they pass on to yet other phases , but apparently there is more communication between these phases than there is between us and Spiritland .
The lower can not ascend , but the higher can descend at will .
The life has a close analogy to that of this world at it its best .
It is pre-eminently a life of the mind , as this is of the body .
Preoccupations of food , money , lust , pain , etc.
, are of the body and are gone .
Music , the Arts , intellectual and spiritual knowledge , and progress have increased .
The people are clothed , as one would expect , since there is no reason why modesty should disappear with our new forms .
These new forms are the absolute reproduction of the old ones at their best , the young growing up and the old reverting until all come to the normal .
People live in communities , as one would expect if like attracts like , and the male spirit still finds his true mate though there is no sexuality in the grosser sense and no childbirth .
Since connections still endure , and those in the same state of development keep abreast , one would expect that nations are still roughly divided from each other , though language is no longer a bar , since thought has become a medium of conversation .
How close is the connection between kindred souls over there is shown by the way in which Myers , Gurney and Roden Noel , all friends and co-workers on earth , sent messages together through Mrs. Holland , who knew none of them , each message being characteristic to those who knew the men in life -- or the way in which Professor Verrall and Professor Butcher , both famous Greek scholars , collaborated to produce the Greek problem which has been analysed by Mr. Gerald Balfour in The Ear of Dionysius , with the result that that excellent authority testified that the effect COULD have been attained by no other entities , save only Verrall and Butcher .
It may be remarked in passing that these and other examples show clearly either that the spirits have the use of an excellent reference library or else that they have memories which produce something like omniscience .
No human memory could possibly carry all the exact quotations which occur in such communications as The Ear of Dionysius .
There is an opposite school of critics which rather finds the difficulty in picturing a life which has keen perceptions , robust emotions , and a solid surrounding all constructed in so diaphanous a material .
Let us remember that everything depends upon its comparison with the things around it .
`` I have compared the diction and vocabulary of these letters with those employed in my own writing -- I am not unknown as a magazine contributor -- and I find no points of similarity between the two . ''
There is much further evidence in this case for which I refer the reader to the book itself .
Many such manifestations have appeared of recent years in various quarters of the world , each of which is treated by the press in a more or less comic vein , with a conviction apparently that the use of the word `` spook '' discredits the incident and brings discussion to an end .
It is remarkable that each is treated as an entirely isolated phenomenon , and thus the ordinary reader gets no idea of the strength of the cumulative evidence .
In this particular case of the Cheriton Dugout the facts are as follows :
`` Well , to make a long story short , I used to find the little man in his place every morning , always with his black bag , and for nigh on to four months never a day passed without his having his three hours ' drive and paying his fare like a man at the end of it .
I shifted into new quarters on the strength of it , and was able to buy a new set of harness .
I do n't say as I altogether swallowed the story of the doctors having recommended him on a hot day to go about in a growler with both windows up .
However , it 's a bad thing in this world to be too knowing , so though I own I felt a bit curious at times , I never put myself out o ' the way to find out what the little game was .
One day , I was driving tap to my usual place of dropping him -- for by this time we had got into the way of going a regular beat every morning -- when I saw a policeman waiting , with a perky sort of look about him , as if he had some job on hand .
When the cab stopped out jumped the little man with his bag right into the arms of the 'bobby . '
`` 'On the charge of forging Bank of England notes , ' says the 'bobby ' .
`` Well , you see , he had all his plant for making the notes in that bag .
If he were to lock himself up in his lodging several hours a day it would soon set people wondering , to say nothing of the chance of eyes at the window or key-hole .
Again , you see , if he took a house all on his own hook , without servant nor anyone , it would look queer .
So he made up his mind as the best way of working it was to carry it on in a closed cab , and I do n't know that he was n't right .
He was known to the police however , and that was how they spotted him .
It was as near as a touch to my off-wheel .
`` My dear fellow , how can you possibly be so sure of that ? ''
`` For the very simple reason that I see the dog himself on our very door-step , and there is the ring of its owner .
Do n't move , I beg you , Watson .
He is a professional brother of yours , and your presence may be of assistance to me .
Now is the dramatic moment of fate , Watson , when you hear a step upon the stair which is walking into your life , and you know not whether for good or ill. What does Dr. James Mortimer , the man of science , ask of Sherlock Holmes , the specialist in crime ?
`` Yes , sir .
I married , and so left the hospital , and with it all hopes of a consulting practice .
It was necessary to make a home of my own . ''
`` Yes , it is a statement of a certain legend which runs in the Baskerville family . ''
When Dr. Mortimer had finished reading this singular narrative he pushed his spectacles up on his forehead and stared across at Mr. Sherlock Holmes .
The latter yawned and tossed the end of his cigarette into the fire .
`` The recent sudden death of Sir Charles Baskerville , whose name has been mentioned as the probable Liberal candidate for Mid-Devon at the next election , has cast a gloom over the county .
Though Sir Charles had resided at Baskerville Hall for a comparatively short period his amiability of character and extreme generosity had won the affection and respect of all who had been brought into contact with him .
In these days of _nouveaux riches_ it is refreshing to find a case where the scion of an old county family which has fallen upon evil days is able to make his own fortune and to bring it back with him to restore the fallen grandeur of his line .
Sir Charles , as is well known , made large sums of money in South African speculation .
More wise than those who go on until the wheel turns against them , he realized his gains and returned to England with them .
It is only two years since he took up his residence at Baskerville Hall , and it is common talk how large were those schemes of reconstruction and improvement which have been interrupted by his death .
Being himself childless , it was his openly expressed desire that the whole country-side should , within his own lifetime , profit by his good fortune , and many will have personal reasons for bewailing his untimely end .
His generous donations to local and county charities have been frequently chronicled in these columns .
`` Damp and raw . ''
`` But not actually raining ? ''
`` There are two lines of old yew hedge , twelve feet high and impenetrable .
The walk in the centre is about eight feet across . ''
`` Yes , there is a strip of grass about six feet broad on either side . ''
`` Yes , the wicket-gate which leads on to the moor . ''
`` No ; he lay about fifty yards from it . ''
`` I did not positively say so . ''
`` And you , a trained man of science , believe it to be supernatural ? ''
`` The original hound was material enough to tug a man 's throat out , and yet he was diabolical as well . ''
`` Then , how can I assist you ? ''
On the death of Sir Charles we inquired for this young gentleman and found that he had been farming in Canada .
From the accounts which have reached us he is an excellent fellow in every way .
I speak not as a medical man but as a trustee and executor of Sir Charles 's will . ''
`` Why should he not go to the home of his fathers ? ''
`` And then you will say nothing to him at all until I have made up my mind about the matter . ''
`` How long will it take you to make up your mind ? ''
`` Three people did . ''
`` Certainly , but how ? ''
`` It must be a wild place . ''
`` Then you are yourself inclining to the supernatural explanation . ''
`` Why , yes , '' said he , `` and the strange thing is , Mr. Sherlock Holmes , that if my friend here had not proposed coming round to you this morning I should have come on my own account .
I understand that you think out little puzzles , and I 've had one this morning which wants more thinking out than I am able to give it . ''
`` Pray take a seat , Sir Henry .
Do I understand you to say that you have yourself had some remarkable experience since you arrived in London ? ''
`` Who knew that you were going to the Northumberland Hotel ? ''
asked Holmes , glancing keenly across at our visitor .
`` No one could have known .
We only decided after I met Dr .
`` What do you make of it , Dr. Mortimer ?
You must allow that there is nothing supernatural about this , at any rate ? ''
`` I do n't know much about the tariff and things of that kind , '' said he ; `` but it seems to me we 've got a bit off the trail so far as that note is concerned . ''
`` Really , Mr. Holmes , this exceeds anything which I could have imagined , '' said Dr. Mortimer , gazing at my friend in amazement .
`` I could understand anyone saying that the words were from a newspaper ; but that you should name which , and add that it came from the leading article , is really one of the most remarkable things which I have ever known .
How did you do it ? ''
`` So far as I can follow you , then , Mr. Holmes , '' said Sir Henry Baskerville , `` someone cut out this message with a scissors -- ''
`` Gum , '' said Holmes .
`` We are coming now rather into the region of guesswork , '' said Dr. Mortimer .
`` Why , no , Mr. Holmes .
I think not . ''
`` I seem to have walked right into the thick of a dime novel , '' said our visitor .
`` Why in thunder should anyone follow or watch me ? ''
`` Then I understand that on your arrival in London yesterday you went out at once and bought a pair of boots ? ''
`` Well , of course , that is possible also .
I am very much indebted to you , Dr. Mortimer , for introducing me to a problem which presents several interesting alternatives .
But the practical point which we now have to decide , Sir Henry , is whether it is or is not advisable for you to go to Baskerville Hall . ''
`` There 's our man , Watson !
We 'll have a good look at him , if we can do no more . ''
`` Well , it was evident from what we have heard that Baskerville has been very closely shadowed by someone since he has been in town .
How else could it be known so quickly that it was the Northumberland Hotel which he had chosen ?
If they had followed him the first day I argued that they would follow him also the second .
You may have observed that I twice strolled over to the window while Dr. Mortimer was reading his legend . ''
`` My dear Watson , clumsy as I have been , you surely do not seriously imagine that I neglected to get the number ?
2704 is our man .
But that is no use to us for the moment . ''
`` I fail to see how you could have done more . ''
A lad of fourteen , with a bright , keen face , had obeyed the summons of the manager .
He stood now gazing with great reverence at the famous detective .
`` Let me have the Hotel Directory , '' said Holmes .
Now , Cartwright , there are the names of twenty-three hotels here , all in the immediate neighbourhood of Charing Cross .
Do you see ? ''
`` Yes , sir . ''
`` Yes , sir . ''
`` In each case the outside porter will send for the hall porter , to whom also you will give a shilling .
Here are twenty-three shillings .
You will then learn in possibly twenty cases out of the twenty-three that the waste of the day before has been burned or removed .
In the three other cases you will be shown a heap of paper and you will look for this page of the Times among it .
The odds are enormously against your finding it .
There are ten shillings over in case of emergencies .
Let me have a report by wire at Baker Street before evening .
And now , Watson , it only remains for us to find out by wire the identity of the cabman , No .
2704 , and then we will drop into one of the Bond Street picture galleries and fill in the time until we are due at the hotel . ''
As we came round the top of the stairs we had run up against Sir Henry Baskerville himself .
His face was flushed with anger , and he held an old and dusty boot in one of his hands .
So furious was he that he was hardly articulate , and when he did speak it was in a much broader and more Western dialect than any which we had heard from him in the morning .
`` Yes , sir , and mean to find it . ''
An agitated German waiter had appeared upon the scene .
`` Well , I do n't profess to understand it yet .
This case of yours is very complex , Sir Henry .
When taken in conjunction with your uncle 's death I am not sure that of all the five hundred cases of capital importance which I have handled there is one which cuts so deep .
But we hold several threads in our hands , and the odds are that one or other of them guides us to the truth .
We may waste time in following the wrong one , but sooner or later we must come upon the right . ''
`` That , unfortunately , is what I can not tell you .
Have you among your neighbours or acquaintances on Dartmoor any man with a black , full beard ? ''
`` He is in charge of the Hall . ''
`` He is the son of the old caretaker , who is dead .
They have looked after the Hall for four generations now .
So far as I know , he and his wife are as respectable a couple as any in the county . ''
`` That is true . ''
`` He and his wife had five hundred pounds each . ''
`` And this man of simple tastes would be the heir to Sir Charles's thousands . ''
Well , Sir Henry , I am of one mind with you as to the advisability of your going down to Devonshire without delay .
There is only one provision which I must make .
You certainly must not go alone . ''
`` But Dr. Mortimer has his practice to attend to , and his house is miles away from yours .
With all the good will in the world he may be unable to help you .
No , Sir Henry , you must take with you someone , a trusty man , who will be always by your side . ''
Holmes laid his hand upon my arm .
`` Would that suit Dr .
`` But it is a very singular thing , '' Dr. Mortimer remarked .
`` I searched this room carefully before lunch . ''
The German was sent for but professed to know nothing of the matter , nor could any inquiry clear it up .
Another item had been added to that constant and apparently purposeless series of small mysteries which had succeeded each other so rapidly .
Setting aside the whole grim story of Sir Charles 's death , we had a line of inexplicable incidents all within the limits of two days , which included the receipt of the printed letter , the black-bearded spy in the hansom , the loss of the new brown boot , the loss of the old black boot , and now the return of the new brown boot .
Holmes sat in silence in the cab as we drove back to Baker Street , and I knew from his drawn brows and keen face that his mind , like my own , was busy in endeavouring to frame some scheme into which all these strange and apparently disconnected episodes could be fitted .
All afternoon and late into the evening he sat lost in tobacco and thought .
Never have I seen my friend more completely taken aback than by the cabman 's reply .
For an instant he sat in silent amazement .
Then he burst into a hearty laugh .
`` And how would you describe Mr. Sherlock Holmes ? ''
`` You have arms , I suppose ? ''
Our friends had already secured a first-class carriage and were waiting for us upon the platform .
`` You have always kept together , I presume ? ''
`` Except yesterday afternoon .
I usually give up one day to pure amusement when I come to town , so I spent it at the Museum of the College of Surgeons . ''
That is very interesting .
Well , good-bye , '' he added as the train began to glide down the platform .
`` Bear in mind , Sir Henry , one of the phrases in that queer old legend which Dr. Mortimer has read to us , and avoid the moor in those hours of darkness when the powers of evil are exalted . ''
I looked back at the platform when we had left it far behind , and saw the tall , austere figure of Holmes standing motionless and gazing after us .
`` I 've been over a good part of the world since I left it , Dr. Watson , '' said he ; `` but I have never seen a place to compare with it . ''
`` I never saw a Devonshire man who did not swear by his county , '' I remarked .
A steep curve of heath-clad land , an outlying spur of the moor , lay in front of us .
On the summit , hard and clear like an equestrian statue upon its pedestal , was a mounted soldier , dark and stern , his rifle poised ready over his forearm .
He was watching the road along which we travelled .
The young heir glanced round with a gloomy face .
`` You do n't mind my driving straight home , Sir Henry ? ''
`` My wife is expecting me . ''
The wheels died away down the drive while Sir Henry and I turned into the hall , and the door clanged heavily behind us .
It was a fine apartment in which we found ourselves , large , lofty , and heavily raftered with huge balks of age-blackened oak .
In the great old-fashioned fireplace behind the high iron dogs a log-fire crackled and snapped .
Sir Henry and I held out our hands to it , for we were numb from our long drive .
Then we gazed round us at the high , thin window of old stained glass , the oak panelling , the stags ' heads , the coats-of-arms upon the walls , all dim and sombre in the subdued light of the central lamp .
`` Would you wish dinner to be served at once , sir ? ''
`` I only meant , sir , that Sir Charles led a very retired life , and we were able to look after his wants .
You would , naturally , wish to have more company , and so you will need changes in your household . ''
I seemed to discern some signs of emotion upon the butler 's white face .
`` I have no doubt , sir , that we shall succeed in establishing ourselves in some business .
Sir Charles 's generosity has given us the means to do so .
And now , sir , perhaps I had best show you to your rooms . ''
Suddenly my thoughts were interrupted by the sound of running feet behind me and by a voice which called me by name .
I turned , expecting to see Dr. Mortimer , but to my surprise it was a stranger who was pursuing me .
He was a small , slim , clean-shaven , prim-faced man , flaxen-haired and lean-jawed , between thirty and forty years of age , dressed in a gray suit and wearing a straw hat .
A tin box for botanical specimens hung over his shoulder and he carried a green butterfly-net in one of his hands .
`` I do not think that it is likely . ''
My first thought was that I should be by Sir Henry 's side .
But then I remembered the pile of papers and bills with which his study table was littered .
It was certain that I could not help with those .
And Holmes had expressly said that I should study the neighbours upon the moor .
I accepted Stapleton 's invitation , and we turned together down the path .
`` It is a wonderful place , the moor , '' said he , looking round over the undulating downs , long green rollers , with crests of jagged granite foaming up into fantastic surges .
`` You never tire of the moor .
You can not think the wonderful secrets which it contains .
It is so vast , and so barren , and so mysterious . ''
`` I have only been here two years .
The residents would call me a newcomer .
We came shortly after Sir Charles settled .
But my tastes led me to explore every part of the country round , and I should think that there are few men who know it better than I do . ''
A long , low moan , indescribably sad , swept over the moor .
It filled the whole air , and yet it was impossible to say whence it came .
From a dull murmur it swelled into a deep roar , and then sank back into a melancholy , throbbing murmur once again .
Stapleton looked at me with a curious expression in his face .
`` But what is it ? ''
`` It 's a very rare bird -- practically extinct -- in England now , but all things are possible upon the moor .
Yes , I should not be surprised to learn that what we have heard is the cry of the last of the bitterns . ''
`` What are they ?
`` But I have only just come . ''
Stapleton had abandoned the chase and came back to us breathing hard and flushed with his exertions .
`` I imagine that it must be Sir Henry Baskerville . ''
`` It certainly did cross my mind that it might be a little dull -- less for you , perhaps , than for your sister . ''
All this , however , is foreign to the mission on which you sent me and will probably be very uninteresting to your severely practical mind .
I can still remember your complete indifference as to whether the sun moved round the earth or the earth round the sun .
Let me , therefore , return to the facts concerning Sir Henry Baskerville .
We are four able-bodied men in this household , so that we could take good care of ourselves , but I confess that I have had uneasy moments when I have thought of the Stapletons .
They live miles from any help .
There are one maid , an old manservant , the sister , and the brother , the latter not a very strong man .
They would be helpless in the hands of a desperate fellow like this Notting Hill criminal , if he could once effect an entrance .
Both Sir Henry and I were concerned at their situation , and it was suggested that Perkins the groom should go over to sleep there , but Stapleton would not hear of it .
`` I could not quite understand the object of your questions this morning , Sir Henry , '' said he .
`` I trust that they do not mean that I have done anything to forfeit your confidence ? ''
BASKERVILLE HALL , Oct. 15th .
MY DEAR HOLMES , -- If I was compelled to leave you without much news during the early days of my mission you must acknowledge that I am making up for lost time , and that events are now crowding thick and fast upon us .
In my last report I ended upon my top note with Barrymore at the window , and now I have quite a budget already which will , unless I am much mistaken , considerably surprise you .
Things have taken a turn which I could not have anticipated .
In some ways they have within the last forty-eight hours become much clearer and in some ways they have become more complicated .
But I will tell you all and you shall judge for yourself .
`` I knew that Barrymore walked about nights , and I had a mind to speak to him about it , '' said he .
`` Two or three times I have heard his steps in the passage , coming and going , just about the hour you name . ''
`` The man is rather deaf , and in any case we must take our chance of that .
We 'll sit up in my room to-night and wait until he passes . ''
Sir Henry rubbed his hands with pleasure , and it was evident that he hailed the adventure as a relief to his somewhat quiet life upon the moor .
`` My dear fellow , '' said he , `` Holmes , with all his wisdom , did not foresee some things which have happened since I have been on the moor .
I am sure that you are the last man in the world who would wish to be a spoil-sport .
I must go out alone . ''
But when I came to think the matter over my conscience reproached me bitterly for having on any pretext allowed him to go out of my sight .
I imagined what my feelings would be if I had to return to you and to confess that some misfortune had occurred through my disregard for your instructions .
I assure you my cheeks flushed at the very thought .
It might not even now be too late to overtake him , so I set off at once in the direction of Merripit House .
I hurried along the road at the top of my speed without seeing anything of Sir Henry , until I came to the point where the moor path branches off .
There , fearing that perhaps I had come in the wrong direction after all , I mounted a hill from which I could command a view -- the same hill which is cut into the dark quarry .
Thence I saw him at once .
He was on the moor path , about a quarter of a mile off , and a lady was by his side who could only be Miss Stapleton .
It was clear that there was already an understanding between them and that they had met by appointment .
They were walking slowly along in deep conversation , and I saw her making quick little movements of her hands as if she were very earnest in what she was saying , while he listened intently , and once or twice shook his head in strong dissent .
I stood among the rocks watching them , very much puzzled as to what I should do next .
To follow them and break into their intimate conversation seemed to be an outrage , and yet my clear duty was never for an instant to let him out of my sight .
To act the spy upon a friend was a hateful task .
Still , I could see no better course than to observe him from the hill , and to clear my conscience by confessing to him afterwards what I had done .
It is true that if any sudden danger had threatened him I was too far away to be of use , and yet I am sure that you will agree with me that the position was very difficult , and that there was nothing more which I could do .
Our friend , Sir Henry , and the lady had halted on the path and were standing deeply absorbed in their conversation , when I was suddenly aware that I was not the only witness of their interview .
A wisp of green floating in the air caught my eye , and another glance showed me that it was carried on a stick by a man who was moving among the broken ground .
It was Stapleton with his butterfly-net .
He was very much closer to the pair than I was , and he appeared to be moving in their direction .
At this instant Sir Henry suddenly drew Miss Stapleton to his side .
His arm was round her , but it seemed to me that she was straining away from him with her face averted .
He stooped his head to hers , and she raised one hand as if in protest .
Next moment I saw them spring apart and turn hurriedly round .
Stapleton was the cause of the interruption .
He was running wildly towards them , his absurd net dangling behind him .
He gesticulated and almost danced with excitement in front of the lovers .
What the scene meant I could not imagine , but it seemed to me that Stapleton was abusing Sir Henry , who offered explanations , which became more angry as the other refused to accept them .
The lady stood by in haughty silence .
Finally Stapleton turned upon his heel and beckoned in a peremptory way to his sister , who , after an irresolute glance at Sir Henry , walked off by the side of her brother .
The naturalist 's angry gestures showed that the lady was included in his displeasure .
The baronet stood for a minute looking after them , and then he walked slowly back the way that he had come , his head hanging , the very picture of dejection .
`` Nothing , sir . ''
His agitation was so great that he could hardly speak , and the shadows sprang up and down from the shaking of his candle .
`` It was the window , sir .
I go round at night to see that they are fastened . ''
`` Yes , sir , all the windows . ''
`` There it is ! ''
`` And you go in disgrace .
By thunder , you may well be ashamed of yourself .
Your family has lived with mine for over a hundred years under this roof , and here I find you deep in some dark plot against me . ''
`` Speak out , then !
What does it mean ? ''
`` That 's the truth , sir , '' said Barrymore .
`` I said that it was not my secret and that I could not tell it to you .
But now you have heard it , and you will see that if there was a plot it was not against you . ''
This , then , was the explanation of the stealthy expeditions at night and the light at the window .
Sir Henry and I both stared at the woman in amazement .
Was it possible that this stolidly respectable person was of the same blood as one of the most notorious criminals in the country ?
`` Are you armed ? ''
`` What do they call this sound ? ''
`` No , no . ''
`` What shall we do now ? ''
And have I not cause for such a feeling ?
Consider the long sequence of incidents which have all pointed to some sinister influence which is at work around us .
There is the death of the last occupant of the Hall , fulfilling so exactly the conditions of the family legend , and there are the repeated reports from peasants of the appearance of a strange creature upon the moor .
Twice I have with my own ears heard the sound which resembled the distant baying of a hound .
It is incredible , impossible , that it should really be outside the ordinary laws of nature .
A spectral hound which leaves material footmarks and fills the air with its howling is surely not to be thought of .
Stapleton may fall in with such a superstition , and Mortimer also ; but if I have one quality upon earth it is common-sense , and nothing will persuade me to believe in such a thing .
To do so would be to descend to the level of these poor peasants , who are not content with a mere fiend dog but must needs describe him with hell-fire shooting from his mouth and eyes .
Holmes would not listen to such fancies , and I am his agent .
But facts are facts , and I have twice heard this crying upon the moor .
Suppose that there were really some huge hound loose upon it ; that would go far to explain everything .
But where could such a hound lie concealed , where did it get its food , where did it come from , how was it that no one saw it by day ?
It must be confessed that the natural explanation offers almost as many difficulties as the other .
And always , apart from the hound , there is the fact of the human agency in London , the man in the cab , and the letter which warned Sir Henry against the moor .
This at least was real , but it might have been the work of a protecting friend as easily as of an enemy .
Where is that friend or enemy now ?
Has he remained in London , or has he followed us down here ?
Could he -- could he be the stranger whom I saw upon the tor ?
`` If you had told us of your own free will it would have been a different thing , '' said the baronet , `` you only told us , or rather your wife only told us , when it was forced from you and you could not help yourself . ''
`` God bless you , sir , and thank you from my heart !
It would have killed my poor wife had he been taken again . ''
The baronet and I were both upon our feet .
`` Do you know how he died ? ''
`` And the woman 's name ? ''
`` I ca n't give you the name , sir , but I can give you the initials .
Her initials were L. L . ''
`` Well , sir , I took no particular notice of his letters .
I should not have noticed this one , only it happened to come alone . ''
`` No , sir .
No more than you have .
But I expect if we could lay our hands upon that lady we should know more about Sir Charles's death . ''
`` Well , sir , I thought no good could come of it .
But now you have been kind to us , and I feel as if it would be treating you unfairly not to tell you all that I know about the matter . ''
-- All day to-day the rain poured down , rustling on the ivy and dripping from the eaves .
I thought of the convict out upon the bleak , cold , shelterless moor .
Whatever his crimes , he has suffered something to atone for them .
And then I thought of that other one -- the face in the cab , the figure against the moon .
Was he also out in that deluged -- the unseen watcher , the man of darkness ?
In the evening I put on my waterproof and I walked far upon the sodden moor , full of dark imaginings , the rain beating upon my face and the wind whistling about my ears .
God help those who wander into the great mire now , for even the firm uplands are becoming a morass .
I found the black tor upon which I had seen the solitary watcher , and from its craggy summit I looked out myself across the melancholy downs .
Rain squalls drifted across their russet face , and the heavy , slate-coloured clouds hung low over the landscape , trailing in gray wreaths down the sides of the fantastic hills .
In the distant hollow on the left , half hidden by the mist , the two thin towers of Baskerville Hall rose above the trees .
They were the only signs of human life which I could see , save only those prehistoric huts which lay thickly upon the slopes of the hills .
Nowhere was there any trace of that lonely man whom I had seen on the same spot two nights before .
`` Can you , then , tell me the name of any woman whose initials are L .
`` I fancy old Frankland allows her a pittance , but it can not be more , for his own affairs are considerably involved .
Whatever she may have deserved one could not allow her to go hopelessly to the bad .
Her story got about , and several of the people here did something to enable her to earn an honest living .
Stapleton did for one , and Sir Charles for another .
I gave a trifle myself .
It was to set her up in a typewriting business . ''
`` I do n't know , sir .
I hope to heaven that he has gone , for he has brought nothing but trouble here !
I 've not heard of him since I left out food for him last , and that was three days ago . ''
`` Then he was certainly there ? ''
I sat with my coffee-cup halfway to my lips and stared at Barrymore .
`` Have you seen him ? ''
`` No , sir . ''
`` Selden found out that he has got a lad who works for him and brings him all he needs .
I dare say he goes to Coombe Tracey for what he wants . ''
`` What is the object of these questions ? ''
`` Have you the dates of those letters ? ''
`` Have you ever met him ? ''
`` Yes , once or twice , when he came into Coombe Tracey .
He was a very retiring man , and he preferred to do good by stealth . ''
`` Because I had only just learned that he was going to London next day and might be away for months .
There were reasons why I could not get there earlier . ''
`` Do you think a woman could go alone at that hour to a bachelor's house ? ''
`` I quoted the postscript .
The letter had , as I said , been burned and it was not all legible .
I ask you once again why it was that you were so pressing that Sir Charles should destroy this letter which he received on the day of his death . ''
The woman 's story hung coherently together , and all my questions were unable to shake it .
I could only check it by finding if she had , indeed , instituted divorce proceedings against her husband at or about the time of the tragedy .
`` Did it do you any good ? ''
`` You 'll be surprised to hear that his food is taken to him by a child .
I see him every day through my telescope upon the roof .
He passes along the same path at the same hour , and to whom should he be going except to the convict ? ''
It was several miles off , but I could distinctly see a small dark dot against the dull green and gray .
The telescope , a formidable instrument mounted upon a tripod , stood upon the flat leads of the house .
Frankland clapped his eye to it and gave a cry of satisfaction .
`` Just as you wish . ''
If there was one report there might be others , so I looked round the hut in search of them .
There was no trace , however , of anything of the kind , nor could I discover any sign which might indicate the character or intentions of the man who lived in this singular place , save that he must be of Spartan habits and cared little for the comforts of life .
When I thought of the heavy rains and looked at the gaping roof I understood how strong and immutable must be the purpose which had kept him in that inhospitable abode .
Was he our malignant enemy , or was he by chance our guardian angel ?
I swore that I would not leave the hut until I knew .
Outside the sun was sinking low and the west was blazing with scarlet and gold .
Its reflection was shot back in ruddy patches by the distant pools which lay amid the great Grimpen Mire .
There were the two towers of Baskerville Hall , and there a distant blur of smoke which marked the village of Grimpen .
Between the two , behind the hill , was the house of the Stapletons .
All was sweet and mellow and peaceful in the golden evening light , and yet as I looked at them my soul shared none of the peace of nature but quivered at the vagueness and the terror of that interview which every instant was bringing nearer .
With tingling nerves , but a fixed purpose , I sat in the dark recess of the hut and waited with sombre patience for the coming of its tenant .
`` I never was more glad to see anyone in my life , '' said I , as I wrung him by the hand .
`` Yes , I saw you then . ''
`` But why keep me in the dark ? ''
`` But why this elaborate deception ? ''
`` But are you sure of this , Holmes ?
How do you know that the woman is his wife ? ''
`` Because he so far forgot himself as to tell you a true piece of autobiography upon the occasion when he first met you , and I dare say he has many a time regretted it since .
He was once a schoolmaster in the north of England .
Now , there is no one more easy to trace than a schoolmaster .
There are scholastic agencies by which one may identify any man who has been in the profession .
A little investigation showed me that a school had come to grief under atrocious circumstances , and that the man who had owned it -- the name was different -- had disappeared with his wife .
When I learned that the missing man was devoted to entomology the identification was complete . ''
The darkness was rising , but much was still hidden by the shadows .
`` Where is it ? ''
Holmes whispered ; and I knew from the thrill of his voice that he , the man of iron , was shaken to the soul .
`` Where is it , Watson ? ''
`` There , I think . ''
I pointed into the darkness .
I saw Holmes put his hand to his forehead like a man distracted .
He stamped his feet upon the ground .
`` Why should we not seize him at once ? ''
`` It is not the baronet -- it is -- why , it is my neighbour , the convict ! ''
`` Then the clothes have been the poor devil 's death , '' said he .
`` It is clear enough that the hound has been laid on from some article of Sir Henry 's -- the boot which was abstracted in the hotel , in all probability -- and so ran this man down .
There is one very singular thing , however : How came Selden , in the darkness , to know that the hound was on his trail ? ''
`` A greater mystery to me is why this hound , presuming that all our conjectures are correct -- ''
`` Yes , indeed .
I have no doubt that my friend 's explanation will cover the facts .
I will take an unpleasant remembrance back to London with me to-morrow . ''
`` I hope your visit has cast some light upon those occurrences which have puzzled us ? ''
`` Why should we not arrest him at once ? ''
`` Surely we have a case . ''
`` Well , then , to-night ? ''
`` I have no doubt that you would have had a more lively evening , '' said Holmes drily .
`` By the way , I do n't suppose you appreciate that we have been mourning over you as having broken your neck ? ''
`` But how about the case ? ''
`` Have you made anything out of the tangle ?
I do n't know that Watson and I are much the wiser since we came down . ''
`` If you will do this I think the chances are that our little problem will soon be solved .
I have no doubt -- -- ''
`` I know what is good when I see it , and I see it now .
That 's a Kneller , I 'll swear , that lady in the blue silk over yonder , and the stout gentleman with the wig ought to be a Reynolds .
They are all family portraits , I presume ? ''
`` Who is the gentleman with the telescope ? ''
`` There is something of Sir Henry about the jaw . ''
`` Good heavens ! ''
I cried , in amazement .
The face of Stapleton had sprung out of the canvas .
`` But this is marvellous .
It might be his portrait . ''
`` Prove it to me !
Prove it to me !
And if you can do so -- ! ''
The fierce flash of her eyes said more than any words .
`` And then after you had sent the letter he dissuaded you from keeping the appointment ? ''
He said that the death was a very mysterious one , and that I should certainly be suspected if the facts came out .
He frightened me into remaining silent . ''
`` As long as I have my trousers I have a hip-pocket , and as long as I have my hip-pocket I have something in it . ''
`` You 're mighty close about this affair , Mr. Holmes .
What 's the game now ? ''
`` A waiting game . ''
I tiptoed down the path and stooped behind the low wall which surrounded the stunted orchard .
Creeping in its shadow I reached a point whence I could look straight through the uncurtained window .
`` Is that serious ? ''
So as the fog-bank flowed onward we fell back before it until we were half a mile from the house , and still that dense white sea , with the moon silvering its upper edge , swept slowly and inexorably on .
`` Having first endangered it .
Are you strong enough to stand ? ''
But there was no sign within it of that desperate and defiant villain whom we expected to see .
Instead we were faced by an object so strange and so unexpected that we stood for a moment staring at it in amazement .
`` The brute ! ''
`` Here , Lestrade , your brandy-bottle !
Put her in the chair !
She has fainted from ill-usage and exhaustion . ''
`` It is dead . ''
`` He may find his way in , but never out , '' she cried .
`` How can he see the guiding wands to-night ?
We planted them together , he and I , to mark the pathway through the mire .
Oh , if I could only have plucked them out to-day .
Then indeed you would have had him at your mercy ! ''
He retained it in his hand after using it to set the hound upon the track .
He fled when he knew the game was up , still clutching it .
And he hurled it away at this point of his flight .
We know at least that he came so far in safety . ''
But more than that we were never destined to know , though there was much which we might surmise .
There was no chance of finding footsteps in the mire , for the rising mud oozed swiftly in upon them , but as we at last reached firmer ground beyond the morass we all looked eagerly for them .
But no slightest sign of them ever met our eyes .
If the earth told a true story , then Stapleton never reached that island of refuge towards which he struggled through the fog upon that last night .
Somewhere in the heart of the great Grimpen Mire , down in the foul slime of the huge morass which had sucked him in , this cold and cruel-hearted man is forever buried .
Many traces we found of him in the bog-girt island where he had hid his savage ally .
A huge driving-wheel and a shaft half-filled with rubbish showed the position of an abandoned mine .
Beside it were the crumbling remains of the cottages of the miners , driven away no doubt by the foul reek of the surrounding swamp .
In one of these a staple and chain with a quantity of gnawed bones showed where the animal had been confined .
A skeleton with a tangle of brown hair adhering to it lay among the debris .
`` Perhaps you would kindly give me a sketch of the course of events from memory . ''
`` We now come to that portion of his life which has proved to be of such intense interest to us .
The fellow had evidently made inquiry and found that only two lives intervened between him and a valuable estate .
When he went to Devonshire his plans were , I believe , exceedingly hazy , but that he meant mischief from the first is evident from the way in which he took his wife with him in the character of his sister .
The idea of using her as a decoy was clearly already in his mind , though he may not have been certain how the details of his plot were to be arranged .
He meant in the end to have the estate , and he was ready to use any tool or run any risk for that end .
His first act was to establish himself as near to his ancestral home as he could , and his second was to cultivate a friendship with Sir Charles Baskerville and with the neighbours .
`` The baronet himself told him about the family hound , and so prepared the way for his own death .
Stapleton , as I will continue to call him , knew that the old man 's heart was weak and that a shock would kill him .
So much he had learned from Dr. Mortimer .
He had heard also that Sir Charles was superstitious and had taken this grim legend very seriously .
His ingenious mind instantly suggested a way by which the baronet could be done to death , and yet it would be hardly possible to bring home the guilt to the real murderer .
`` We had an example of his readiness of resource that morning when he got away from us so successfully , and also of his audacity in sending back my own name to me through the cabman .
From that moment he understood that I had taken over the case in London , and that therefore there was no chance for him there .
He returned to Dartmoor and awaited the arrival of the baronet . ''
`` It was my game to watch Stapleton .
It was evident , however , that I could not do this if I were with you , since he would be keenly on his guard .
I deceived everybody , therefore , yourself included , and I came down secretly when I was supposed to be in London .
My hardships were not so great as you imagined , though such trifling details must never interfere with the investigation of a case .
I stayed for the most part at Coombe Tracey , and only used the hut upon the moor when it was necessary to be near the scene of action .
Cartwright had come down with me , and in his disguise as a country boy he was of great assistance to me .
I was dependent upon him for food and clean linen .
When I was watching Stapleton , Cartwright was frequently watching you , so that I was able to keep my hand upon all the strings .
`` By the time that you discovered me upon the moor I had a complete knowledge of the whole business , but I had not a case which could go to a jury .
Even Stapleton 's attempt upon Sir Henry that night which ended in the death of the unfortunate convict did not help us much in proving murder against our man .
There seemed to be no alternative but to catch him red-handed , and to do so we had to use Sir Henry , alone and apparently unprotected , as a bait .
We did so , and at the cost of a severe shock to our client we succeeded in completing our case and driving Stapleton to his destruction .
That Sir Henry should have been exposed to this is , I must confess , a reproach to my management of the case , but we had no means of foreseeing the terrible and paralyzing spectacle which the beast presented , nor could we predict the fog which enabled him to burst upon us at such short notice .
We succeeded in our object at a cost which both the specialist and Dr. Mortimer assure me will be a temporary one .
A long journey may enable our friend to recover not only from his shattered nerves but also from his wounded feelings .
His love for the lady was deep and sincere , and to him the saddest part of all this black business was that he should have been deceived by her .
The chancellor rose , and having slowly unrolled the parchment-scroll , proceeded to read it out in a thick and pompous voice , while a subdued rustle and movement among the brothers bespoke the interest with which they followed the proceedings .
`` Charges brought upon the second Thursday after the Feast of the Assumption , in the year of our Lord thirteen hundred and sixty-six , against brother John , formerly known as Hordle John , or John of Hordle , but now a novice in the holy monastic order of the Cistercians .
Read upon the same day at the Abbey of Beaulieu in the presence of the most reverend Abbot Berghersh and of the assembled order .
`` Who can vouch for this thing ? ''
`` And the woman ? ''
`` Did she not break into lamentation and woe that a brother should so demean himself ? ''
`` John of Hordle , '' he thundered , `` you have shown yourself during the two months of your novitiate to be a recreant monk , and one who is unworthy to wear the white garb which is the outer symbol of the spotless spirit .
That dress shall therefore be stripped from thee , and thou shalt be cast into the outer world without benefit of clerkship , and without lot or part in the graces and blessings of those who dwell under the care of the Blessed Benedict .
Thou shalt come back neither to Beaulieu nor to any of the granges of Beaulieu , and thy name shall be struck off the scrolls of the order . ''
As these three brothers advanced towards him to carry out the Abbot's direction , the smile faded from the novice 's face , and he glanced right and left with his fierce brown eyes , like a bull at a baiting .
Then , with a sudden deep-chested shout , he tore up the heavy oaken prie-dieu and poised it to strike , taking two steps backward the while , that none might take him at a vantage .
The youth was not clad in monastic garb , but in lay attire , though his jerkin , cloak and hose were all of a sombre hue , as befitted one who dwelt in sacred precincts .
A broad leather strap hanging from his shoulder supported a scrip or satchel such as travellers were wont to carry .
In one hand he grasped a thick staff pointed and shod with metal , while in the other he held his coif or bonnet , which bore in its front a broad pewter medal stamped with the image of Our Lady of Rocamadour .
`` Art ready , then , fair son ? ''
`` This is indeed a day of comings and of goings .
It is strange that in one twelve hours the Abbey should have cast off its foulest weed and should now lose what we are fain to look upon as our choicest blossom . ''
`` And beyond that , fair son ? ''
`` To my brother 's at Minstead .
If he be indeed an ungodly and violent man , there is the more need that I should seek him out and see whether I can not turn him to better ways . ''
It is not , however , in the nature of things that a lad of twenty , with young life glowing in his veins and all the wide world before him , should spend his first hours of freedom in mourning for what he had left .
Long ere Alleyne was out of sound of the Beaulieu bells he was striding sturdily along , swinging his staff and whistling as merrily as the birds in the thicket .
It was an evening to raise a man 's heart .
The sun shining slantwise through the trees threw delicate traceries across the road , with bars of golden light between .
Away in the distance before and behind , the green boughs , now turning in places to a coppery redness , shot their broad arches across the track .
The still summer air was heavy with the resinous smell of the great forest .
Here and there a tawny brook prattled out from among the underwood and lost itself again in the ferns and brambles upon the further side .
Save the dull piping of insects and the sough of the leaves , there was silence everywhere -- the sweet restful silence of nature .
`` Amen and amen !
But thou art a pretty lad , and the prettier for thy modest ways .
It is easy to see from thy cheek that thou hast not spent thy days in the rain and the heat and the wind , as my poor Wat hath been forced to do . ''
Alleyne stooped and kissed her , for the kiss was the common salutation of the age , and , as Erasmus long afterwards remarked , more used in England than in any other country .
Yet it sent the blood to his temples again , and he wondered , as he turned away , what the Abbot Berghersh would have answered to so frank an invitation .
He was still tingling from this new experience when he came out upon the high-road and saw a sight which drove all other thoughts from his mind .
Further on , at the edge of the woodland , he came upon a chapman and his wife , who sat upon a fallen tree .
He had put his pack down as a table , and the two of them were devouring a great pasty , and washing it down with some drink from a stone jar .
The chapman broke a rough jest as he passed , and the woman called shrilly to Alleyne to come and join them , on which the man , turning suddenly from mirth to wrath , began to belabor her with his cudgel .
Alleyne hastened on , lest he make more mischief , and his heart was heavy as lead within him .
Look where he would , he seemed to see nothing but injustice and violence and the hardness of man to man .
`` Hast never seen tumblers before ? ''
asked the elder , a black-browed , swarthy man , as brown and supple as a hazel twig .
`` Why shrink from us , then , as though we were the spawn of the Evil One ? ''
`` Truly , sirs , it is a new sight to me , '' the clerk answered .
`` When I saw your four legs above the bush I could scarce credit my own eyes .
Why is it that you do this thing ? ''
`` We thank you for the wine , kind sir , '' said he , `` and for the ready courtesy wherewith you offered it .
Touching your question , we may tell you that we are strollers and jugglers , who , having performed with much applause at Winchester fair , are now on our way to the great Michaelmas market at Ringwood .
As our art is a very fine and delicate one , however , we can not let a day go by without exercising ourselves in it , to which end we choose some quiet and sheltered spot where we may break our journey .
Here you find us ; and we can not wonder that you , who are new to tumbling , should be astounded , since many great barons , earls , marshals and knight , who have wandered as far as the Holy Land , are of one mind in saying that they have never seen a more noble or gracious performance .
If you will be pleased to sit upon that stump , we will now continue our exercise . ''
`` How knew you the tune ? ''
Both opened their eyes at this , and stared at Alleyne with as much amazement as he had shown at them .
Yet it is not always the burliest and the wildest who are the most to be dreaded .
The workers looked hungrily at him , and then jogged onwards upon their way in slow , lumbering Saxon style .
A worse man to deal with was a wooden-legged cripple who came hobbling down the path , so weak and so old to all appearance that a child need not stand in fear of him .
Yet when Alleyne had passed him , of a sudden , out of pure devilment , he screamed out a curse at him , and sent a jagged flint stone hurtling past his ear .
So horrid was the causeless rage of the crooked creature , that the clerk came over a cold thrill , and took to his heels until he was out of shot from stone or word .
It seemed to him that in this country of England there was no protection for a man save that which lay in the strength of his own arm and the speed of his own foot .
In the cloisters he had heard vague talk of the law -- the mighty law which was higher than prelate or baron , yet no sign could he see of it .
What was the benefit of a law written fair upon parchment , he wondered , if there were no officers to enforce it .
As it fell out , however , he had that very evening , ere the sun had set , a chance of seeing how stern was the grip of the English law when it did happen to seize the offender .
good youth , '' she answered , `` I have a humor in the eyes , and though I can see that there is a stone there I can by no means be sure as to where it lies . ''
`` You are weak , mother , '' said he .
`` Hast journeyed far , I wot . ''
`` I am the law ! ''
-- nodding his head solemnly .
`` I am the law of England and the mouthpiece of his most gracious and royal majesty , Edward the Third . ''
`` But there should be another one , '' cried the man in the purple coat .
`` There should be a black man .
A shipman with St. Anthony 's fire , and a black man who had served him as cook -- those are the pair that we are in chase of . ''
`` The black man fled over to that side , '' said Alleyne , pointing towards the barrow .
`` Dead as Pontius Pilate , worshipful sir . ''
`` It is well .
Now , as to the other knave .
There are trees and to spare over yonder , but we have scarce leisure to make for them .
Draw thy sword , Thomas of Redbridge , and hew me his head from his shoulders . ''
`` A boon , gracious sir , a boon ! ''
cried the condemned man .
`` There is little merit in this confession , '' quoth the bailiff sternly .
`` Thou hast done evil within my bailiwick , and must die . ''
`` But , sir , '' urged Alleyne , who was white to the lips at these bloody doings , `` he hath not yet come to trial . ''
Though it was an autumn evening and somewhat warm , a huge fire of heaped billets of wood crackled and sparkled in a broad , open grate , some of the smoke escaping up a rude chimney , but the greater part rolling out into the room , so that the air was thick with it , and a man coming from without could scarce catch his breath .
On this fire a great cauldron bubbled and simmered , giving forth a rich and promising smell .
Seated round it were a dozen or so folk , of all ages and conditions , who set up such a shout as Alleyne entered that he stood peering at them through the smoke , uncertain what this riotous greeting might portend .
cried one rough looking fellow in a tattered jerkin .
`` One more round of mead or ale and the score to the last comer . ''
`` Why , '' said Alleyne , `` a merlin is a bird of the same form as an eagle or a falcon .
I can well remember that learned brother Bartholomew , who is deep in all the secrets of nature , pointed one out to me as we walked together near Vinney Ridge . ''
`` Nay , gentles , gentles ! ''
cried Dame Eliza , in a singsong heedless voice , which showed that such bickerings were nightly things among her guests .
`` No brawling or brabbling , gentles !
Take heed to the good name of the house . ''
`` I do not marvel at it , '' cried the Cambrig scholar , speaking in the high drawling voice which was common among his class .
`` It is not a tongue for men of sweet birth and delicate upbringing .
It is a foul , snorting , snarling manner of speech .
For myself , I swear by the learned Polycarp that I have most ease with Hebrew , and after that perchance with Arabian . ''
`` A raw rat , '' the man of drugs was saying , `` that is what it is ever my use to order for the plague -- a raw rat with its paunch cut open . ''
`` Aye , truly would it , my fair son . ''
`` There is no great harm in that , '' remarked the tooth-drawer , `` for the sheep give many folk their living .
There is not only the herd , but the shearer and brander , and then the dresser , the curer , the dyer , the fuller , the webster , the merchant , and a score of others . ''
`` If it come to that . ''
said one of the foresters , `` the tough meat of them will wear folks teeth out , and there is a trade for the man who can draw them . ''
`` Elbow room for Floyting Will ! ''
`` Twang us a merry lilt . ''
The jongleur had put down his harp in high dudgeon .
`` Am I to be preached to by a child ? ''
he cried , staring across at Alleyne with an inflamed and angry countenance .
`` Is a hairless infant to raise his tongue against me , when I have sung in every fair from Tweed to Trent , and have twice been named aloud by the High Court of the Minstrels at Beverley ?
I shall sing no more to-night . ''
`` Indeed , your high and mighty grace , '' sneered one of the yeomen , `` have you in sooth so ordained ? ''
What of the cord ?
The cord was made in England : A rough cord , a tough cord , A cord that bowmen love ; So we 'll drain our jacks To the English flax And the land where the hemp was wove .
Then there is the chance of a ransom .
Why , look you , in the affair at Brignais some four years back , when the companies slew James of Bourbon , and put his army to the sword , there was scarce a man of ours who had not count , baron , or knight .
Peter Karsdale , who was but a common country lout newly brought over , with the English fleas still hopping under his doublet , laid his great hands upon the Sieur Amaury de Chatonville , who owns half Picardy , and had five thousand crowns out of him , with his horse and harness .
'T is true that a French wench took it all off Peter as quick as the Frenchman paid it ; but what then ?
By the twang of string !
it would be a bad thing if money was not made to be spent ; and how better than on woman -- eh , ma belle ? ''
`` Nay , I am a man of peace , '' said Alleyne Edricson .
`` Besides , I have other work to do . ''
growled the soldier , striking his flagon on the board until the dishes danced again .
`` What , in the name of the devil , hath come over the folk ?
Why sit ye all moping by the fireside , like crows round a dead horse , when there is man 's work to be done within a few short leagues of ye ?
Out upon you all , as a set of laggards and hang-backs !
By my hilt I believe that the men of England are all in France already , and that what is left behind are in sooth the women dressed up in their paltocks and hosen . ''
`` Afeard , thou lurden ! ''
`` I never saw the face yet of the man that I was afeard of .
Come out , and we shall see who is the better man . ''
`` Aye was it .
By my ten finger-bones !
it is a trick that will add a proper man to the ranks of the Company . ''
`` I doubt it not , mon ami , '' quoth the archer , going back to his tankard .
`` Here is to thee , lad , and may we be good comrades to each other !
what is it that ails our friend of the wrathful face ? ''
`` It would be shame to the good brothers of Beaulieu if I could not , '' he answered , `` seeing that I have been their clerk this ten years back . ''
`` So am not I. I must store my plunder at this inn , since the hostess is an honest woman .
ma cherie , I wish to leave with you my gold-work , my velvet , my silk , my feather bed , my incense-boat , my ewer , my naping linen , and all the rest of it .
I take only the money in a linen bag , and the box of rose colored sugar which is a gift from my captain to the Lady Loring .
Wilt guard my treasure for me ? ''
`` Now , there is a true friend ! ''
cried the bowman , taking her hand .
`` There is a bonne amie !
English land and English women , say I , and French wine and French plunder .
I shall be back anon , mon ange .
I am a lonely man , my sweeting , and I must settle some day when the wars are over and done .
Mayhap you and I -- -- Ah , mechante , mechante !
There is la petite peeping from behind the door .
Now , John , the sun is over the trees ; you must be brisker than this when the bugleman blows 'Bows and Bills . '
`` Then we must be off .
Adieu , ma vie !
The two livres shall settle the score and buy some ribbons against the next kermesse .
Do not forget Sam Aylward , for his heart shall ever be thine alone -- and thine , ma petite !
So , marchons , and may St. Julian grant us as good quarters elsewhere ! ''
`` How can a man have too much religion ? ''
`` It is the one thing that availeth .
A man is but a beast as he lives from day to day , eating and drinking , breathing and sleeping .
It is only when he raises himself , and concerns himself with the immortal spirit within him , that he becomes in very truth a man .
Bethink ye how sad a thing it would be that the blood of the Redeemer should be spilled to no purpose . ''
The young clerk smiled at his companion 's earnestness .
`` Had He wished help , '' he said , `` He could have summoned legions of archangels from heaven , so what need had He of your poor bow and arrow ?
Besides , bethink you of His own words -- that those who live by the sword shall perish by the sword . ''
`` These are the Beating Friars , otherwise called the Flagellants , '' quoth he .
`` I marvel that ye should have come upon none of them before , for across the water they are as common as gallybaggers .
I have heard that there are no English among them , but that they are from France , Italy and Bohemia .
En avant , camarades !
that we may have speech with them . ''
`` Mort Dieu ! ''
cried the bowman , `` there is a bucketful or more of my blood over in France , but it was all spilled in hot fight , and I should think twice before I drew it drop by drop as these friars are doing .
our young one here is as white as a Picardy cheese .
What is amiss then , mon cher ? ''
`` It is nothing , '' Alleyne answered .
`` My life has been too quiet , I am not used to such sights . ''
`` I count them not a fly , '' cried Hordle John ; `` for who is the better for all their whipping and yowling ?
They are like other friars , I trow , when all is done .
Let them leave their backs alone , and beat the pride out of their hearts . ''
`` May you live to see it , '' quoth the bowman .
`` And hark ye , mes enfants , take an old soldier 's rede and lay your bodies to the bow , drawing from hip and thigh as much as from arm .
Learn also , I pray you , to shoot with a dropping shaft ; for though a bowman may at times be called upon to shoot straight and fast , yet it is more often that he has to do with a town-guard behind a wall , or an arbalestier with his mantlet raised when you can not hope to do him scathe unless your shaft fall straight upon him from the clouds .
I have not drawn string for two weeks , but I may be able to show ye how such shots should be made . ''
He loosened his long-bow , slung his quiver round to the front , and then glanced keenly round for a fitting mark .
There was a yellow and withered stump some way off , seen under the drooping branches of a lofty oak .
The archer measured the distance with his eye ; and then , drawing three shafts , he shot them off with such speed that the first had not reached the mark ere the last was on the string .
Each arrow passed high over the oak ; and , of the three , two stuck fair into the stump ; while the third , caught in some wandering puff of wind , was driven a foot or two to one side .
Leaving the thumbless archer and his brood , the wayfarers struck through the scattered huts of Emery Down , and out on to the broad rolling heath covered deep in ferns and in heather , where droves of the half-wild black forest pigs were rooting about amongst the hillocks .
The woods about this point fall away to the left and the right , while the road curves upwards and the wind sweeps keenly over the swelling uplands .
The broad strips of bracken glowed red and yellow against the black peaty soil , and a queenly doe who grazed among them turned her white front and her great questioning eyes towards the wayfarers .
Alleyne gazed in admiration at the supple beauty of the creature ; but the archer's fingers played with his quiver , and his eyes glistened with the fell instinct which urges a man to slaughter .
`` Why , man , I first loosed string in battle when I was but a lad , younger by two years than you , at Neville 's Cross , under the Lord Mowbray .
Later , I served under the Warden of Berwick , that very John Copeland of whom our friend spake , the same who held the King of Scots to ransom .
it is rough soldiering , and a good school for one who would learn to be hardy and war-wise . ''
`` And the French ? ''
asked Alleyne , to whom the archer 's light gossip had all the relish that the words of the man of action have for the recluse .
`` I have seen the low countryman in arms , and I have nought to say against him .
Heavy and slow is he by nature , and is not to be brought into battle for the sake of a lady 's eyelash or the twang of a minstrel 's string , like the hotter blood of the south .
lay hand on his wool-bales , or trifle with his velvet of Bruges , and out buzzes every stout burgher , like bees from the tee-hole , ready to lay on as though it were his one business in life .
they have shown the French at Courtrai and elsewhere that they are as deft in wielding steel as in welding it . ''
`` Would it not be well , '' said John , `` that we should wait here , and see what manner of greeting you have from your brother .
You may prove to be as welcome as the king 's purveyor to the village dame . ''
It was not without some emotion that he looked upon the scene around him , for , in spite of his secluded life , he knew enough of the ancient greatness of his own family to be aware that the time had been when they had held undisputed and paramount sway over all that tract of country .
His father could trace his pure Saxon lineage back to that Godfrey Malf who had held the manors of Bisterne and of Minstead at the time when the Norman first set mailed foot upon English soil .
The afforestation of the district , however , and its conversion into a royal demesne had clipped off a large section of his estate , while other parts had been confiscated as a punishment for his supposed complicity in an abortive Saxon rising .
The fate of the ancestor had been typical of that of his descendants .
During three hundred years their domains had gradually contracted , sometimes through royal or feudal encroachment , and sometimes through such gifts to the Church as that with which Alleyne's father had opened the doors of Beaulieu Abbey to his younger son .
The importance of the family had thus dwindled , but they still retained the old Saxon manor-house , with a couple of farms and a grove large enough to afford pannage to a hundred pigs -- '' sylva de centum porcis , '' as the old family parchments describe it .
Above all , the owner of the soil could still hold his head high as the veritable Socman of Minstead -- that is , as holding the land in free socage , with no feudal superior , and answerable to no man lower than the king .
Knowing this , Alleyne felt some little glow of worldly pride as he looked for the first time upon the land with which so many generations of his ancestors had been associated .
He pushed on the quicker , twirling his staff merrily , and looking out at every turn of the path for some sign of the old Saxon residence .
He was suddenly arrested , however , by the appearance of a wild-looking fellow armed with a club , who sprang out from behind a tree and barred his passage .
He was a rough , powerful peasant , with cap and tunic of untanned sheepskin , leather breeches , and galligaskins round legs and feet .
`` And therefore the worst of foemen to thyself , '' said Alleyne .
`` But I pray you , since you seem to know him , to point out to me the shortest path to my brother 's house . ''
`` The deer , clowns ? ''
said a hard-visaged , swarthy-faced man , who rode at the king 's elbow .
`` If ye have headed it back it is as much as your ears are worth . ''
`` It is well , '' cried Edward , still speaking in French : for , though he could understand English , he had never learned to express himself in so barbarous and unpolished a tongue .
`` By my faith , sirs , '' he continued , half turning in his saddle to address his escort , `` unless my woodcraft is sadly at fault , it is a stag of six tines and the finest that we have roused this journey .
A golden St. Hubert to the man who is the first to sound the mort . ''
He shook his bridle as he spoke , and thundered away , his knights lying low upon their horses and galloping as hard as whip and spur would drive them , in the hope of winning the king 's prize .
Away they drove down the long green glade -- bay horses , black and gray , riders clad in every shade of velvet , fur , or silk , with glint of brazen horn and flash of knife and spear .
One only lingered , the black-browed Baron Brocas , who , making a gambade which brought him within arm-sweep of the serf , slashed him across the face with his riding-whip .
`` Doff , dog , doff , '' he hissed , `` when a monarch deigns to lower his eyes to such as you ! ''
-- then spurred through the underwood and was gone , with a gleam of steel shoes and flutter of dead leaves .
`` Is this your land , then ? ''
`` If you leave me now , '' whispered the woman , `` then shame forever upon your manhood . ''
`` Yet can I , '' said Alleyne smiling ; `` for indeed I also am the son of Edric the Socman , of the pure blood of Godfrey the thane , by the only daughter of Aluric of Brockenhurst .
Surely , dear brother , '' he continued , holding out his hand , `` you have a warmer greeting than this for me .
There are but two boughs left upon this old , old Saxon trunk . ''
`` You may say what you will to me , '' he said between his clenched teeth -- '' it may be no better than I deserve ; but , brother or no , I swear by my hopes of salvation that I will break your arm if you do not leave hold of the maid . ''
`` Nay , let him come ! ''
`` I shall not budge a foot for him or his dogs . ''
she exclaimed , raising her black eyebrows .
`` I do not think that even my father himself , who is a hard judge of manhood , would call you that .
But it is , as you may think , sir , a very pleasant thing for me to hear that you are grieved at what you have done , and I can but rede that we should go back together , and you should make your peace with the Socman by handing back your prisoner .
It is a sad thing that so small a thing as a woman should come between two who are of one blood . ''
`` Nor can I marvel at that , '' said she , with a little tinkling laugh .
`` You came in as the knight does in the jongleur 's romances , between dragon and damsel , with small time for the asking of questions .
Come , '' she went on , springing to her feet , and smoothing down her rumpled frock , `` let us walk through the shaw together , and we may come upon Bertrand with the horses .
If poor Troubadour had not cast a shoe , we should not have had this trouble .
Nay , I must have your arm : for , though I speak lightly , now that all is happily over I am as frightened as my brave Roland .
See how his chest heaves , and his dear feathers all awry -- the little knight who would not have his lady mishandled . ''
So she prattled on to her hawk , while Alleyne walked by her side , stealing a glance from time to time at this queenly and wayward woman .
In silence they wandered together over the velvet turf and on through the broad Minstead woods , where the old lichen-draped beeches threw their circles of black shadow upon the sunlit sward .
`` You have a right to know it , if you have lost a brother 's favor through it .
And yet -- -- Ah well , you are , as I understand , a clerk , so I must think of you as one step further in orders , and make you my father-confessor .
Know then that this man has been a suitor for my hand , less as I think for my own sweet sake than because he hath ambition and had it on his mind that he might improve his fortunes by dipping into my father 's strong box -- though the Virgin knows that he would have found little enough therein .
My father , however , is a proud man , a gallant knight and tried soldier of the oldest blood , to whom this man's churlish birth and low descent -- -- Oh , lackaday !
I had forgot that he was of the same strain as yourself . ''
`` But your father ? ''
He had gone some way , lost in doubt and in self-reproach , his mind all tremulous with a thousand new-found thoughts and fears and wonderments , when of a sudden there was a light rustle of the leaves behind him , and , glancing round , there was this graceful , swift-footed creature , treading in his very shadow , with her proud head bowed , even as his was -- the picture of humility and repentance .
`` Nay , you can not vex me , '' he answered , all warm again at the very sight of her .
`` It was my rough words which vexed you ; but I have been thrown among men all my life , and indeed , with all the will , I scarce know how to temper my speech to a lady 's ear . ''
`` Then unsay it , '' cried she quickly ; `` say that I was right to wish to have vengeance on the Socman . ''
To his surprise she burst out a-laughing , and , spurring her palfrey , dashed off down the glade , with her page riding behind her .
Not one word did she say , but as she vanished amid the trees she half turned in her saddle and waved a last greeting .
Long time he stood , half hoping that she might again come back to him ; but the thud of the hoofs had died away , and there was no sound in all the woods but the gentle rustle and dropping of the leaves .
At last he turned away and made his way back to the high-road -- another person from the light-hearted boy who had left it a short three hours before .
HOW HORDLE JOHN FOUND A MAN WHOM HE MIGHT FOLLOW .
There were folk , too , to be met upon the road -- beggars and couriers , chapmen and tinkers -- cheery fellows for the most part , with a rough jest and homely greeting for each other and for Alleyne .
Near Shotwood he came upon five seamen , on their way from Poole to Southampton -- rude red-faced men , who shouted at him in a jargon which he could scarce understand , and held out to him a great pot from which they had been drinking -- nor would they let him pass until he had dipped pannikin in and taken a mouthful , which set him coughing and choking , with the tears running down his cheeks .
Further on he met a sturdy black-bearded man , mounted on a brown horse , with a rosary in his right hand and a long two-handed sword jangling against his stirrup-iron .
By his black robe and the eight-pointed cross upon his sleeve , Alleyne recognized him as one of the Knights Hospitallers of St. John of Jerusalem , whose presbytery was at Baddesley .
He held up two fingers as he passed , with a `` _Benedic , fili mi !
_ '' whereat Alleyne doffed hat and bent knee , looking with much reverence at one who had devoted his life to the overthrow of the infidel .
he had not learned yet that what men are and what men profess to be are very wide asunder , and that the Knights of St. John , having come into large part of the riches of the ill-fated Templars , were very much too comfortable to think of exchanging their palace for a tent , or the cellars of England for the thirsty deserts of Syria .
Yet ignorance may be more precious than wisdom , for Alleyne as he walked on braced himself to a higher life by the thought of this other's sacrifice , and strengthened himself by his example which he could scarce have done had he known that the Hospitaller 's mind ran more upon malmsey than on Mamelukes , and on venison rather than victories .
`` Certes , Stephen Hapgood , his wisdom doth not suffice , '' cried the other .
`` It is as though a mole cried out against the morning star , because he could not see it .
But our dispute , friend , is concerning the nature of that subtle essence which we call thought .
For I hold with the learned Scotus that thought is in very truth a thing , even as vapor or fumes , or many other substances which our gross bodily eyes are blind to .
For , look you , that which produces a thing must be itself a thing , and if a man 's thought may produce a written book , then must thought itself be a material thing , even as the book is .
Have I expressed it ?
Do I make it plain ? ''
Alleyne sat between them munching his bread , while the twain disputed across his knees , leaning forward with flushed faces and darting hands , in all the heat of argument .
Never had he heard such jargon of scholastic philosophy , such fine-drawn distinctions , such cross-fire of major and minor , proposition , syllogism , attack and refutation .
Question clattered upon answer like a sword on a buckler .
The ancients , the fathers of the Church , the moderns , the Scriptures , the Arabians , were each sent hurtling against the other , while the rain still dripped and the dark holly-leaves glistened with the moisture .
At last the fat man seemed to weary of it , for he set to work quietly upon his meal , while his opponent , as proud as the rooster who is left unchallenged upon the midden , crowed away in a last long burst of quotation and deduction .
Suddenly , however , his eyes dropped upon his food , and he gave a howl of dismay .
`` A brave piece of reasoning , '' cried the other , `` and I know of but one reply to it . ''
On which , leaning forward , he caught his comrade a rousing smack across his rosy cheek .
`` Nay , take it not amiss , '' he said , `` since all things are but thoughts , then that also is but a thought and may be disregarded . ''
`` I wish no better , '' said he , with a pringling in the eyes at this hearty greeting .
`` I am back for Minstead , lad . ''
`` Take them back , man , and never heed the pay , '' said John .
`` I did but wish to learn the feel of them , since I am like to have such trinkets hung to my own girdle for some years to come . ''
`` Red upon white , '' said Alleyne , shading his eyes ; `` but whether roebuck or no is more than I could vouch .
How black is the great tower , and how bright the gleam of arms upon the wall !
See below the flag , how it twinkles like a star ! ''
It chanced on that very evening that Sir Nigel Loring , having supped before sunset , as was his custom , and having himself seen that Pommers and Cadsand , his two war-horses , with the thirteen hacks , the five jennets , my lady 's three palfreys , and the great dapple-gray roussin , had all their needs supplied , had taken his dogs for an evening breather .
Sixty or seventy of them , large and small , smooth and shaggy -- deer-hound , boar-hound , blood-hound , wolf-hound , mastiff , alaun , talbot , lurcher , terrier , spaniel -- snapping , yelling and whining , with score of lolling tongues and waving tails , came surging down the narrow lane which leads from the Twynham kennels to the bank of Avon .
Two russet-clad varlets , with loud halloo and cracking whips , walked thigh-deep amid the swarm , guiding , controlling , and urging .
Behind came Sir Nigel himself , with Lady Loring upon his arm , the pair walking slowly and sedately , as befitted both their age and their condition , while they watched with a smile in their eyes the scrambling crowd in front of them .
They paused , however , at the bridge , and , leaning their elbows upon the stonework , they stood looking down at their own faces in the glassy stream , and at the swift flash of speckled trout against the tawny gravel .
`` Nay , my heart 's comfort , I never raised hand to woman yet , and it would be a passing strange thing if I began on my own flesh and blood .
It was a woman 's hand which cast this lime into mine eyes , and though I saw her stoop , and might well have stopped her ere she threw , I deemed it unworthy of my knighthood to hinder or balk one of her sex . ''
`` Is that where the shoe galls ? ''
cried the bowman , and laughed aloud .
`` I will ask you what you think of him three months hence , if we be all alive ; for sure I am that -- -- ''
A scared man was the keeper ; for , having chained the brute to a stake while he drank a stoup of ale at the inn , it had been baited by stray curs , until , in wrath and madness , it had plucked loose the chain , and smitten or bitten all who came in its path .
Most scared of all was he to find that the creature had come nigh to harm the Lord and Lady of the castle , who had power to place him in the stretch-neck or to have the skin scourged from his shoulders .
Yet , when he came with bowed head and humble entreaty for forgiveness , he was met with a handful of small silver from Sir Nigel , whose dame , however , was less charitably disposed , being much ruffled in her dignity by the manner in which she had been hustled from her lord 's side .
`` Methinks a company of school lads could hold this place against an army , '' quoth John .
`` Nay , there you are wide of the clout , '' the bowman said gravely .
`` By my hilt !
I have seen a stronger fortalice carried in a summer evening .
I remember such a one in Picardy , with a name as long as a Gascon's pedigree .
It was when I served under Sir Robert Knolles , before the days of the Company ; and we came by good plunder at the sacking of it .
I had myself a great silver bowl , with two goblets , and a plastron of Spanish steel .
there are some fine women over yonder !
Mort de ma vie !
see to that one in the doorway !
I will go speak to her .
But whom have we here ? ''
`` Art so set on plunder then ?
Is the purse so light that there is not enough for a rouse ?
I have a bag at my belt , camarade , and you have but to put your fist into it for what you want .
It was ever share and share between us . ''
`` Nay , it warmed my very heart to see it .
So glad was I , that I laughed for very pleasure .
My fine preacher can himself be tempted then , thought I ; he is not made of another clay to the rest of us . ''
`` Nay , I know him not .
I have learned it by looking from my own chamber window and marking these poor monks of the priory , their weary life , their profitless round .
I have asked myself if the best which can be done with virtue is to shut it within high walls as though it were some savage creature .
If the good will lock themselves up , and if the wicked will still wander free , then alas for the world ! ''
`` Oh , I weary of your preaching ! ''
she cried , and swept away with a toss of her beautiful head , leaving Alleyne as cast down and ashamed as though he had himself proposed some infamous thing .
She was back again in an instant , however , in another of her varying moods .
`` Yes , I have ridden much at the abbey . ''
`` I have carved two days a week for the brethren . ''
`` It is of import , '' said he , `` for I love to keep my hair well ordered , seeing that the weight of my helmet for thirty years hath in some degree frayed it upon the top . ''
He pulled off his velvet cap of maintenance as he spoke , and displayed a pate which was as bald as an egg , and shone bravely in the firelight .
`` You see , '' said he , whisking round , and showing one little strip where a line of scattered hairs , like the last survivors in some fatal field , still barely held their own against the fate which had fallen upon their comrades ; `` these locks need some little oiling and curling , for I doubt not that if you look slantwise at my head , when the light is good , you will yourself perceive that there are places where the hair is sparse . ''
lady , '' Alleyne answered , `` I know well the great honor that you have done me in deeming me worthy to wait upon so renowned a knight , yet I am so conscious of my own weakness that I scarce dare incur duties which I might be so ill-fitted to fulfil . ''
At times , too , when the wild fit was upon her , she would break into pertness and rebel openly against Alleyne 's gentle firmness .
Yet he would jog quietly on with his teachings , taking no heed to her mutiny , until suddenly she would be conquered by his patience , and break into self-revilings a hundred times stronger than her fault demanded .
It chanced however that , on one of these mornings when the evil mood was upon her , Agatha the young tire-woman , thinking to please her mistress , began also to toss her head and make tart rejoinder to the teacher's questions .
In an instant the Lady Maude had turned upon her two blazing eyes and a face which was blanched with anger .
`` I know it , '' she cried , `` I am a most wicked woman .
But it is bad enough that one should misuse you .
I will see that there is not a second one . ''
`` Nay , nay , no one has misused me , '' he answered .
`` But the fault lies in your hot and bitter words .
You have called her a baggage and a lack-brain , and I know not what . ''
`` Methinks that I could lay my hand upon another who is smitten with the same trouble , '' said she , with the same sidelong look .
`` Canst not give a name to it , and thou so skilled in leech-craft ? ''
HOW THE WHITE COMPANY SET FORTH TO THE WARS .
`` It is the sight of these brave men , '' she answered ; `` and to think how many of them go and how few are like to find their way back .
I have seen it before , when I was a little maid , in the year of the Prince 's great battle .
I remember then how they mustered in the bailey , even as they do now , and my lady-mother holding me in her arms at this very window that I might see the show . ''
`` My brother , what has he to do with it ?
And your father -- -- ''
`` You say truly , '' he cried , `` you say truly .
But you do not reject me , Maude ?
You give me some ray of hope ?
I do not ask pledge or promise .
Say only that I am not hateful to you -- that on some happier day I may hear kinder words from you . ''
`` My father hath gone down , '' she cried .
`` Your place is by his side .
Nay , look not at me , Alleyne .
It is no time for dallying .
Win my father's love , and all may follow .
It is when the brave soldier hath done his devoir that he hopes for his reward , Farewell , and may God be with you ! ''
She held out her white , slim hand to him , but as he bent his lips over it she whisked away and was gone , leaving in his outstretched hand the very green veil for which poor Peter Terlake had craved in vain .
Again the hoarse cheering burst out from below , and he heard the clang of the rising portcullis .
Pressing the veil to his lips , he thrust it into the bosom of his tunic , and rushed as fast as feet could bear him to arm himself and join the muster .
`` I trust that there is nothing forgot , '' she said , beckoning to Alleyne to ride on her further side .
`` I trust him to you , Edricson .
Hosen , shirts , cyclas , and under-jupons are in the brown basket on the left side of the mule .
His wine he takes hot when the nights are cold , malvoisie or vernage , with as much spice as would cover the thumb-nail .
See that he hath a change if he come back hot from the tilting .
There is goose-grease in a box , if the old scars ache at the turn of the weather .
Let his blankets be dry and -- -- ''
`` Nay , my heart 's life , '' the little knight interrupted , `` trouble not now about such matters .
Why so pale and wan , Edricson ?
Is it not enow to make a man 's heart dance to see this noble Company , such valiant men-at-arms , such lusty archers ?
I would be ill to please if I were not blithe to see the red roses flying at the head of so noble a following ! ''
`` Ah , so it is , indeed , '' said Sir Nigel , puckering his cheeks ; `` but wayside ventures are not to be scorned , for I have seen no finer passages than are to be had from such chance meetings , when cavaliers are willing to advance themselves .
I can well remember that two leagues from the town of Rheims I met a very valiant and courteous cavalier of France , with whom I had gentle and most honorable contention for upwards of an hour .
It hath ever grieved me that I had not his name , for he smote upon me with a mace and went upon his way ere I was in condition to have much speech with him ; but his arms were an allurion in chief above a fess azure .
I was also on such an occasion thrust through the shoulder by Lyon de Montcourt , whom I met on the high road betwixt Libourne and Bordeaux .
I met him but the once , but I have never seen a man for whom I bear a greater love and esteem .
And so also with the squire Le Bourg Capillet , who would have been a very valiant captain had he lived . ''
`` He is dead then ? ''
It was indeed a tall and buxom country lass , with a basket of spinach-leaves upon her head , and a great slab of bacon tucked under one arm .
She bobbed a frightened curtsey as Sir Nigel swept his velvet hat from his head and reined up his great charger .
`` By my hilt !
the good dame speaks truth , '' said Aylward .
`` It seems to be the very home of them . ''
`` Do not thwart her , comrade , '' said big John .
`` She hath a proper spirit for her years and can not abide to be thwarted .
It is kindly and homely to me to hear her voice and to feel that she is behind me .
But I must leave you now , mother , for the way is over-rough for your feet ; but I will bring you back a silken gown , if there be one in France or Spain , and I will bring Jinny a silver penny ; so good-bye to you , and God have you in His keeping ! ''
Whipping up the little woman , he lifted her lightly to his lips , and then , taking his place in the ranks again , marched on with the laughing Company .
`` Nay , my lord , '' said Alleyne , `` I still have some moneys remaining . ''
There were two cross-roads before they reached the Lymington Ford , and at each of then Sir Nigel pulled up his horse , and waited with many a curvet and gambade , craning his neck this way and that to see if fortune would send him a venture .
Crossroads had , as he explained , been rare places for knightly spear-runnings , and in his youth it was no uncommon thing for a cavalier to abide for weeks at such a point , holding gentle debate with all comers , to his own advancement and the great honor of his lady .
The times were changed , however , and the forest tracks wound away from them deserted and silent , with no trample of war-horse or clang of armor which might herald the approach of an adversary -- so that Sir Nigel rode on his way disconsolate .
At the Lymington River they splashed through the ford , and lay in the meadows on the further side to eat the bread and salt meat which they carried upon the sumpter horses .
Then , ere the sun was on the slope of the heavens , they had deftly trussed up again , and were swinging merrily upon their way , two hundred feet moving like two .
There is a third cross-road where the track from Boldre runs down to the old fishing village of Pitt 's Deep .
Down this , as they came abreast of it , there walked two men , the one a pace or two behind the other .
The cavaliers could not but pull up their horses to look at them , for a stranger pair were never seen journeying together .
The first was a misshapen , squalid man with cruel , cunning eyes and a shock of tangled red hair , bearing in his hands a small unpainted cross , which he held high so that all men might see it .
He seemed to be in the last extremity of fright , with a face the color of clay and his limbs all ashake as one who hath an ague .
Behind him , with his toe ever rasping upon the other's heels , there walked a very stern , black-bearded man with a hard eye and a set mouth .
He bore over his shoulder a great knotted stick with three jagged nails stuck in the head of it , and from time to time he whirled it up in the air with a quivering arm , as though he could scarce hold back from dashing his companion 's brains out .
So in silence they walked under the spread of the branches on the grass-grown path from Boldre .
`` You are no very shrewd reasoner , fellow , '' quoth the knight ; `` for if it be within the law for you to threaten him with your club , then it is also lawful for me to threaten you with my sword . ''
said the knight , `` our good merchant of Southampton hath not played us false , for methinks I can see our ship down yonder .
He said that she would be of great size and of a yellow shade . ''
`` It is as well , '' remarked Terlake ; `` for methinks , my fair lord , that we are not the only ones who are waiting a passage to Gascony .
Mine eye catches at times a flash and sparkle among yonder houses which assuredly never came from shipman 's jacket or the gaberdine of a burgher . ''
A tumultuous crowd of fishermen , citizens , and women had indeed swarmed out from the northern gate , and approached them up the side of the moor , waving their hands and dancing with joy , as though a great fear had been rolled back from their minds .
At their head rode a very large and solemn man with a long chin and a drooping lip .
He wore a fur tippet round his neck and a heavy gold chain over it , with a medallion which dangled in front of him .
`` Welcome , most puissant and noble lord , '' he cried , doffing his bonnet to Black Simon .
`` I have heard of your lordship 's valiant deeds , and in sooth they might be expected from your lordship 's face and bearing .
Is there any small matter in which I may oblige you ? ''
`` Words , words ! ''
shouted the other furiously .
`` Am I to be put off with words ?
I say to you again , how of the clams and scallops ? ''
`` Man , man , '' cried Sir Oliver , `` your mind still runs on nought but blades and bassinets .
Hast no space in thy frame for the softer joys .
Ah , even now I can scarce speak of it unmoved .
So noble a pie , such tender pigeons , and sugar in the gravy instead of salt !
You were by my side that day , as were Sir Claude Latour and the Lord of Pommers . ''
`` There can be no manner of doubt about it , '' said Sir Oliver Buttesthorn , `` I can well remember that in Navarre one day it thundered on the left out of a cloudless sky .
We knew that ill would come of it , nor had we long to wait .
Only thirteen days after , a haunch of prime venison was carried from my very tent door by the wolves , and on the same day two flasks of old vernage turned sour and muddy . ''
`` You shall fly your pennon upon the fore part , then , and I upon the poop .
For foreguard I shall give you your own forty men , with two-score archers .
Two-score men , with my own men-at-arms and squires , will serve as a poop-guard .
Ten archers , with thirty shipmen , under the master , may hold the waist while ten lie aloft with stones and arbalests .
How like you that ? ''
`` Good , by my faith , good !
But here comes my harness , and I must to work , for I can not slip into it as I was wont when first I set my face to the wars . ''
`` Stand to it , my hearts of gold , '' said the old bowman as he passed from knot to knot .
`` By my hilt !
we are in luck this journey .
Bear in mind the old saying of the Company . ''
With a clank of arms , the rough archers and seamen took to their knees , with bent heads and crossed hands , listening to the hoarse mutter from the file-leaders .
It was strange to mark the hush ; so that the lapping of the water , the straining of the sail , and the creaking of the timbers grew louder of a sudden upon the ear .
Many of the bowmen had drawn amulets and relics from their bosoms , while he who possessed some more than usually sanctified treasure passed it down the line of his comrades , that all might kiss and reap the virtue .
`` Shall we turn , my fair lord , or shall we carry on ? ''
asked the master-shipman , looking behind him with anxious eyes .
`` Yet it would not be to a knight 's honor or good name to lower his pennon .
Let them be , and they will think that we are a wine-ship for Gascony , or that we bear the wool-bales of some mercer of the Staple .
Ma foi , but they are very swift !
They swoop upon us like two goshawks on a heron .
Is there not some symbol or device upon their sails ? ''
The three archers named stood at the further end of the poop , balancing themselves with feet widely spread and bows drawn , until the heads of the cloth-yard arrows were level with the centre of the stave .
`` You are the surer , Watkin , '' said Aylward , standing by them with shaft upon string .
`` Do you take the rogue with the red coif .
You two bring down the man with the head-piece , and I will hold myself ready if you miss .
they are about to loose her .
Shoot , mes garcons , or you will be too late . ''
The throng of pirates had cleared away from the great wooden catapult , leaving two of their number to discharge it .
One in a scarlet cap bent over it , steadying the jagged rock which was balanced on the spoon-shaped end of the long wooden lever .
The other held the loop of the rope which would release the catch and send the unwieldy missile hurtling through the air .
So for an instant they stood , showing hard and clear against the white sail behind them .
The next , redcap had fallen across the stone with an arrow between his ribs ; and the other , struck in the leg and in the throat , was writhing and spluttering upon the ground .
As he toppled backwards he had loosed the spring , and the huge beam of wood , swinging round with tremendous force , cast the corpse of his comrade so close to the English ship that its mangled and distorted limbs grazed their very stern .
As to the stone , it glanced off obliquely and fell midway between the vessels .
A roar of cheering and of laughter broke from the rough archers and seamen at the sight , answered by a yell of rage from their pursuers .
`` Keep them in play , Aylward , with ten of your men , '' the knight continued .
`` And let ten of Sir Oliver 's bowmen do as much for the Genoese .
I have no mind as yet to show them how much they have to fear from us . ''
`` Bide here , man .
You would need wings ere you could reach Sir Nigel's side . ''
`` By heaven , Sir Nigel is down ! ''
`` By St. Paul !
it would be a very sorry thing if we suffered you to be the worse of this day 's work , '' said Sir Nigel .
`` You shall take these galleys back with you , and Master Witherton may sell them .
Then from the moneys he shall take as much as may make good the damage , and the rest he shall keep until our home-coming , when every man shall have his share .
An image of silver fifteen inches high I have vowed to the Virgin , to be placed in her chapel within the Priory , for that she was pleased to allow me to come upon this Spade-beard , who seemed to me from what I have seen of him to be a very sprightly and valiant gentleman .
But how fares it with you , Edricson ? ''
`` They are all dead -- save only the Norman knight who stands behind you .
What would you that we should do with him ? ''
The pirate leader had stood by the bulwarks , a cord round his arms , and two stout archers on either side .
At Sir Nigel 's words he started violently , and his swarthy features blanched to a livid gray .
As he spoke , there sounded high above the shriek of the gale and the straining of the timbers a gust of oaths with a roar of deep-chested mirth from the gamblers in the forecastle .
`` Can I be of avail ? ''
`` Say the word and the thing is done , if two hands may do it . ''
`` I would fain have your rede , Sir Oliver , for Master Hawtayne hath fears that when we veer there may come danger from the hole in our side . ''
At this instant , however , a startled shout rang out from two seamen upon the forecastle .
they yelled , stabbing into the air with their forefingers .
`` Rocks beneath our very bows ! ''
Through the belly of a great black wave , not one hundred paces to the front of them , there thrust forth a huge jagged mass of brown stone , which spouted spray as though it were some crouching monster , while a dull menacing boom and roar filled the air .
screamed Goodwin Hawtayne , flinging himself upon the long pole which served as a tiller .
`` Cut the halliard !
Lay her two courses to the wind ! ''
`` I fear that we can scarce bide upon this tack , '' cried Hawtayne ; `` and yet the other will drive us on the rocks . ''
`` 'T is the fane of St. Michael , as that upon the right is of St. Remi .
There , too , above the poop of yonder nief , you see the towers of Saint Croix and of Pey Berland .
Mark also the mighty ramparts which are pierced by the three water-gates , and sixteen others to the landward side . ''
`` It would be strange else , seeing that all the great lords of England and of Gascony are within the walls , and each would have his trumpeter blow as loud as his neighbor , lest it might be thought that his dignity had been abated .
they make as much louster as a Scotch army , where every man fills himself with girdle-cakes , and sits up all night to blow upon the toodle-pipe .
See all along the banks how the pages water the horses , and there beyond the town how they gallop them over the plain !
For every horse you see a belted knight hath herbergage in the town , for , as I learn , the men-at-arms and archers have already gone forward to Dax . ''
`` May the blessed George and the memory of my sweet lady-love raise high my heart ! ''
`` And as a token I vow that I will not take this patch from my eye until I have seen something of this country of Spain , and done such a small deed as it lies in me to do .
And this I swear upon the cross of my sword and upon the glove of my lady . ''
`` Sir Oliver Buttesthorn , '' said the little knight shortly , `` I would have you to understand that , blind as I am , I can yet see the path of honor very clearly , and that that is the road upon which I do not crave another man 's guidance . ''
`` By my soul , '' said Sir Oliver , `` you are as tart as verjuice this morning !
If you are bent upon a quarrel with me I must leave you to your humor and drop into the 'Tete d'Or ' here , for I marked a varlet pass the door who bare a smoking dish , which had , methought , a most excellent smell . ''
`` See to the brave stalls ! ''
`` See to the noble armor set forth , and the costly taffeta -- and oh , Ford , see to where the scrivener sits with the pigments and the ink-horns , and the rolls of sheepskin as white as the Beaulieu napery !
Saw man ever the like before ? ''
`` It is Sir William de Pakington , the prince 's own herald and scrivener , '' whispered Sir Nigel , as they pulled up amid the line of knights who waited admission .
`` Ill fares it with the man who would venture to deceive him .
He hath by rote the name of every knight of France or of England ; and all the tree of his family , with his kinships , coat-armor , marriages , augmentations , abatements , and I know not what beside .
We may leave our horses here with the varlets , and push forward with our squires . ''
`` Nay , it is but a day since I set foot in Bordeaux , but I feared lest the prince should think it strange that I had not waited upon him . ''
`` Then you must be Sir Stephen Mackworth , for I learn that when old Sir Guy died he came in for the arms and the name , the war-cry and the profit . ''
`` As heart could wish .
We had sight of two rover galleys , and even came to have some slight bickering with them . ''
`` Ever in luck 's way , Nigel ! ''
`` We must hear the tale anon .
But I deem it best that ye should leave your squires and come with me , for , howsoe'er pressed the prince may be , I am very sure that he would be loth to keep two old comrades-in-arms upon the further side of the door .
Follow close behind me , and I will forestall old Sir William , though I can scarce promise to roll forth your style and rank as is his wont . ''
So saying , he led the way to the inner chamber , the two companions treading close at his heels , and nodding to right and left as they caught sight of familiar faces among the crowd .
HOW THERE WAS STIR AT THE ABBEY OF ST. ANDREW 'S .
`` Perchance , my fair sir , '' he whispered , `` there is some small vow of which I may relieve you .
Might we not have some honorable debate upon the matter .
Your gentle courtesy may perhaps grant me an exchange of thrusts . ''
`` Why , little coz , '' he whispered , `` you are very eager to have your neck in a noose .
had you asked as much from our new ally Don Pedro , he had not baulked you .
Between friends , there is overmuch of the hangman in him , and too little of the prince .
But indeed this White Company is a rough band , and may take some handling ere you find yourself safe in your captaincy . ''
`` I doubt not , with the help of St. Paul , that I shall bring them to some order , '' Sir Nigel answered .
`` But there are many faces here which are new to me , though others have been before me since first I waited upon my dear master , Sir Walter .
I pray you to tell me , Sir John , who are these priests upon the dais ? ''
`` The one is the Archbishop of Bordeaux , Nigel , and the other the Bishop of Agen . ''
`` My lord , '' cried Don Martin , `` I can not stand there to hear such words of my master .
Did they come from other lips , I should know better how to answer them . ''
`` Our cousin Charles has had experience of our friendship , '' the prince continued , `` and now , by the Saints !
he shall feel a touch of our displeasure .
I send now a message to our cousin Charles which his whole kingdom may read .
Let him take heed lest worse befall him .
Where is my Lord Chandos ?
Ha , Sir John , I commend this worthy knight to your care .
You will see that he hath refection , and such a purse of gold as may defray his charges , for indeed it is great honor to any court to have within it so noble and gentle a cavalier .
How say you , sire ? ''
he asked , turning to the Spanish refugee , while the herald of Navarre was conducted from the chamber by the old warrior .
`` I am not a Lombard , sire .
Your kingly pledge is my security , without bond or seal .
But I have tidings for you , my lords and lieges , that our brother of Lancaster is on his way for our capital with four hundred lances and as many archers to aid us in our venture .
When he hath come , and when our fair consort is recovered in her health , which I trust by the grace of God may be ere many weeks be past , we shall then join the army at Dax , and set our banners to the breeze once more . ''
`` My Lord de Clisson , '' cried Lord Audley , `` you look some , what fixedly in my direction .
By God 's soul !
I should be right glad to go further into the matter with you . ''
`` Friends , friends ! ''
he cried at last , `` this quarrel must go no further .
The man shall answer to me , be he Gascon or English , who carries it beyond this room .
I have overmuch need for your swords that you should turn them upon each other .
Sir John Charnell , Lord Audley , you do not doubt the courage of our friends of Gascony ? ''
`` How is it with the old man at Windsor ? ''
`` I take it , '' said Ford , `` that it is much as it was when you were there last , save that perchance there is a little less noise there . ''
`` You may take it as it comes , '' said Ford carelessly .
`` If my hand is not hard , it is ready . ''
`` Sweet little coz ! ''
answered the burly squire .
`` Such a dainty color !
Such a mellow voice !
Eyes of a bashful maid , and hair like a three years ' babe !
He passed his thick fingers roughly through the youth 's crisp golden curls .
`` Nay ; Tranter first laid hand upon his head , '' said Harcomb .
`` How say you , Tranter ?
The matter may rest where it stands ? ''
`` You hear , young sir ? ''
`` Our friend will overlook the matter if you do but say that you have acted in heat and haste . ''
`` The council will not break up until the banquet , '' remarked a gray-haired squire .
`` You have a clear two hours . ''
Close to the banks of the Garonne there lay a little tract of green sward , with the high wall of a prior 's garden upon one side and an orchard with a thick bristle of leafless apple-trees upon the other .
The river ran deep and swift up to the steep bank ; but there were few boats upon it , and the ships were moored far out in the centre of the stream .
Here the two combatants drew their swords and threw off their doublets , for neither had any defensive armor .
The duello with its stately etiquette had not yet come into vogue , but rough and sudden encounters were as common as they must ever be when hot-headed youth goes abroad with a weapon strapped to its waist .
In such combats , as well as in the more formal sports of the tilting-yard , Tranter had won a name for strength and dexterity which had caused Norbury to utter his well-meant warning .
On the other hand , Alleyne had used his weapons in constant exercise and practice for every day for many months , and being by nature quick of eye and prompt of hand , he might pass now as no mean swordsman .
A strangely opposed pair they appeared as they approached each other : Tranter dark and stout and stiff , with hairy chest and corded arms , Alleyne a model of comeliness and grace , with his golden hair and his skin as fair as a woman 's .
An unequal fight it seemed to most ; but there were a few , and they the most experienced , who saw something in the youth 's steady gray eye and wary step which left the issue open to doubt .
Tranter well knew his advantage and lost no time in putting it to use .
As his opponent walked towards him he suddenly bounded forward and sent in a whistling cut which would have severed the other in twain had he not sprung lightly back from it .
So close was it that the point ripped a gash in the jutting edge of his linen cyclas .
Quick as a panther , Alleyne sprang in with a thrust , but Tranter , who was as active as he was strong , had already recovered himself and turned it aside with a movement of his heavy blade .
Again he whizzed in a blow which made the spectators hold their breath , and again Alleyne very quickly and swiftly slipped from under it , and sent back two lightning thrusts which the other could scarce parry .
So close were they to each other that Alleyne had no time to spring back from the next cut , which beat down his sword and grazed his forehead , sending the blood streaming into his eyes and down his cheeks .
He sprang out beyond sword sweep , and the pair stood breathing heavily , while the crowd of young squires buzzed their applause .
`` For my part , I have no wish to slay this young man , '' said Tranter , wiping his heated brow .
`` Does this gentleman crave my pardon for having used me despitefully ? ''
`` Then on guard again ! ''
cried the young squire , and sprang in with a fire and a fury which more than made up for the shortness of his weapon .
It had not escaped him that his opponent was breathing in short , hoarse gasps , like a man who is dizzy with fatigue .
Now was the time for the purer living and the more agile limb to show their value .
Back and back gave Tranter , ever seeking time for a last cut .
On and on came Alleyne , his jagged point now at his foeman 's face , now at his throat , now at his chest , still stabbing and thrusting to pass the line of steel which covered him .
Yet his experienced foeman knew well that such efforts could not be long sustained .
Let him relax for one instant , and his death-blow had come .
Flesh and blood could not stand the strain .
Already the thrusts were less fierce , the foot less ready , although there was no abatement of the spirit in the steady gray eyes .
Tranter , cunning and wary from years of fighting , knew that his chance had come .
He brushed aside the frail weapon which was opposed to him , whirled up his great blade , sprang back to get the fairer sweep -- and vanished into the waters of the Garonne .
Yet the current was swift and strong , and , good swimmer as he was , it was no easy task which Alleyne had set himself .
To clutch at Tranter and to seize him by the hair was the work of a few seconds , but to hold his head above water and to make their way out of the current was another matter .
For a hundred strokes he did not seem to gain an inch .
Then at last , amid a shout of joy and praise from the bank , they slowly drew clear into more stagnant water , at the instant that a rope , made of a dozen sword-belts linked together by the buckles , was thrown by Ford into their very hands .
Three pulls from eager arms , and the two combatants , dripping and pale , were dragged up the bank , and lay panting upon the grass .
`` Here is your pourpoint , Edricson , '' cried Norbury .
`` Throw it over your shoulders , that you may have at least one dry garment . ''
`` One moment , sirs , '' cried Alleyne , who was leaning on Ford 's shoulder , with the broken sword , which he had picked up , still clutched in his right hand .
`` My ears may be somewhat dulled by the water , and perchance what has been said has escaped me , but I have not yet heard this gentleman crave pardon for the insults which he put upon me in the hall . ''
HOW AGOSTINO PISANO RISKED HIS HEAD .
The crowd had thickened in front , so that the lame man and the girl had come to a stand .
Several half-drunken English archers , attracted , as the squires had been , by their singular appearance , were facing towards them , and peering at them through the dim light .
`` What hath the old toad under his arm ? ''
cried one of the others .
`` He hugs it to him as the devil hugged the pardoner . ''
`` Let us see , old bag of bones ; let us see what it is that you have under your arm ! ''
They crowded in upon him , while he , ignorant of their language , could but clutch the girl with one hand and the parcel with the other , looking wildly about in search of help .
A glance at Aylward 's resolute face , and at the huge shoulders of Hordle John , had convinced the archers that there was little to be got by violence .
The girl and the old man began to shuffle on in the crowd without their tormentors venturing to stop them .
Ford and Alleyne followed slowly behind them , but Aylward caught the latter by the shoulder .
`` Ho , ho ! ''
cried he with a high crowing laugh , `` it is not the head upon my shoulders that I think of .
It is the head under my arm which you have preserved . ''
`` Well said , Tita !
Well said , my girl !
I pray you , sirs , to honor my unworthy roof so far .
A light , Giacomo !
There are five steps up .
Here we are at last in safety .
I would not have given ten maravedi for my head when those children of the devil were pushing us against the wall .
Tita mia , you have been a brave girl , and it was better that you should be pulled and pushed than that my head should be broken . ''
`` And the green of this grass -- how bright and clear !
Why all the painting that I have seen is but child 's play beside this .
This worthy gentleman must be one of those great painters of whom I have oft heard brother Bartholomew speak in the old days at Beaulieu . ''
The dark mobile face of the artist shone with pleasure at the unaffected delight of the two young Englishmen .
His daughter had thrown off her mantle and disclosed a face of the finest and most delicate Italian beauty , which soon drew Ford 's eyes from the pictures in front of him .
Alleyne , however , continued with little cries of admiration and of wonderment to turn from the walls to the table and yet again to the walls .
`` It is great ! ''
`` It is wonderful !
But I marvel , sir , that you should have risked a work of such beauty and value by bearing it at night through so unruly a crowd . ''
`` Why , on my faith , it is not unlike her ! ''
said Alleyne , in some confusion .
`` And all these ! ''
`` Have you indeed done them all ?
-- and where are they to go ? ''
`` There are three hundred and forty-one in the town , '' said Aylward , `` and I hear that three hundred and forty cartels and defiances have already been sent in , the only one missing being Sir John Ravensholme , who is in his bed with the sweating sickness , and can not set foot to ground . ''
`` Then there is Chandos . ''
`` Here is to old Samkin Aylward ! ''
shouted several at the further end of the room , waving their blackjacks in the air .
`` Ask him ! ''
said Aylward modestly , nodding towards Black Simon .
`` He saw more than I did .
And yet , by the holy nails !
there was not very much that I did not see either . ''
`` But the fight , Aylward , the fight ! ''
`` Nay , from a man 's feet , lad .
I had reason to think that he might not need them again , seeing that a thirty-inch shaft had feathered in his back . ''
`` You are right , master-shipman , '' said another of the older archers .
`` It is an old bowyer 's rede that the second feather of a fenny goose is better than the pinion of a tame one .
Draw on old lad , for I have come between you and the clout . ''
Oh , some have laughed and some have cried And some have scoured the country-side !
But off they ride through wood and glade , The bowman and the franklin 's maid .
`` And why , Sir John ? ''
`` Because , sire , it is not for you to take part with Gascons against English , or with English against Gascons , seeing that you are lord of both .
We are not too well loved by the Gascons now , and it is but the golden link of your princely coronet which holds us together .
If that be snapped I know not what would follow . ''
`` Every man to his own humor , '' said Pedro carelessly .
there is a sweet face at yonder window !
Don Fernando , I pray you to mark the house , and to have the maid brought to us at the abbey . ''
`` Ever the mirror of true chivalry ! ''
exclaimed Pedro , while James of Majorca , frightened at the stern countenance of their all-powerful protector , plucked hard at the mantle of his brother exile .
`` And why not , dear coz ?
Your bowmen have cleared a path to Paris , and why not to Jerusalem ?
Once there , your arms might rest . ''
`` By my soul !
John , '' said the prince , `` I have never known you turn laggard before . ''
`` Nay , my true-heart !
I have tried you too often not to know .
But , by my soul !
I have not seen so dense a throng since the day that we brought King John down Cheapside . ''
The holders of the lists occupied the end which was nearest to the city gate .
There , in front of their respective pavilions , flew the martlets of Audley , the roses of Loring , the scarlet bars of Wake , the lion of the Percies and the silver wings of the Beauchamps , each supported by a squire clad in hanging green stuff to represent so many Tritons , and bearing a huge conch-shell in their left hands .
Behind the tents the great war-horses , armed at all points , champed and reared , while their masters sat at the doors of their pavilions , with their helmets upon their knees , chatting as to the order of the day 's doings .
The English archers and men-at-arms had mustered at that end of the lists , but the vast majority of the spectators were in favor of the attacking party , for the English had declined in popularity ever since the bitter dispute as to the disposal of the royal captive after the battle of Poictiers .
Hence the applause was by no means general when the herald-at-arms proclaimed , after a flourish of trumpets , the names and styles of the knights who were prepared , for the honor of their country and for the love of their ladies , to hold the field against all who might do them the favor to run a course with them .
On the other hand , a deafening burst of cheering greeted the rival herald , who , advancing from the other end of the lists , rolled forth the well-known titles of the five famous warriors who had accepted the defiance .
`` Faith , John , '' said the prince , `` it sounds as though you were right .
my grace D'Armagnac , it seems that our friends on this side will not grieve if our English champions lose the day . ''
`` Who comes next for England , John ? ''
asked the prince in a voice which quivered with excitement .
`` You speak out boldly , squire , '' the prince answered ; `` but unless I have some further assurance of your master 's noble birth and gentle name I can not match the choicest lances of my court against him . ''
`` I do refuse . ''
`` Then I must ask , Lord Chandos , that you will step forth .
I have your pledge that the name shall remain ever a secret , and that you will neither say nor write one word which might betray it .
The name is -- -- '' He stooped down from his horse and whispered something into the old knight 's ear which made him start with surprise , and stare with much curiosity at the distant Knight , who was sitting his charger at the further end of the arena .
`` It is , my lord , and I swear it by St. Ives of Brittany . ''
`` My master will not drink , '' said the squire .
`` I perceive , '' said the prince , `` that your master is a man of great heart and high of enterprise .
But the sun already is low in the west , and there will scarce be light for these courses .
I pray you , gentlemen , to take your places , that we may see whether this stranger 's deeds are as bold as his words . ''
`` So I would turn what is but a lady 's bodkin of a weapon into a very handsome club . ''
`` He is indeed , as I have said , sire , a knight from whom much honor is to be gained .
But the lower edge of the sun is wet , and it will be beneath the sea ere long . ''
`` The finest in your army , sire , '' Chandos answered .
`` Yet I doubt not that he will need all his skill this day . ''
`` Because I knew that you would be here , sire .
Had the man who sits upon your right been ruler of this land , I had indeed thought twice before I looked to him for aught that was knightly or generous . ''
With a soldierly salute , he wheeled round his horse , and , galloping down the lists , disappeared amid the dense crowd of footmen and of horsemen who were streaming away from the scene of the tournament .
`` Yet this is no English word , my sweet lord .
Here are four t 's and never a letter betwixt them . ''
Alleyne sat down as ordered , with a pen in his hand and a fresh sheet of parchment before him , while Sir Nigel slowly spelled out his letter , running his forefinger on from word to word .
`` How of that , Alleyne ? ''
continued Sir Nigel , blinking at his squire , with an expression of some pride upon his face .
`` Have I not told her all that hath befallen us ? ''
`` My fair lady and mistress , '' he wrote , `` God hath had us in His keeping , and my lord is well and in good cheer .
He hath won much honor at the jousting before the prince , when he alone was able to make it good against a very valiant man from France .
Touching the moneys , there is enough and to spare until we reach Montaubon .
Herewith , my fair lady , I send my humble regards , entreating you that you will give the same to your daughter , the Lady Maude .
May the holy saints have you both in their keeping is ever the prayer of thy servant ,
`` She is indeed , '' cried Alleyne from his heart , all tingling at this sudden turn of the talk .
`` I could not live else . ''
`` Then must you strive to be worthy of her love .
Be brave and pure , fearless to the strong and humble to the weak ; and so , whether this love prosper or no , you will have fitted yourself to be honored by a maiden's love , which is , in sooth , the highest guerdon which a true knight can hope for . ''
`` Indeed , my lord , I do so strive , '' said Alleyne ; `` but she is so sweet , so dainty , and of so noble a spirit , that I fear me that I shall never be worthy of her . ''
`` Nay , Oliver , I can not be with you , for I must to Montaubon this day . ''
`` And why , Oliver ? ''
You are mad ! ''
yes , 'Old Sir Oliver 's heart is still stout , ' said one of his court .
'Else had it been out of keeping with the rest of him , ' quoth the prince .
'And his arm is strong , ' said another .
'So is the backbone of his horse , ' quoth the prince .
This very day I will send him my cartel and defiance . ''
`` Nay , nay , my dear Oliver , '' said Sir Nigel , laying his hand upon his angry friend 's arm .
`` There is naught in this , for it was but saying that you were a strong and robust man , who had need of a good destrier .
And as to Chandos and Felton , bethink you that if when you yourself were young the older lances had ever been preferred , how would you then have had the chance to earn the good name and fame which you now bear ?
You do not ride as light as you did , Oliver , and I ride lighter by the weight of my hair , but it would be an ill thing if in the evening of our lives we showed that our hearts were less true and loyal than of old .
If such a knight as Sir Oliver Buttesthorn may turn against his own prince for the sake of a light word , then where are we to look for steadfast faith and constancy ? ''
It was a bright , crisp winter 's day when the little party set off from Bordeaux on their journey to Montaubon , where the missing half of their Company had last been heard of .
Sir Nigel and Ford had ridden on in advance , the knight upon his hackney , while his great war-horse trotted beside his squire .
Two hours later Alleyne Edricson followed ; for he had the tavern reckoning to settle , and many other duties which fell to him as squire of the body .
With him came Aylward and Hordle John , armed as of old , but mounted for their journey upon a pair of clumsy Landes horses , heavy-headed and shambling , but of great endurance , and capable of jogging along all day , even when between the knees of the huge archer , who turned the scale at two hundred and seventy pounds .
They took with them the sumpter mules , which carried in panniers the wardrobe and table furniture of Sir Nigel ; for the knight , though neither fop nor epicure , was very dainty in small matters , and loved , however bare the board or hard the life , that his napery should still be white and his spoon of silver .
`` What was it then ? ''
asked Alleyne , coming with a start out of his reverie .
mon petit , '' cried the bowman , `` you take me back to the days when you were new fledged , as sweet a little chick as ever pecked his way out of a monkish egg .
I had feared that in gaining our debonair young man-at-arms we had lost our soft-spoken clerk .
In truth , I have noted much change in you since we came from Twynham Castle . ''
camarade , to the devil with the other six !
That is enough for me and for thee also .
I can see that they are very wise and discreet folk at Beaulieu .
mon ange , what have you in the pipkin ? ''
`` Nay , ma petite , but here is a two-sous piece for thy kindly tongue and for the sight of thy pretty face .
but she has a bonne mine .
I have a mind to bide and speak with her . ''
`` True , true , camarade !
Adieu , ma cherie !
mon coeur est toujours a toi .
Her mother is a well-grown woman also .
See where she digs by the wayside .
the riper fruit is ever the sweeter .
Bon jour , ma belle dame !
God have you in his keeping !
Said Sir Nigel where he would await us ? ''
`` It was young Sieur de Crespigny of Saintonge , who chanced to be here , and made game of the Englishman , seeing that he was but a small man and hath a face which is full of peace .
But indeed this good knight was a very quiet and patient man , for he saw that the Sieur de Crespigny was still young and spoke from an empty head , so he sat his horse and quaffed his wine , even as you are doing now , all heedless of the clacking tongue . ''
father , '' said Alleyne , `` how then can we be of help to thee ? ''
`` And the wood and stone , holy father ? ''
asked Alleyne , with bated breath , as he stared awe-struck at his precious relics .
`` But , father , '' quoth Alleyne , `` the holy Elisha was bald , which brought down upon him the revilements of the wicked children . ''
`` Down , pride , down ! ''
cried the pilgrim , still beating upon his chest .
`` Can I not bend myself then to take this sorry sum which is offered me for that which has cost me the labors of a life .
Give me the dross !
Here are the precious relics , and , oh , I pray you that you will handle them softly and with reverence , else had I rather left my unworthy bones here by the wayside . ''
With doffed caps and eager hands , the comrades took their new and precious possessions , and pressed onwards upon their journey , leaving the aged palmer still seated under the cherry-tree .
They rode in silence , each with his treasure in his hand , glancing at it from time to time , and scarce able to believe that chance had made them sole owners of relics of such holiness and worth that every abbey and church in Christendom would have bid eagerly for their possession .
So they journeyed , full of this good fortune , until opposite the town of Le Mas , where John 's horse cast a shoe , and they were glad to find a wayside smith who might set the matter to rights .
To him Aylward narrated the good hap which had befallen them ; but the smith , when his eyes lit upon the relics , leaned up against his anvil and laughed , with his hand to his side , until the tears hopped down his sooty cheeks .
Away they galloped together , and ere long they saw the old gray palmer walking slowly along in front of them .
He turned , however , at the sound of their hoofs , and it was clear that his blindness was a cheat like all the rest of him , for he ran swiftly through a field and so into a wood , where none could follow him .
They hurled their relics after him , and so rode back to the blacksmith 's the poorer both in pocket and in faith .
`` This Sir Gaston is a very worthy man , '' said he to his squires as they rode from the `` Baton Rouge . ''
`` He hath a very strong desire to advance himself , and would have entered upon some small knightly debate with me , had he not chanced to have his arm-bone broken by the kick of a horse .
I have conceived a great love for him , and I have promised him that when his bone is mended I will exchange thrusts with him .
But we must keep to this road upon the left . ''
`` Nay , my fair lord , '' said Alleyne , `` these are not horses and a squire , but mules and a varlet .
The man is a mercer , for he hath a great bundle beside him . ''
`` Sir knight , '' said he , `` my name is David Micheldene , and I am a burgher and alderman of the good town of Norwich , where I live five doors from the church of Our Lady , as all men know on the banks of Yare .
I have here my bales of cloth which I carry to Cahors -- woe worth the day that ever I started on such an errand !
I crave your gracious protection upon the way for me , my servant , and my mercery ; for I have already had many perilous passages , and have now learned that Roger Club-foot , the robber-knight of Quercy , is out upon the road in front of me .
I hereby agree to give you one rose-noble if you bring me safe to the inn of the 'Angel ' in Cahors , the same to be repaid to me or my heirs if any harm come to me or my goods . ''
`` By Saint Paul ! ''
answered Sir Nigel , `` I should be a sorry knight if I ask pay for standing by a countryman in a strange land .
You may ride with me and welcome , Master Micheldene , and your varlet may follow with my archers . ''
`` It is such men as he , '' retorted Micheldene , `` who are like rats in a wheat-rick or moths in a woolfels , a harm and a hindrance to all peaceful and honest men . ''
`` It was only last Lammastide , sir knight , that I was left for dead near Reading as I journeyed to Winchester fair .
Yet I had the rogues up at the court of pie-powder , and they will harm no more peaceful traders . ''
`` You travel much then ! ''
`` I know that he is there because I have just passed him in there , '' answered the stranger , rubbing his bejewelled hands together in placid satisfaction .
`` It is my holy mission to be a sompnour or pardoner .
I am the unworthy servant and delegate of him who holds the keys .
A contrite heart and ten nobles to holy mother Church may stave off perdition ; but he hath a pardon of the first degree , with a twenty-five livre benison , so that I doubt if he will so much as feel a twinge of purgatory .
I came up even as the seneschal 's archers were tying him up , and I gave him my fore-word that I would bide with him until he had passed .
There were two leaden crowns among the silver , but I would not for that stand in the way of his salvation . ''
`` When I sell my cloth , '' quoth he , `` he who buys may weigh and feel and handle .
These goods which you sell are not to be seen , nor is there any proof that you hold them .
Certes , if mortal man might control God's mercy , it would be one of a lofty and God-like life , and not one who is decked out with rings and chains and silks , like a pleasure-wench at a kermesse .
`` Silence yourself ! ''
we found thee by the gallows like a carrion-crow .
A fine life thou hast of it with thy silks and thy baubles , cozening the last few shillings from the pouches of dying men .
A fig for thy curse !
Bide here , if you will take my rede , for we will make England too hot for such as you , when Master Wicliff has the ordering of it .
it is you , and such as you , who bring an evil name upon the many churchmen who lead a pure and a holy life .
Thou outside the door of heaven !
Art more like to be inside the door of hell . ''
At this crowning insult the sompnour , with a face ashen with rage , raised up a quivering hand and began pouring Latin imprecations upon the angry alderman .
The latter , however , was not a man to be quelled by words , for he caught up his ell-measure sword-sheath and belabored the cursing clerk with it .
The latter , unable to escape from the shower of blows , set spurs to his mule and rode for his life , with his enemy thundering behind him .
At sight of his master 's sudden departure , the varlet Watkin set off after him , with the pack-mule beside him , so that the four clattered away down the road together , until they swept round a curve and their babble was but a drone in the distance .
Sir Nigel and Alleyne gazed in astonishment at one another , while Ford burst out a-laughing .
`` Nor is it , '' said Alleyne , `` part of the teachings of that mother Church of which he had so much to say .
There was sooth in what the alderman said of it . ''
After passing Cahors , the party branched away from the main road , and leaving the river to the north of them , followed a smaller track which wound over a vast and desolate plain .
This path led them amid marshes and woods , until it brought them out into a glade with a broad stream swirling swiftly down the centre of it .
Through this the horses splashed their way , and on the farther shore Sir Nigel announced to them that they were now within the borders of the land of France .
For some miles they still followed the same lonely track , which led them through a dense wood , and then widening out , curved down to an open rolling country , such as they had traversed between Aiguillon and Cahors .
`` Young man , '' said he , `` I know not who you may be , and I am not much inclined to bestir myself , but if it were not that I am bent upon taking my ease , I swear , by the sword of Joshua !
that I would lay my dog-whip across your shoulders for daring to fill the air with these discordant bellowings . ''
`` And yet ere I have been here an hour I find Englishmen crawling about within it .
Where are we to be free from this pestilent race ?
Can a Frenchman upon French land not sit down in a French auberge without having his ears pained by the clack of their hideous talk ?
Send them packing , inn-keeper , or it may be the worse for them and for you . ''
`` Indeed , gentlemen , you had best go , '' said mine host .
`` It is but six miles to Villefranche , where there are very good quarters at the sign of the 'Lion Rouge . '
`` Mort Dieu ! ''
cried he , `` it is my little swordsman of Bordeaux .
I should remember that coat-armor , seeing that it is but three days since I looked upon it in the lists by Garonne .
Sir Nigel , Sir Nigel !
you owe me a return for this , '' and he touched his right arm , which was girt round just under the shoulder with a silken kerchief .
he gasped at last .
`` Bertrand du Guesclin ! ''
`` By Saint Ives ! ''
shouted the French soldier , with a hoarse roar of laughter , `` it is well that I should ride with my vizor down , for he that has once seen my face does not need to be told my name .
It is indeed I , Sir Nigel , and here is my hand !
I give you my word that there are but three Englishmen in this world whom I would touch save with the sharp edge of the sword : the prince is one , Chandos the second , and you the third ; for I have heard much that is good of you . ''
`` By the Virgin of Rennes !
you have given me cause to be very certain of it , '' said Du Guesclin , with a gleam of his broad white teeth .
`` Your fame is very well known to me , and I shall ask my lady to enter your name upon my tablets , '' said Sir Bertrand .
`` There are many who wish to advance themselves , and who bide their turn , for I refuse no man who comes on such an errand .
At present it may not be , for mine arm is stiff from this small touch , and I would fain do you full honor when we cross swords again .
Come in with me , and let your squires come also , that my sweet spouse , the Lady Tiphaine , may say that she hath seen so famed and gentle a knight . ''
`` And the glove -- is it your lady 's ? ''
`` Certes , he would have a welcome for you , '' quoth Sir Nigel ; `` but indeed he might look askance at one who comes without permit over the marches . ''
`` And comes not back ? ''
`` I hurt my leg and can not ride , '' quoth the bishop 's champion .
`` I strained a sinew on the day that I slew the three men at Castelnau . ''
`` A pretty thing this , John , '' said he .
`` Thou wilt have holy Church upon you if you hang her champions upon iron hooks in an inn kitchen . ''
The Castle of Villefranche was harsh and stern as its master .
A broad moat , a high outer wall turreted at the corners , with a great black keep towering above all -- so it lay before them in the moonlight .
By the light of two flambeaux , protruded through the narrow slit-shaped openings at either side of the ponderous gate , they caught a glimpse of the glitter of fierce eyes and of the gleam of the weapons of the guard .
The sight of the two-headed eagle of Du Guesclin , however , was a passport into any fortalice in France , and ere they had passed the gate the old border knight came running forwards with hands out-thrown to greet his famous countryman .
Nor was he less glad to see Sir Nigel , when the Englishman's errand was explained to him , for these archers had been a sore thorn in his side and had routed two expeditions which he had sent against them .
A happy day it would be for the Seneschal of Auvergne when they should learn that the last yew bow was over the marches .
`` Ma foi , no ! ''
`` I have two Englishmen of this class in my train , who are at this instant , I make little doubt , as full of your wine as any cask in your cellar .
He who pummelled them might come by such a pat as he would be likely to remember . ''
`` And there was Gertrude Le Boeuf , as fair a maiden as eye could see , but as bad and bitter as the rest of them .
When young Amory de Valance was here last Lammastide he looked kindly upon the girl , and even spoke of taking her into his service .
What does she do , with her dog of a father ?
Why , they tie themselves together and leap into the Linden Pool , where the water is five spears'-lengths deep .
I give you my word that it was a great grief to young Amory , and it was days ere he could cast it from his mind .
But how can one serve people who are so foolish and so ungrateful ? ''
Whilst the Seneschal of Villefranche had been detailing the evil doings of his tenants , Alleyne had been unable to take his eyes from the face of Lady Tiphaine .
She had lain back in her chair , with drooping eyelids and bloodless face , so that he had feared at first her journey had weighed heavily upon her , and that the strength was ebbing out of her .
Of a sudden , however , there came a change , for a dash of bright color flickered up on to either cheek , and her lids were slowly raised again upon eyes which sparkled with such lustre as Alleyne had never seen in human eyes before , while their gaze was fixed intently , not on the company , but on the dark tapestry which draped the wall .
So transformed and so ethereal was her expression , that Alleyne , in his loftiest dream of archangel or of seraph , had never pictured so sweet , so womanly , and yet so wise a face .
Glancing at Du Guesclin , Alleyne saw that he also was watching his wife closely , and from the twitching of his features , and the beads upon his brick-colored brow , it was easy to see that he was deeply agitated by the change which he marked in her .
The French soldier burst into a thunderous laugh , and his green eyes twinkled with amusement .
`` At what time during these twenty years would not that have been a true word ? ''
`` Danger is in the air that I breathe .
But is this so very close , Tiphaine ? ''
The lady sat with parted lips , and her breath came quick and fast .
`` My God ! ''
she cried , `` what is this that is shown me ?
Whence come they , these peoples , these lordly nations , these mighty countries which rise up before me ?
I look beyond , and others rise , and yet others , far and farther to the shores of the uttermost waters .
The world is given to them , and it resounds with the clang of their hammers and the ringing of their church bells .
They call them many names , and they rule them this way or that but they are all English , for I can hear the voices of the people .
On I go , and onwards over seas where man hath never yet sailed , and I see a great land under new stars and a stranger sky , and still the land is England .
Where have her children not gone ?
What have they not done ?
Her banner is planted on ice .
Her banner is scorched in the sun .
She lies athwart the lands , and her shadow is over the seas .
we are undone for the buds of her bud are even as our choicest flower ! ''
Her voice rose into a wild cry , and throwing up her arms she sank back white and nerveless into the deep oaken chair .
HOW THE BRUSHWOOD MEN CAME TO THE CHATEAU OF VILLEFRANCHE .
`` Yes , or I have been slave to my own fancy .
I tell you , lad , that I am all undone , like a fretted bow-string .
Hark hither , Alleyne !
it can not be that you have forgotten little Tita , the daughter of the old glass-stainer at Bordeaux ? ''
`` I remember her well . ''
As he gazed , he saw of a sudden a man steal forth from the wood into the open clearing .
He walked with his head sunk , his shoulders curved , and his knees bent , as one who strives hard to remain unseen .
Ten paces from the fringe of trees he glanced around , and waving his hand he crouched down , and was lost to sight among a belt of furze-bushes .
After him there came a second man , and after him a third , a fourth , and a fifth stealing across the narrow open space and darting into the shelter of the brushwood .
Nine-and-seventy Alleyne counted of these dark figures flitting across the line of the moonlight .
Many bore huge burdens upon their backs , though what it was that they carried he could not tell at the distance .
Out of the one wood and into the other they passed , all with the same crouching , furtive gait , until the black bristle of trees had swallowed up the last of them .
For a moment Alleyne stood in the window , still staring down at the silent forest , uncertain as to what he should think of these midnight walkers .
Then he bethought him that there was one beside him who was fitter to judge on such a matter .
His fingers had scarce rested upon Aylward 's shoulder ere the bowman was on his feet , with his hand outstretched to his sword .
As he spoke , a sudden shouting broke forth in the castle , with the scream of a woman and the rush of many feet .
Then came the sharp clink of clashing steel , and a roar like that of an angry lion -- '' Notre Dame Du Guesclin !
The bow-man pulled back the bolt of the door , and thrust out the headpiece at the end of the bow .
A clash , the clatter of the steel-cap upon the ground , and , ere the man who struck could heave up for another blow , the archer had passed his sword through his body .
`` On , camarades , on ! ''
he cried ; and , breaking fiercely past two men who threw themselves in his way , he sped down the broad corridor in the direction of the shouting .
`` On the contrary , '' quoth Sir Nigel , `` there is much left to us , for there is a very honorable contention before us , and a fair lady for whom to give our lives .
There are many ways in which a man might die , but none better than this . ''
`` That we make for the keep .
It is unused , save in time of war , and the key hangs from my poor lord and master 's belt . ''
`` It is the larger .
Once there , we might hold the narrow stair ; and at least , as the walls are of a greater thickness , it would be longer ere they could burn them .
Could we but carry the lady across the bailey , all might be well with us . ''
HOW FIVE MEN HELD THE KEEP OF VILLEFRANCHE
`` Make straight for the keep ! ''
said Du Guesclin , in a sharp , stern whisper .
`` The two archers in front , the lady in the centre , a squire on either side , while we three knights shall bide behind and beat back those who press upon us .
Now open the door , and God have us in his holy keeping ! ''
As he thundered forth his war-cry , the Jacks who had been gathering before the black arch of the gateway rushed in madly in a desperate effort to carry the staircase .
Their leaders were a small man , dark in the face , with his beard done up in two plaits , and another larger man , very bowed in the shoulders , with a huge club studded with sharp nails in his hand .
The first had not taken three steps ere an arrow from Aylward 's bow struck him full in the chest , and he fell coughing and spluttering across the threshold .
The other rushed onwards , and breaking between Du Guesclin and Sir Nigel he dashed out the brains of the Bohemian with a single blow of his clumsy weapon .
With three swords through him he still struggled on , and had almost won his way through them ere he fell dead upon the stair .
Close at his heels came a hundred furious peasants , who flung themselves again and again against the five swords which confronted them .
It was cut and parry and stab as quick as eye could see or hand act .
The door was piled with bodies , and the stone floor was slippery with blood .
The deep shout of Du Guesclin , the hard , hissing breath of the pressing multitude , the clatter of steel , the thud of falling bodies , and the screams of the stricken , made up such a medley as came often in after years to break upon Alleyne 's sleep .
Slowly and sullenly at last the throng drew off , with many a fierce backward glance , while eleven of their number lay huddled in front of the stair which they had failed to win .
As he spoke , a dozen men rushed forward , each screening himself behind a huge fardel of brushwood .
Hurling their burdens in one vast heap within the portal , they threw burning torches upon the top of it .
The wood had been soaked in oil , for in an instant it was ablaze , and a long , hissing , yellow flame licked over the heads of the defenders , and drove them further up to the first floor of the keep .
They had scarce reached it , however , ere they found that the wooden joists and planks of the flooring were already on fire .
Dry and worm-eaten , a spark upon them became a smoulder , and a smoulder a blaze .
A choking smoke filled the air , and the five could scarce grope their way to the staircase which led up to the very summit of the square tower .
`` By my hilt ! ''
said Aylward to John , `` it is in my mind that we shall not see Spain this journey .
It is a great joy to me that I have placed my feather-bed and other things of price with that worthy woman at Lyndhurst , who will now have the use of them .
I have thirteen arrows yet , and if one of them fly unfleshed , then , by the twang of string !
I shall deserve my doom .
First at him who flaunts with my lady 's silken frock .
Clap in the clout , by God !
though a hand's-breadth lower than I had meant .
Now for the rogue with the head upon his pike .
to the inch , John .
When my eye is true , I am better at rovers than at long-butts or hoyles .
A good shoot for you also , John !
The villain hath fallen forward into the fire .
But I pray you , John , to loose gently , and not to pluck with the drawing-hand , for it is a trick that hath marred many a fine bowman . ''
`` Nay , Bertrand , I fear it as little as you , '' said she .
`` Had I my dearest wish , it would be that we should go together . ''
`` By Saint Ives !
it is true , '' cried Sir Bertrand , striding across to the recess where the ungainly , funnel-shaped , thick-ribbed engines were standing .
`` Bombards they are , and of good size .
We may shoot down upon them . ''
`` Bertrand , '' said she , `` hush and listen !
I have heard the voices of men all singing together in a strange tongue . ''
What of the bow ?
The bow was made in England .
Of true wood , of yew wood , The wood of English bows ; For men who are free Love the old yew-tree And the land where the yew tree grows .
`` It is I , old lad .
It is Sam Aylward of the Company ; and here is your captain , Sir Nigel Loring , and four others , all laid out to be grilled like an Easterling 's herrings . ''
`` But how are they to reach it ? ''
asked the young archer beside him .
`` Close to your hand then . ''
With an easy pull he sent the shaft flickering gently up , falling upon the stonework within a foot of where Aylward was standing .
The other end was secured to the rope , so that in a minute a good strong cord was dangling from the only sound side of the blazing and shattered tower .
The Lady Tiphaine was lowered with a noose drawn fast under the arms , and the other five slid swiftly down , amid the cheers and joyous outcry of their rescuers .
The archers had spread themselves over the ruins , but a blast upon a bugle brought them all back to muster , with such booty as they could bear with them stuffed into their pouches or slung over their shoulders .
As they formed into ranks , each man dropping silently into his place , Sir Nigel ran a questioning eye over them , and a smile of pleasure played over his face .
Tall and sinewy , and brown , clear-eyed , hard-featured , with the stern and prompt bearing of experienced soldiers , it would be hard indeed for a leader to seek for a choicer following .
Here and there in the ranks were old soldiers of the French wars , grizzled and lean , with fierce , puckered features and shaggy , bristling brows .
The most , however , were young and dandy archers , with fresh English faces , their beards combed out , their hair curling from under their close steel hufkens , with gold or jewelled earrings gleaming in their ears , while their gold-spangled baldrics , their silken belts , and the chains which many of them wore round their thick brown necks , all spoke of the brave times which they had had as free companions .
Each had a yew or hazel stave slung over his shoulder , plain and serviceable with the older men , but gaudily painted and carved at either end with the others .
Steel caps , mail brigandines , white surcoats with the red lion of St. George , and sword or battle-axe swinging from their belts , completed this equipment , while in some cases the murderous maule or five-foot mallet was hung across the bowstave , being fastened to their leathern shoulder-belt by a hook in the centre of the handle .
Sir Nigel 's heart beat high as he looked upon their free bearing and fearless faces .
`` Sir Nigel ! ''
`` Sir Nigel Loring , at last !
By my soul we have awaited you this month past .
Right welcome , Sir Nigel !
You have had my letter ? ''
Sir Nigel sat silent and distrait at his meal , while Alleyne hearkened to the clattering tongue of the Gascon , and to his talk of the glories of his own estate , his successes in love , and his triumphs in war .
`` And now that you are here , Sir Nigel , '' he said at last , `` I have many fine ventures all ready for us .
I have heard that Montpezat is of no great strength , and that there are two hundred thousand crowns in the castle .
At Castelnau also there is a cobbler who is in my pay , and who will throw us a rope any dark night from his house by the town wall .
I promise you that you shall thrust your arms elbow-deep among good silver pieces ere the nights are moonless again ; for on every hand of us are fair women , rich wine , and good plunder , as much as heart could wish . ''
`` Then , Sir Claude , I must lead the Company without you . ''
`` And a little one from Brockenhurst ! ''
shouted a huge-limbed fellow who sprawled beneath a tree .
`` Nay , Aylward , '' said Sir Nigel , `` we can not mend the matter by broiling .
Sir Claude , I think that what you have said does you little honor , and if my words aggrieve you I am ever ready to go deeper into the matter with you .
But you shall have such men as will follow you , and you may go where you will , so that you come not with us .
Let all who love their prince and country stand fast , while those who think more of a well-lined purse step forth upon the farther side . ''
`` If it please you , my fair lord , '' said Black Simon , `` I know something of these parts , for I have twice served a term with the King of Navarre .
There is a hospice of monks yonder , where you may see the roof among the trees , and there it was that Sir Roland was slain .
The village upon the left is Orbaiceta , and I know a house therein where the right wine of Jurancon is to be bought , if it would please you to quaff a morning cup . ''
`` Yet our own army is a great one , '' said Alleyne .
`` It is Silas Peterson , of Horsham .
Do not wink with one eye and look with the other , Silas , and do not hop and dance after you shoot , with your tongue out , for that will not speed it upon its way .
Stand straight and firm , as God made you .
Move not the bow arm , and steady with the drawing hand ! ''
`` I know not about that , '' answered the Brabanter , `` but this I know , that though I have served for fourteen years , I have never yet seen an Englishman do aught with the long-bow which I could not do better with my arbalest .
By the three kings !
I would even go further , and say that I have done things with my arbalest which no Englishman could do with his long-bow . ''
`` Tut , tut , Aylward , '' said the old bowman .
`` My day is past , and it is for the younger ones to hold what we have gained .
I take it unkindly of thee , Samkin , that thou shouldst call all eyes thus upon a broken bowman who could once shoot a fair shaft .
Let me feel that bow , Wilkins !
It is a Scotch bow , I see , for the upper nock is without and the lower within .
By the black rood !
it is a good piece of yew , well nocked , well strung , well waxed , and very joyful to the feel .
I think even now that I might hit any large and goodly mark with a bow like this .
Turn thy quiver to me , Aylward .
I love an ash arrow pierced with cornel-wood for a roving shaft . ''
`` I see something , '' answered Johnston , shading his eyes with his hand ; `` but it is a very long shoot . ''
`` It would ill beseem me to claim to be a better marksman , '' answered Johnston , `` for I have heard great things of your skill .
I did but wish to show that the long-bow could do that which an arbalest could not do , for you could not with your moulinet have your string ready to speed another shaft ere the bird drop to the earth . ''
`` In that you have vantage , '' said the crossbowman .
`` By Saint James !
it is now my turn to show you where my weapon has the better of you .
I pray you to draw a flight shaft with all your strength down the valley , that we may see the length of your shoot . ''
`` By my hilt !
it is over it , '' cried Aylward .
`` I can see where they have stooped to gather up the shaft . ''
The Brabanter stepped forward with a smile of conscious triumph , and loosed the cord of his weapon .
A shout burst from his comrades as they watched the swift and lofty flight of the heavy bolt .
`` Over the fourth ! ''
`` By my hilt !
I think that it is well up to the fifth . ''
`` Which weapon hath the vantage now ? ''
cried the Brabanter , Strutting proudly about with shouldered arbalest , amid the applause of his companions .
`` Five hundred and eight paces will serve my turn , '' answered the Brabanter , looking askance at this new opponent .
`` I scarce shot as many shafts at Brignais , '' growled the man of Brabant ; `` though I found a better mark there than a cantle of bull 's hide .
But what is this , Englishman ?
The shield hangs not one hundred paces from me , and a blind man could strike it . ''
He screwed up his string to the furthest pitch , and shot his quarrel at the dangling shield .
Aylward , who had drawn an arrow from his quiver , carefully greased the head of it , and sped it at the same mark .
In an instant order and method took the place of general confusion .
Bows , steel caps , and jacks were caught up from the grass .
A long cordon cleared the camp of all strangers , while the main body fell into four lines with under-officers and file-leaders in front and on either flank .
So they stood , silent and motionless , when their leader came riding towards them , his face shining and his whole small figure swelling with the news which he bore .
my knight-errant of Twynham ! ''
said a voice , `` You are off to Ebro , I hear ; and , by the holy fish of Tobias !
you must take me under your banner . ''
A dry-wood fire had been lit , and round this the leaders crouched , the glare beating upon their rugged faces , while the hardy archers lounged and chatted amid the tethered horses , while they munched their scanty provisions .
`` For my part , '' said Sir Simon Burley , `` I am of opinion that we have already done that which we have come for .
For do we not now know where the king is , and how great a following he hath , which was the end of our journey . ''
`` Yet I would fain have your rede and counsel , Sir Simon .
But , touching what you say of the river , we can take heed that we shall not have it at the back of us , for the prince hath now advanced to Salvatierra , and thence to Vittoria , so that if we come upon their camp from the further side we can make good our retreat . ''
The peasant , reading the soldier 's meaning in his fierce eyes and harsh accents dropped upon his knees , screaming loudly for mercy .
`` Over the cliff with him ! ''
shouted half a dozen voices ; but ere the archers could drag him from the rocks to which he clung Sir Nigel had ridden up and called upon them to stop .
`` Hark ye , fellow , '' said Sir Nigel .
`` We give you one more chance to find the path .
We are about to gain much honor , Sir William , in this enterprise , and it would be a sorry thing if the first blood shed were that of an unworthy boor .
Let us say our morning orisons , and it may chance that ere we finish he may strike upon the track . ''
As he spoke he scrambled down one of the narrow ravines , and , climbing over a low ridge at the further end , he led them into a short valley with a stream purling down the centre of it and a very thick growth of elder and of box upon either side .
Pushing their way through the dense brushwood , they looked out upon a scene which made their hearts beat harder and their breath come faster .
`` By the rood ! ''
cried the fierce man-at-arms , `` I will see the color of their blood ere I turn my mare 's head for the mountains .
Am I a child , that I should ride for three days and nought but words at the end of it ? ''
`` A cow ! ''
`` Say rather ten acres and a homestead on the banks of Avon . ''
`` Say you so ?
Then , by our Lady !
here is for yonder one in the red jerkin ! ''
`` And so say I , '' cried the Scottish earl ; `` for they do not know that there is any enemy within thirty long leagues of them . ''
`` Because we shall have nightfall to cover us when we draw off , so that we may make our way back through the mountains .
I would station a score of archers here in the pass , with all our pennons jutting forth from the rocks , and as many nakirs and drums and bugles as we have with us , so that those who follow us in the fading light may think that the whole army of the prince is upon them , and fear to go further .
What think you of my plan , Sir Simon ? ''
`` Fret not for that , '' answered Sir Nigel .
`` For , in sooth , had he not pulled you down , a dozen cloth-yard shafts had crossed each other in your body . ''
`` You are the prisoner of the man who took you , Sir Diego , '' answered Sir Nigel .
`` And I may tell you that better men than either you or I have found themselves before now prisoners in the hands of archers of England . ''
`` Surely I see the red pile of Chandos at the head of yonder squadron ! ''
cried Sir Richard Causton , shading his eyes with his hand .
`` Not so , '' answered Sir Simon Burley , who had watched the approaching host with a darkening face .
`` It is even as I feared .
That is the double eagle of Du Guesclin . ''
`` By St. Paul !
I am very glad of it , '' said Sir Nigel .
`` Of these Spaniards I know nothing ; but the French are very worthy gentlemen , and will do what they can for our advancement . ''
`` I will do as you order , Nigel ; but what is it that you propose to do ? ''
So saying , Sir Nigel mounted the white horse of the Spanish cavalier , and rode quietly forth from his concealment with his three companions behind him , Alleyne leading his master 's own steed by the bridle .
So many small parties of French and Spanish horse were sweeping hither and thither that the small band attracted little notice , and making its way at a gentle trot across the plain , they came as far as the camp without challenge or hindrance .
On and on they pushed past the endless lines of tents , amid the dense swarms of horsemen and of footmen , until the huge royal pavilion stretched in front of them .
They were close upon it when of a sudden there broke out a wild hubbub from a distant portion of the camp , with screams and war-cries and all the wild tumult of battle .
At the sound soldiers came rushing from their tents , knights shouted loudly for their squires , and there was mad turmoil on every hand of bewildered men and plunging horses .
At the royal tent a crowd of gorgeously dressed servants ran hither and thither in helpless panic for the guard of soldiers who were stationed there had already ridden off in the direction of the alarm .
A man-at-arms on either side of the doorway were the sole protectors of the royal dwelling .
`` I have come for the king , '' whispered Sir Nigel ; `` and , by Saint Paul !
he must back with us or I must bide here . ''
`` Then , by the light of heaven !
I will ride back for him , '' cried Sir Nigel .
HOW SIR NIGEL TOOK THE PATCH FROM HIS EYE .
`` I know not about that , '' said John , kicking his helmet up into the air and catching it in his hand .
`` I do but know that whether the broth be ready or no , I am about to dip this into it . ''
`` Well said , old war-dog ! ''
`` By my hilt !
I pray that your dream may come true , for the prince hath not set us out here to drink broth or to gather whortle-berries .
One more fight , and I am ready to hang up my bow , marry a wife , and take to the fire corner .
But how now , Robin ?
Whom is it that you seek ? ''
`` What then ? ''
asked the knight , peering up at him anxiously .
`` There is nought amiss with the Lady Mary or with the Lady Maude ? ''
`` Yet he was my brother -- the only kith or kin that I had upon earth .
Mayhap he had cause to be bitter against me , for his land was given to the abbey for my upbringing .
and I raised my staff against him when last we met !
He has been slain -- and slain , I fear , amidst crime and violence . ''
`` It was the vision of the Lady Tiphaine , '' said Sir Nigel , after a pause .
`` Marked you not how she said that the leader was one with a yellow beard , and how he fell before the gate .
But how came it , Alleyne , that this woman , to whom all things are as crystal , and who hath not said one word which has not come to pass , was yet so led astray as to say that your thoughts turned to Twynham Castle even more than my own ? ''
`` And mine also is very old , '' answered the squire .
Alleyne delivered his message , and then wandered forth from the camp , for his mind was all in a whirl with this unexpected news , and with his talk with Sir Nigel .
Sitting upon a rock , with his burning brow resting upon his hands , he thought of his brother , of their quarrel , of the Lady Maude in her bedraggled riding-dress , of the gray old castle , of the proud pale face in the armory , and of the last fiery words with which she had sped him on his way .
Then he was but a penniless , monk-bred lad , unknown and unfriended .
Now he was himself Socman of Minstead , the head of an old stock , and the lord of an estate which , if reduced from its former size , was still ample to preserve the dignity of his family .
Further , he had become a man of experience , was counted brave among brave men , had won the esteem and confidence of her father , and , above all , had been listened to by him when he told him the secret of his love .
As to the gaining of knighthood , in such stirring times it was no great matter for a brave squire of gentle birth to aspire to that honor .
He would leave his bones among these Spanish ravines , or he would do some deed which would call the eyes of men upon him .
`` Were we a troop of mountain goats we might do so , '' answered Sir William Felton , `` but it is not to be passed by a company of horsemen .
If these be indeed Don Tello and his men , then we must bide where we are , and do what we can to make them rue the day that they found us in their path . ''
`` By my faith ! ''
said Sir Nigel , smiling , `` if they are in a humor for venerie we may promise them some sport ere they sound the mort over us .
But there is a hill in the centre of the gorge on which we might take our stand . ''
Felton 's reply was to bound upon his charger , and to urge it down the slope , while Sir Nigel followed not three spears'-lengths behind him .
It was a rugged course , rocky and uneven , yet the two knights , choosing their men , dashed onwards at the top of their speed , while the gallant Spaniards flew as swiftly to meet them .
The one to whom Felton found himself opposed was a tall stripling with a stag 's head upon his shield , while Sir Nigel 's man was broad and squat with plain steel harness , and a pink and white torse bound round his helmet .
The first struck Felton on the target with such force as to split it from side to side , but Sir William 's lance crashed through the camail which shielded the Spaniard's throat , and he fell , screaming hoarsely , to the ground .
Carried away by the heat and madness of fight , the English knight never drew rein , but charged straight on into the array of the knights of Calatrava .
Long time the silent ranks upon the hill could see a swirl and eddy deep down in the heart of the Spanish column , with a circle of rearing chargers and flashing blades .
Here and there tossed the white plume of the English helmet , rising and falling like the foam upon a wave , with the fierce gleam and sparkle ever circling round it until at last it had sunk from view , and another brave man had turned from war to peace .
`` By Saint Paul ! ''
quoth Sir Nigel , plucking the patch from his eye , `` I think that I am now clear of my vow , for this Spanish knight was a person from whom much honor might be won .
Indeed , he was a very worthy gentleman , of good courage , and great hardiness , and it grieves me that he should have come by such a hurt .
As to what you say of food , Oliver , it is not to be thought of , for we have nothing with us upon the hill . ''
`` To your arms , men ! ''
`` Shoot while you may , and then out sword , and let us live or die together ! ''
HOW THE WHITE COMPANY CAME TO BE DISBANDED .
Then up rose from the hill in the rugged Cantabrian valley a sound such as had not been heard in those parts before , nor was again , until the streams which rippled amid the rocks had been frozen by over four hundred winters and thawed by as many returning springs .
Deep and full and strong it thundered down the ravine , the fierce battle-call of a warrior race , the last stern welcome to whoso should join with them in that world-old game where the stake is death .
Thrice it swelled forth and thrice it sank away , echoing and reverberating amidst the crags .
Then , with set faces , the Company rose up among the storm of stones , and looked down upon the thousands who sped swiftly up the slope against them .
Horse and spear had been set aside , but on foot , with sword and battle-axe , their broad shields slung in front of them , the chivalry of Spain rushed to the attack .
And now arose a struggle so fell , so long , so evenly sustained , that even now the memory of it is handed down amongst the Cantabrian mountaineers and the ill-omened knoll is still pointed out by fathers to their children as the `` Altura de los Inglesos , '' where the men from across the sea fought the great fight with the knights of the south .
The last arrow was quickly shot , nor could the slingers hurl their stones , so close were friend and foe .
From side to side stretched the thin line of the English , lightly armed and quick-footed , while against it stormed and raged the pressing throng of fiery Spaniards and of gallant Bretons .
The clink of crossing sword-blades , the dull thudding of heavy blows , the panting and gasping of weary and wounded men , all rose together in a wild , long-drawn note , which swelled upwards to the ears of the wondering peasants who looked down from the edges of the cliffs upon the swaying turmoil of the battle beneath them .
Back and forward reeled the leopard banner , now borne up the slope by the rush and weight of the onslaught , now pushing downwards again as Sir Nigel , Burley , and Black Simon with their veteran men-at arms , flung themselves madly into the fray .
Alleyne , at his lord 's right hand , found himself swept hither and thither in the desperate struggle , exchanging savage thrusts one instant with a Spanish cavalier , and the next torn away by the whirl of men and dashed up against some new antagonist .
To the right Sir Oliver , Aylward , Hordle John , and the bowmen of the Company fought furiously against the monkish Knights of Santiago , who were led up the hill by their prior -- a great , deep-chested man , who wore a brown monastic habit over his suit of mail .
Three archers he slew in three giant strokes , but Sir Oliver flung his arms round him , and the two , staggering and straining , reeled backwards and fell , locked in each other 's grasp , over the edge of the steep cliff which flanked the hill .
In vain his knights stormed and raved against the thin line which barred their path : the sword of Aylward and the great axe of John gleamed in the forefront of the battle and huge jagged pieces of rock , hurled by the strong arms of the bowmen , crashed and hurtled amid their ranks .
Slowly they gave back down the hill , the archers still hanging upon their skirts , with a long litter of writhing and twisted figures to mark the course which they had taken .
At the same instant the Welshmen upon the left , led on by the Scotch earl , had charged out from among the rocks which sheltered them , and by the fury of their outfall had driven the Spaniards in front of them in headlong flight down the hill .
In the centre only things seemed to be going ill with the defenders .
Black Simon was down -- dying , as he would wish to have died , like a grim old wolf in its lair with a ring of his slain around him .
Twice Sir Nigel had been overborne , and twice Alleyne had fought over him until he had staggered to his feet once more .
Burley lay senseless , stunned by a blow from a mace , and half of the men-at-arms lay littered upon the ground around him .
Sir Nigel 's shield was broken , his crest shorn , his armor cut and smashed , and the vizor torn from his helmet ; yet he sprang hither and thither with light foot and ready hand , engaging two Bretons and a Spaniard at the same instant -- thrusting , stooping , dashing in , springing out -- while Alleyne still fought by his side , stemming with a handful of men the fierce tide which surged up against them .
Yet it would have fared ill with them had not the archers from either side closed in upon the flanks of the attackers , and pressed them very slowly and foot by foot down the long slope , until they were on the plain once more , where their fellows were already rallying for a fresh assault .
`` The prince must hear of how things are with us , '' said the knight .
`` Another onfall we may withstand , but they are many and we are few , so that the time must come when we can no longer form line across the hill .
Yet if help were brought us we might hold the crest until it comes .
See yonder horses which stray among the rocks beneath us ? ''
`` I see them , my fair lord . ''
`` And see yonder path which winds along the hill upon the further end of the valley ? ''
`` Were you on those horses , and riding up yonder track , steep and rough as it is , I think that ye might gain the valley beyond .
Then on to the prince , and tell him how we fare . ''
`` Ye can not go round to them , for they would be upon ye ere ye could come to them .
Think ye that ye have heart enough to clamber down this cliff ? ''
`` Nay , it is to serve me that ye go .
And you , Norbury ? ''
The old knight said no word , but he put a hand on either shoulder , and kissed his squire , with the tears shining in his eyes .
Alleyne sprang to the rope , and sliding swiftly down , soon found himself at its extremity .
From above it seemed as though rope and cliff were well-nigh touching , but now , when swinging a hundred feet down , the squire found that he could scarce reach the face of the rock with his foot , and that it was as smooth as glass , with no resting-place where a mouse could stand .
Some three feet lower , however , his eye lit upon a long jagged crack which slanted downwards , and this he must reach if he would save not only his own poor life , but that of the eight-score men above him .
Yet it were madness to spring for that narrow slit with nought but the wet , smooth rock to cling to .
He swung for a moment , full of thought , and even as he hung there another of the hellish stones sang through his curls , and struck a chip from the face of the cliff .
Up he clambered a few feet , drew up the loose end after him , unslung his belt , held on with knee and with elbow while he spliced the long , tough leathern belt to the end of the cord : then lowering himself as far as he could go , he swung backwards and forwards until his hand reached the crack , when he left the rope and clung to the face of the cliff .
Another stone struck him on the side , and he heard a sound like a breaking stick , with a keen stabbing pain which shot through his chest .
Yet it was no time now to think of pain or ache .
There was his lord and his eight-score comrades , and they must be plucked from the jaws of death .
On he clambered , with his hand shuffling down the long sloping crack , sometimes bearing all his weight upon his arms , at others finding some small shelf or tuft on which to rest his foot .
Would he never pass over that fifty feet ?
He dared not look down and could but grope slowly onwards , his face to the cliff , his fingers clutching , his feet scraping and feeling for a support .
Every vein and crack and mottling of that face of rock remained forever stamped upon his memory .
At last , however , his foot came upon a broad resting-place and he ventured to cast a glance downwards .
he had reached the highest of those fatal pinnacles upon which his comrade had fallen .
Quickly now he sprang from rock to rock until his feet were on the ground , and he had his hand stretched out for the horse 's rein , when a sling-stone struck him on the head , and he dropped senseless upon the ground .
There , beneath them , was the blood-bathed hill , and from the highest pinnacle there flaunted the yellow and white banner with the lions and the towers of the royal house of Castile .
Up the long slope rushed ranks and ranks of men exultant , shouting , with waving pennons and brandished arms .
Over the whole summit were dense throngs of knights , with no enemy that could be seen to face them , save only that at one corner of the plateau an eddy and swirl amid the crowded mass seemed to show that all resistance was not yet at an end .
At the sight a deep groan of rage and of despair went up from the baffled rescuers , and , spurring on their horses , they clattered down the long and winding path which led to the valley beneath .
`` By Saint George ! ''
cried Sir Hugh , `` I have never seen signs of so stern a fight , and I am right glad that we have been in time to save you . ''
Three large stones formed a rough cot by the roadside , and beside it , basking in the sun , sat the hermit , with clay-colored face , dull eyes , and long withered hands .
With crossed ankles and sunken head , he sat as though all his life had passed out of him , with the beads slipping slowly through his thin , yellow fingers .
Behind him lay the narrow cell , clay-floored and damp , comfortless , profitless and sordid .
Beyond it there lay amid the trees the wattle-and-daub hut of a laborer , the door open , and the single room exposed to the view .
The man ruddy and yellow-haired , stood leaning upon the spade wherewith he had been at work upon the garden patch .
From behind him came the ripple of a happy woman 's laughter , and two young urchins darted forth from the hut , bare-legged and towsy , while the mother , stepping out , laid her hand upon her husband 's arm and watched the gambols of the children .
The hermit frowned at the untoward noise which broke upon his prayers , but his brow relaxed as he looked upon the broad silver piece which John held out to him .
`` Now woe worth me ! ''
she cried , `` and ill fall on Michael Easover of Romsey !
for I told him that the pin was loose , and yet he must needs gainsay me , like the foolish daffe that he is . ''
`` Her father was the leader of it , and her lover served under him as squire .
News hath come that not one of the Company was left alive , and so , poor lamb , she hath -- -- ''
`` Her father ! ''
cried the lady , smiling .
`` Nay ; Maude is a good daughter , but I think it was this young golden-haired squire of whom I have heard who has made her turn her back upon the world . ''
Aylward at this order came shuffling forward amid the trees , and in an instant the two men were clinging in each other 's arms , laughing and shouting and patting each other in their delight ; while old Sir Nigel came running with his sword , under the impression that some small bickering had broken out , only to embrace and be embraced himself , until all three were hoarse with their questions and outcries and congratulations .
On their journey home through the woods Alleyne learnt their wondrous story : how , when Sir Nigel came to his senses , he with his fellow-captive had been hurried to the coast , and conveyed by sea to their captor 's castle ; how upon the way they had been taken by a Barbary rover , and how they exchanged their light captivity for a seat on a galley bench and hard labor at the pirate 's oars ; how , in the port at Barbary , Sir Nigel had slain the Moorish captain , and had swum with Aylward to a small coaster which they had taken , and so made their way to England with a rich cargo to reward them for their toils .
All this Alleyne listened to , until the dark keep of Twynham towered above them in the gloaming , and they saw the red sun lying athwart the rippling Avon .
No need to speak of the glad hearts at Twynham Castle that night , nor of the rich offerings from out that Moorish cargo which found their way to the chapel of Father Christopher .
As to John , he took unto himself a village maid , and settled in Lyndhurst , where his five thousand crowns made him the richest franklin for many miles around .
For many years he drank his ale every night at the `` Pied Merlin , '' which was now kept by his friend Aylward , who had wedded the good widow to whom he had committed his plunder .
The strong men and the bowmen of the country round used to drop in there of an evening to wrestle a fall with John or to shoot a round with Aylward ; but , though a silver shilling was to be the prize of the victory , it has never been reported that any man earned much money in that fashion .
So they lived , these men , in their own lusty , cheery fashion -- rude and rough , but honest , kindly and true .
Let us thank God if we have outgrown their vices .
Let us pray to God that we may ever hold their virtues .
The sky may darken , and the clouds may gather , and again the day may come when Britain may have sore need of her children , on whatever shore of the sea they be found .
Shall they not muster at her call ?
`` Well , at least , Monica , '' remarked Bertha , as they sat over their teacups that afternoon , `` however strange these people may be , it is our duty to be as polite to them as to the others . ''
`` Oh , let us get away , Bertha ! ''
cried Monica , with her thin , black-gloved hands thrown forwards in abhorrence .
`` Oh , thank you , I am too old a traveler to feel anything but at home wherever I go .
I 've just come back from a few months in the Marquesas Islands , where I had a very pleasant visit .
That was where I got Eliza .
In many respects the Marquesas Islands now lead the world . ''
`` Dear me ! ''
`` In what respect ? ''
`` All right , aunt . ''
`` It was man , Charles .
It was you and your fellows I say that woman is a colossal monument to the selfishness of man .
What is all this boasted chivalry -- these fine words and vague phrases ?
Where is it when we wish to put it to the test ?
Man in the abstract will do anything to help a woman .
How does it work when his pocket is touched ?
Where is his chivalry then ?
Will the doctors help her to qualify ?
will the lawyers help her to be called to the bar ?
will the clergy tolerate her in the Church ?
Oh , it is close your ranks then and refer poor woman to her mission !
To be thankful for coppers and not to interfere with the men while they grabble for gold , like swine round a trough , that is man 's reading of the mission of women .
You may sit there and sneer , Charles , while you look upon your victim , but you know that it is truth , every word of it . ''
`` Yes , we have one or two other visits to pay , '' said the elder sister .
`` You will , I am sure , excuse us .
I hope that you will find Norwood a pleasant residence . ''
Ida Walker was a hand 's breadth smaller than Clara , but was a little fuller in the face and plumper in the figure .
She had light yellow hair , mischievous blue eyes with the light of humor ever twinkling in their depths , and a large , perfectly formed mouth , with that slight upward curve of the corners which goes with a keen appreciation of fun , suggesting even in repose that a latent smile is ever lurking at the edges of the lips .
She was modern to the soles of her dainty little high-heeled shoes , frankly fond of dress and of pleasure , devoted to tennis and to comic opera , delighted with a dance , which came her way only too seldom , longing ever for some new excitement , and yet behind all this lighter side of her character a thoroughly good , healthy-minded English girl , the life and soul of the house , and the idol of her sister and her father .
Such was the family at number two .
A peep into the remaining villa and our introductions are complete .
`` In love perhaps , the young dog .
He seems to have found snug moorings now at any rate . ''
`` Well , they are very charming girls , both of them .
But as long as he hangs in the wind between the two it can not be serious .
After all , the boy is four-and-twenty , and he made five hundred pounds last year .
He is better able to marry than I was when I was lieutenant . ''
`` No doubt she is a little excessive in her views . ''
said the Doctor , `` but in the main I think as she does . ''
`` What , turned traitor to your sex !
We 'll court-martial you as a deserter . ''
`` How old is he , mother ? ''
A SISTER 'S SECRET .
`` Your aunt 's ? ''
`` But surely he is not so incomprehensible as all that ? ''
she said , as an attempt at encouragement .
`` That grey foulard dress -- -- '' she began .
CHAPTER V. A NAVAL CONQUEST .
`` All drawing and the wind astern ! ''
`` Fourteen knots if it 's one .
Why , by George , it is that woman ! ''
`` To our meeting , then ? ''
`` It is a very welcome invasion , ma'am , '' said he , clearing his throat and pulling at his high collar .
`` Try this garden chair .
What is there that I can do for you ?
Shall I ring and let Mrs. Denver know that you are here ? ''
`` Tut , tut !
It is not so bad as that . ''
`` But no woman has a voice .
Consider that the women are a majority in the nation .
Yet if there was a question of legislation upon which all women were agreed upon one side and all the men upon the other , it would appear that the matter was settled unanimously when more than half the population were opposed to it .
Is that right ? ''
`` Certainly , Admiral .
We would not hurry you in your decision .
But we still hope to see you on our platform . ''
She rose and moved about in her lounging masculine fashion from one picture to another , for the walls were thickly covered with reminiscences of the Admiral 's voyages .
`` What a lovely rake her masts have , and what a curve to her bows !
She must have been a clipper . ''
`` I hear that you have had quite a long chat with Mrs. Westmacott , '' said she .
`` Why are n't you playing , then ?
Do n't , for goodness ' sake , begin to be languid and young ladyish !
When you give up active sports you give up youth . ''
`` I have played a set , Mrs .
`` That 's right , my dear . ''
She sat down beside her , and tapped her upon the arm with her tennis racket .
`` I like you , my dear , and I am going to call you Clara .
You are not as aggressive as I should wish , Clara , but still I like you very much .
Self-sacrifice is all very well , you know , but we have had rather too much of it on our side , and should like to see a little on the other .
What do you think of my nephew Charles ? ''
Oh , you must think him well over , for I want to speak to you about him . ''
`` Oh , you little sly puss !
Was there ever a girl who never thought of the matter ?
I think that a young man of six-and-twenty ought to be married . ''
Clara felt very uncomfortable .
The awful thought had come upon her that this ambassadress had come to her as a proxy with a proposal of marriage .
But how could that be ?
She had not spoken more than three or four times with her nephew , and knew nothing more of him than he had told her on the evening before .
It was impossible , then .
And yet what could his aunt mean by this discussion of his private affairs ?
`` I really hardly follow you , Mrs. Westmacott , '' cried Clara in despair .
`` My dear Mrs. Westmacott , '' cried Clara , `` I assure you that I have not the least idea what it is that you are talking of . ''
`` I really do not know , '' she said .
`` Not that I know of . ''
`` You speak hesitatingly . ''
`` Because I am not sure .
But he may ask .
She can not but be flattered . ''
`` And was I included in your joint futures ?
`` You can not admire her more than I do .
Indeed , Miss Walker , I only ask to be brought into nearer relationship with her , and to feel that there is a permanent bond between us . ''
`` I should wish to be near and dear to both of you , '' said he , as he took her hand .
`` I should wish Ida to be my sister , and you my wife . ''
`` It was last night .
She began to praise you , I said what I felt , and then in an instant it was all out . ''
`` My father will wonder where I am .
Shall I say anything to him ? ''
`` Not a bit .
I am just getting my swing . ''
`` I knew it would come out , I felt that it would .
You 've heard of Slattery the author ? ''
`` I thought there was something funny about the beginning and end . ''
`` But your aunt ? ''
`` Well , really , I do n't know that there is any reason for delay .
He has a competence and it increases yearly .
As long as you are quite certain that your mind is made up -- -- ''
`` But you would be completely free . ''
`` Then what do you propose , papa ? ''
She braced herself as one who sees the blow which is about to fall .
He looked at her and hesitated .
`` How like your poor dear mother you are , Clara ! ''
`` As I looked at you then it was as if she had come back from the grave . ''
He stooped towards her and kissed her .
`` There , run away to your sister , my dear , and do not trouble yourself about me .
Nothing is settled yet , but you will find that all will come right . ''
`` Funny , Ida !
Think of any one taking the place of dear mother . ''
`` I would do anything to save him , dear . ''
`` That 's it .
You must steel yourself by that thought . ''
`` Oh , I am so proud of it .
We will tire him for ever of the widow , and of all emancipated women .
Let me see , what are Mrs. Westmacott 's main ideas ?
You have listened to her more than I .
Women should attend less to household duties .
That is one , is it not ? ''
`` We must get in some cloth . ''
`` We must make ourselves a dress each .
A brand-new , enfranchised , emancipated dress , dear .
Do n't you see my plan ?
We shall act up to all Mrs. Westmacott 's views in every respect , and improve them when we can .
Then papa will know what it is to live with a woman who claims all her rights .
Oh , Clara , it will be splendid . ''
`` You will do it ? ''
`` You dear good Clara !
Now I will show you what you are to do .
We must not begin too suddenly .
It might excite suspicion . ''
`` What hypocrites we shall feel ! ''
`` I wish I was sure that we were doing right .
And yet what else can we do ?
Well , then , Ida , the die is cast , and we will call upon Mrs. Westmacott tomorrow . ''
`` Why so , dear ? ''
`` Then that is settled , '' said Clara demurely , and the talk drifted to other matters .
The Doctor took the bedraggled paper with a rueful face .
`` Everything seems to be wrong to-day , '' he remarked .
`` What is this sudden enthusiasm about chemistry , Ida ? ''
But they were not in their accustomed corner by his chair .
Up and down he searched , while the three servants took up the quest , stooping and peeping under book-cases and drawers .
Ida had returned to her studies , and Clara to her blue-covered volume , sitting absorbed and disinterested amid the bustle and the racket .
At last a general buzz of congratulation announced that the cook had discovered the boots hung up among the hats in the hall .
The Doctor , very red and flustered , drew them on , and stamped off to join the Admiral in his morning walk .
As the door slammed Ida burst into a shout of laughter .
`` You see , Clara , '' she cried , `` the charm works already .
He has gone to number one instead of to number three .
Oh , we shall win a great victory .
You've been very good , dear ; I could see that you were on thorns to help him when he was looking for his boots . ''
`` Here is my case .
Can you catch ! ''
`` Yes , dear .
It is here . ''
`` Trying to , papa .
I find it a little difficult , for I have not been used to it . ''
`` Really , pa !
It was you who advised us to imitate her . ''
`` Well , I am going to act upon her advice .
I am going to be a pilot . ''
`` You are joking , Clara .
You must be joking ! ''
The Doctor rose with a gesture of despair .
`` I ca n't imagine what has come over you both , '' said he .
`` Then I must beg to differ from you , madam . ''
`` I am afraid that I can not interfere . ''
The Doctor was very angry .
`` Very well , madam , '' said he .
`` In that case I can only say that I have the honor to wish you a very good morning . ''
He raised his broad straw hat and strode away up the gravel path , while the widow looked after him with twinkling eyes .
She was surprised herself to find that she liked the Doctor better the more masculine and aggressive he became .
It was unreasonable and against all principle , and yet so it was and no argument could mend the matter .
Very hot and angry , the Doctor retired into his room and sat down to read his paper .
Ida had retired , and the distant wails of the bugle showed that she was upstairs in her boudoir .
Clara sat opposite to him with her exasperating charts and her blue book .
The Doctor glanced at her and his eyes remained fixed in astonishment upon the front of her skirt .
His daughter laughed and smoothed out her frock .
To his horror he saw the red plush of the chair where the dress ought to have been .
`` It is all torn ! ''
`` What have you done ? ''
Then he saw that it was indeed so arranged , and that his daughter was clad in a sort of loose , extremely long knickerbockers .
`` Oh , I shall be so glad when it is over , Ida .
I do hate to give him pain .
Surely he has learned now that it is very unpleasant to spend one 's life with reformers . ''
`` But what would you do ?
Oh , do n't look so wicked , Ida !
You look like some evil little fairy , with your golden hair and dancing , mischievous eyes .
I know that you are going to propose something dreadful ! ''
`` But it is needed to clinch the matter .
No , no , there is no drawing back now , Clara , or we shall ruin everything .
Papa is sure to come back by the 9:45 .
He will reach the door at 10 .
We must have everything ready for him .
Now , just sit down at once , and ask Harold to come at nine o'clock , and I shall do the same to Charles . ''
`` That looks very nice and emancipated , '' said Ida , glancing round .
`` Now I shall lie on this sofa .
Now , Charles , just sit here , and throw your arm carelessly over the back of the sofa .
No , do n't stop smoking .
Clara , dear , put your feet upon the coal-scuttle , and do try to look a little dissipated .
I wish we could crown ourselves with flowers .
There are some lettuces on the sideboard .
Oh dear , here he is !
I hear his key . ''
She began to sing in her high , fresh voice a little snatch from a French song , with a swinging tra la-la chorus .
`` Oh , indeed ! ''
The Doctor laughed sarcastically .
`` You think it right , then , to entertain young bachelors late at night , to , smoke and drink with them , to -- -- Oh , that I should ever have lived to blush for my own daughters !
I thank God that your dear mother never saw the day . ''
So by the cleverness of two girls a dark cloud was thinned away and turned into sunshine .
Over one of them , alas , another cloud was gathering , which could not be so easily dispersed .
Of these three households which fate had thrown together , two had already been united by ties of love .
It was destined , however , that a bond of another sort should connect the Westmacotts with the Hay Denvers .
`` Well , I must pay some one , and why not him ? ''
`` Then it 's all off , '' she cried .
`` You need not carry out that investment . ''
`` I tell you what , Admiral , '' she exclaimed suddenly , `` if I were you I should get your boy out of this partnership . ''
`` Jeremiah Pearson , ma'am ?
What can you know of him ?
He bears a good name . ''
`` Now that I think of it , there is a likeness . ''
`` He is a man of iron , Admiral -- a man without a heart .
I should shock you if I were to tell you what I have endured from my brother .
My father's wealth was divided equally between us .
His own share he ran through in five years , and he has tried since then by every trick of a cunning , low-minded man , by base cajolery , by legal quibbles , by brutal intimidation , to juggle me out of my share as well .
There is no villainy of which the man is not capable .
Oh , I know my brother Jeremiah .
I know him and I am prepared for him . ''
`` Why , dad , '' he cried , `` I have just come from town , and the first thing I saw was your back as you marched away .
But you are such a quick walker that I had to run to catch you . ''
The Admiral 's smile of pleasure had broken his stern face into a thousand wrinkles .
`` You are early to-day , '' said he .
`` Oh no , only an inconvenience . ''
`` He is a well-known man in the City , dad , '' said he .
`` Great Heavens ! ''
groaned the Admiral , `` he has absconded . ''
`` And yet it is bitter to bear .
I could have lost all , the house , money , rank -- I could have borne it .
But at my age -- my honor -- the honor of an admiral of the fleet . ''
The old man shook his head , but Harold had already called together his clear practical sense , which for an instant in the presence of this frightful blow had deserted him .
`` No creditor so remorseless as I , Harold .
Never , never shall you get from that bond . ''
`` But I am ruined .
My whole life is blasted . ''
Clara 's face fell as she heard the amount .
`` What do you purpose doing ? ''
`` What can they do ?
They will serve writs for their money , and the firm will be declared bankrupt . ''
`` Let us have a few days . ''
`` It can be done best between men .
Your capital , Clara , is some five thousand pounds , but it is out on a mortgage , and you could not call it in . ''
`` I am sure that he would not . ''
`` Then what are you to do ?
What horrid things money matters are to arrange ! ''
`` Oh , do , do , papa !
And you will do it soon ? ''
When Doctor Walker had departed , the Admiral packed all his possessions back into his sea chest with the exception of one little brass-bound desk .
This he unlocked , and took from it a dozen or so blue sheets of paper all mottled over with stamps and seals , with very large V. R.'s printed upon the heads of them .
He tied these carefully into a small bundle , and placing them in the inner pocket of his coat , he seized his stick and hat .
`` They may give him little time , lass .
But I 'll have a care that I don't go so far that I ca n't put back again .
Now , mother , there 's no use holding me .
It 's got to be done , and there 's no sense in shirking it . ''
He detached her fingers from his sleeve , pushed her gently back into an arm-chair , and hurried from the house .
And , indeed , as a man read that column , it seemed strange to him that there should still remain any one in this world of ours who should be in straits for want of money .
Here were whole lines of gentlemen who were burdened with a surplus in their incomes , and who were loudly calling to the poor and needy to come and take it off their hands .
Here was the guileless person who was not a professional moneylender , but who would be glad to correspond , etc .
Here too was the accommodating individual who advanced sums from ten to ten thousand pounds without expense , security , or delay .
`` The money actually paid over within a few hours , '' ran this fascinating advertisement , conjuring up a vision of swift messengers rushing with bags of gold to the aid of the poor struggler .
A third gentleman did all business by personal application , advanced money on anything or nothing ; the lightest and airiest promise was enough to content him according to his circular , and finally he never asked for more than five per cent .
This struck the Admiral as far the most promising , and his wrinkles relaxed , and his frown softened away as he gazed at it .
He folded up the paper rose from the seat , and found himself face to face with Charles Westmacott .
`` Well , I know something about it .
You see I 've never lived very far from it , and I do a good deal of my aunt 's business . ''
`` It is not pleasant to have to go hat in hand borrowing money , but there are times , as you may find before you are my age , Westmacott , when a man must stow away his pride .
But here 's their number , and their plate is on the corner of the door . ''
A narrow entrance was flanked on either side by a row of brasses , ranging upwards from the shipbrokers and the solicitors who occupied the ground floors , through a long succession of West Indian agents , architects , surveyors , and brokers , to the firm of which they were in quest .
A winding stone stair , well carpeted and railed at first but growing shabbier with every landing , brought them past innumerable doors until , at last , just under the ground-glass roofing , the names of Smith and Hanbury were to be seen painted in large white letters across a panel , with a laconic invitation to push beneath it .
Following out the suggestion , the Admiral and his companion found themselves in a dingy apartment , ill lit from a couple of glazed windows .
An ink-stained table , littered with pens , papers , and almanacs , an American cloth sofa , three chairs of varying patterns , and a much-worn carpet , constituted all the furniture , save only a very large and obtrusive porcelain spittoon , and a gaudily framed and very somber picture which hung above the fireplace .
Sitting in front of this picture , and staring gloomily at it , as being the only thing which he could stare at , was a small sallow-faced boy with a large head , who in the intervals of his art studies munched sedately at an apple .
`` Then I suppose that we had better call again , '' said the Admiral .
`` He 'll fetch him , '' said Charles .
`` Let us make ourselves at home .
This sofa does not feel over and above safe .
It was not meant for fifteen-stone men .
But this does n't look quite the sort of place where one would expect to pick up money . ''
`` Just what I was thinking , '' said the Admiral , looking ruefully about him .
`` Ah , well !
I have heard that the best furnished offices generally belong to the poorest firms .
Let us hope it 's the opposite here .
They can't spend much on the management anyhow .
That pumpkin-headed boy was the staff , I suppose .
Ha , by Jove , that 's his voice , and he 's got our man , I think ! ''
`` No , for this gentleman . ''
`` I thought of five thousand pounds , '' said the Admiral .
That would be sixty per cent a year . ''
`` I do n't ask gentlemen to come to me .
They come of their own free will .
Those are my terms , and they can take it or leave it . ''
Mr. Metaxa turned over a long column of figures .
`` Here is an actuary's table , '' said he .
`` At your time of life the average expectancy of life is only a few years even in a well-preserved man . ''
`` This is beside the question , '' said the moneylender with a deprecatory shrug .
`` The point is that if you died to-morrow where would be the security then ? ''
`` Your premiums for such a sum , if any office would have you , which I very much doubt , would come to close on five hundred a year .
That would hardly suit your book . ''
`` Well , sir , what do you intend to propose ? ''
This is a great pity .
Have you had rheumatic fever ? ''
`` And a mile ? ''
`` Well , well , it 's rather a delicate question to answer , '' said Dr. Proudie , with a show of embarrassment .
`` Would you advance the money instantly ? ''
`` Yes , Admiral .
We shall do you a beautiful houseful at that sum .
It is the custom of my clients to take half in furniture . ''
`` You 're quite right , Westmacott , '' said he .
`` We 'll have a little walk before we settle it . ''
`` Let it be off , then .
`` A shark and a pilot fish , '' said the Admiral .
`` Oh , a mile at least .
We can have a cab . ''
For the second time was the Admiral punched and tapped and listened to .
This time , however , there could be no question of the qualifications of the doctor , a well-known Fellow of the College of Surgeons , and his report was as favorable as the other 's had been adverse .
`` He has the heart and chest of a man of forty , '' said he .
`` I can recommend his life as one of the best of his age that I have ever examined . ''
`` Well , Westmacott , I am sure I am very much obliged to you , '' said the Admiral .
`` You have stood by me when I was the better for a little help , for I 'm clean out of my soundings among these city sharks .
But I've something to do now which is more in my own line , and I need not trouble you any more . ''
`` You infernal villain ! ''
cried the Admiral , raising his stick .
`` You brute and blackguard ! ''
`` What 'll you give me if I tell yer where it is ? ''
said a sharp-faced boy among the crowd .
`` Will you gim me a quid ? ''
The Admiral took a sovereign from his pocket .
`` Here it is . ''
`` No , sir , '' answered an elderly man from a high seat in the corner .
`` He has not come into town to-day .
I can manage any business you may wish seen to . ''
`` Yes , sir , one-and-fifty years . ''
Heaven bless her ! ''
`` Then it was you who got one of our boats , the Comus , off the rocks in the Bay of Fundy ?
The directors voted you three hundred guineas as salvage , and you refused them . ''
`` Well , it reflects credit upon you that you should think so .
If Mr. Henry were here I am sure that he would arrange this matter for you at once .
As it is , I shall lay it before the directors to-day , and I am sure that they will be proud to have you in our employment , and , I hope , in some more suitable position than that which you suggest . ''
The Admiral claped his hands .
`` I knew we should weather it after all !
Hip , hip , hip , hurrah ! ''
`` These men shall have their money , '' said the Admiral .
`` No , boy , I am glad you think so .
It is something , however , to have proved one 's friend , for a real good friend he is .
It was he who brought it in , though Clara sent him .
But this other money will be enough to cover everything , and it is all my own . ''
`` Is it possible that you do not know how this money has been obtained ? ''
`` It is the truth .
Charles Westmacott has told Ida .
He was with him in the City when he took his poor pension about from dealer to dealer trying to sell it .
He succeeded at last , and hence the money . ''
`` Good heaven ! ''
gasped Bertha , `` it is a burglar . ''
`` She has had a terrible blow , '' said he .
`` It must have been with some blunt weapon .
Here is the place behind the ear .
But she is a woman of extraordinary physical powers .
Her pulse is full and slow .
There is no stertor .
It is my belief that she is merely stunned , and that she is in no danger at all . ''
`` The idea of you at your age talking of going to sea , and leaving that dear , patient little wife of yours at home , who has seen nothing of you all her life !
It 's all very well for you .
You have the life , and the change , and the excitement , but you do n't think of her eating her heart out in a dreary London lodging .
You men are all the same . ''
`` Well , ma'am , since you know so much , you probably know also that I have sold my pension .
How am I to live if I do not turn my hand to work ? ''
`` I will tell you about him -- or a little about him , for he has done much which I would not care to talk of , nor you to listen to .
He was always a villain , smooth-spoken and plausible , but a dangerous , subtle villain all the same .
If I have some hard thoughts about mankind I can trace them back to the childhood which I spent with my brother .
He is my only living relative , for my other brother , Charles 's father , was killed in the Indian mutiny .
`` I fancy not , '' Mrs. Westmacott answered calmly .
`` As my brother is a particularly tall , thin man , and as the police are looking for a short , fat one , I do not think that it is very probable that they will catch him .
It is best , I think , that these little family matters should be adjusted in private . ''
`` I fear that we have . ''
`` Good , Watson , good !
But not , if I may say so , quite good enough !
Even if I accepted the compliment for myself I could hardly name any volume which would be less likely to lie at the elbow of one of Moriarty's associates .
Besides , the editions of Holy Writ are so numerous that he could hardly suppose that two copies would have the same pagination .
This is clearly a book which is standardized .
He knows for certain that his page 534 will exactly agree with my page 534 . ''
Twice already in his career had Holmes helped him to attain success , his own sole reward being the intellectual joy of the problem .
For this reason the affection and respect of the Scotchman for his amateur colleague were profound , and he showed them by the frankness with which he consulted Holmes in every difficulty .
Mediocrity knows nothing higher than itself ; but talent instantly recognizes genius , and MacDonald had talent enough for his profession to enable him to perceive that there was no humiliation in seeking the assistance of one who already stood alone in Europe , both in his gifts and in his experience .
Holmes was not prone to friendship , but he was tolerant of the big Scotchman , and smiled at the sight of him .
`` Hang it all , Mr .
`` The papers will be full of the Birlstone mystery in a day or two ; but where 's the mystery if there is a man in London who prophesied the crime before ever it occurred ?
We have only to lay our hands on that man , and the rest will follow . ''
MacDonald turned over the letter which Holmes had handed him .
`` Posted in Camberwell -- that does n't help us much .
Name , you say , is assumed .
Not much to go on , certainly .
Did n't you say that you have sent him money ? ''
The inspector looked surprised and a little shocked .
`` Why not ? ''
`` I 'm glad you 've got so far as to recognize the talent . ''
MacDonald smiled feebly , and looked appealingly to me .
`` Your thoughts move a bit too quick for me , Mr. Holmes .
You leave out a link or two , and I ca n't get over the gap .
What in the whole wide world can be the connection between this dead painting man and the affair at Birlstone ? ''
`` I may remind you , '' Holmes continued , `` that the professor 's salary can be ascertained in several trustworthy books of reference .
It is seven hundred a year . ''
`` Then how could he buy -- ''
`` Ah , that 's another matter .
I have been three times in his rooms , twice waiting for him under different pretexts and leaving before he came .
Once -- well , I can hardly tell about the once to an official detective .
It was on the last occasion that I took the liberty of running over his papers -- with the most unexpected results . ''
`` I 'd like to hear . ''
`` If so , it would , of course , be against the first hypothesis and in favour of the second .
Moriarty may have been engaged to engineer it on a promise of part spoils , or he may have been paid so much down to manage it .
But whichever it may be , or if it is some third combination , it is down at Birlstone that we must seek the solution .
I know our man too well to suppose that he has left anything up here which may lead us to him . ''
About half a mile from the town , standing in an old park famous for its huge beech trees , is the ancient Manor House of Birlstone .
Part of this venerable building dates back to the time of the first crusade , when Hugo de Capus built a fortalice in the centre of the estate , which had been granted to him by the Red King .
This was destroyed by fire in 1543 , and some of its smoke-blackened corner stones were used when , in Jacobean times , a brick country house rose upon the ruins of the feudal castle .
The only approach to the house was over a drawbridge , the chains and windlass of which had long been rusted and broken .
The latest tenants of the Manor House had , however , with characteristic energy , set this right , and the drawbridge was not only capable of being raised , but actually was raised every evening and lowered every morning .
By thus renewing the custom of the old feudal days the Manor House was converted into an island during the night -- a fact which had a very direct bearing upon the mystery which was soon to engage the attention of all England .
`` When was that ? ''
The sergeant had drawn out his notebook .
`` It was just half-past eleven .
I had not begun to undress , and I was sitting by the fire in my bedroom when I heard the report .
It was not very loud -- it seemed to be muffled .
I rushed down -- I do n't suppose it was thirty seconds before I was in the room . ''
`` Then how could any murderer have got away ?
It is out of the question !
Mr. Douglas must have shot himself . ''
`` At what o'clock was it raised ? ''
`` That 's how I read it , '' said Barker .
`` But , I say , are n't we wasting precious time ?
Could n't we start out and scout the country before the fellow gets away ? ''
`` Yes , indeed .
Master always wore his plain gold wedding ring on the little finger of his left hand .
That ring with the rough nugget on it was above it , and the twisted snake ring on the third finger .
There's the nugget and there 's the snake , but the wedding ring is gone . ''
At three in the morning the chief Sussex detective , obeying the urgent call from Sergeant Wilson of Birlstone , arrived from headquarters in a light dog-cart behind a breathless trotter .
By the five-forty train in the morning he had sent his message to Scotland Yard , and he was at the Birlstone station at twelve o'clock to welcome us .
White Mason was a quiet , comfortable-looking person in a loose tweed suit , with a clean-shaved , ruddy face , a stoutish body , and powerful bandy legs adorned with gaiters , looking like a small farmer , a retired gamekeeper , or anything upon earth except a very favourable specimen of the provincial criminal officer .
`` No doubt it is an American shotgun , '' White Mason continued .
`` I seem to have read that a sawed-off shotgun is a weapon used in some parts of America .
Apart from the name upon the barrel , the idea had occurred to me .
There is some evidence then , that this man who entered the house and killed its master was an American . ''
`` Nothing there that could not have been arranged .
Mr. Douglas was an American , or had lived long in America .
So had Mr. Barker .
You don't need to import an American from outside in order to account for American doings . ''
`` Ten years with Sir Charles Chandos -- as solid as a rock .
He has been with Douglas ever since he took the Manor House five years ago .
He has never seen a gun of this sort in the house . ''
`` Well , you put the case strongly , '' my friend replied thoughtfully .
`` It certainly needs a good deal of justification .
May I ask , Mr. White Mason , whether you examined the farther side of the moat at once to see if there were any signs of the man having climbed out from the water ? ''
Three centuries had flowed past the old Manor House , centuries of births and of homecomings , of country dances and of the meetings of fox hunters .
Strange that now in its old age this dark business should have cast its shadow upon the venerable walls !
And yet those strange , peaked roofs and quaint , overhung gables were a fitting covering to grim and terrible intrigue .
As I looked at the deep-set windows and the long sweep of the dull-coloured , water-lapped front , I felt that no more fitting scene could be set for such a tragedy .
Is the water always turbid ? ''
`` How deep is it ? ''
`` No , a child could not be drowned in it . ''
We walked across the drawbridge , and were admitted by a quaint , gnarled , dried-up person , who was the butler , Ames .
The poor old fellow was white and quivering from the shock .
The village sergeant , a tall , formal , melancholy man , still held his vigil in the room of Fate .
The doctor had departed .
`` No , sir . ''
`` I should like a few more facts before I get so far as a theory , Mr. Mac , '' said he , kneeling down beside the body .
these injuries are really appalling .
Can we have the butler in for a moment ?
... Ames , I understand that you have often seen this very unusual mark -- a branded triangle inside a circle -- upon Mr. Douglas 's forearm ? ''
`` It must have caused great pain when it was inflicted .
It is undoubtedly a burn .
Now , I observe , Ames , that there is a small piece of plaster at the angle of Mr. Douglas 's jaw .
Did you observe that in life ? ''
`` Did you ever know him to cut himself in shaving before ? ''
`` No , Mr. Holmes , it 's in better hands than mine . ''
`` And why the missing ring ? ''
`` I do n't know , Mr. Holmes .
There may have been only one .
I have not noticed them for months . ''
`` Sorry to interrupt your consultation , '' said he , `` but you should hear the latest news . ''
`` It would be a grand help to the police , '' said the inspector , `` if these things were numbered and registered .
But we must be thankful for what we 've got .
If we ca n't find where he went to , at least we are likely to get where he came from .
But what in the name of all that is wonderful made the fellow leave it behind ?
And how in the world has he got away without it ?
We do n't seem to get a gleam of light in the case , Mr .
Chapter 5 -- The People of the Drama
As they reached the bottom of the stairs he had seen Mrs. Douglas coming down it .
No , she was not hurrying ; it did not seem to him that she was particularly agitated .
Just as she reached the bottom of the stair Mr. Barker had rushed out of the study .
He had stopped Mrs. Douglas and begged her to go back .
The account of Mrs. Allen , the housekeeper , was , so far as it went , a corroboration of that of her fellow servant .
The housekeeper 's room was rather nearer to the front of the house than the pantry in which Ames had been working .
She was preparing to go to bed when the loud ringing of the bell had attracted her attention .
She was a little hard of hearing .
Perhaps that was why she had not heard the shot ; but in any case the study was a long way off .
She remembered hearing some sound which she imagined to be the slamming of a door .
That was a good deal earlier -- half an hour at least before the ringing of the bell .
When Mr. Ames ran to the front she went with him .
She saw Mr. Barker , very pale and excited , come out of the study .
He intercepted Mrs. Douglas , who was coming down the stairs .
He entreated her to go back , and she answered him , but what she said could not be heard .
Cecil Barker succeeded Mrs. Allen as a witness .
As to the occurrences of the night before , he had very little to add to what he had already told the police .
Personally , he was convinced that the murderer had escaped by the window .
The bloodstain was conclusive , in his opinion , on that point .
Besides , as the bridge was up , there was no other possible way of escaping .
He could not explain what had become of the assassin or why he had not taken his bicycle , if it were indeed his .
He could not possibly have been drowned in the moat , which was at no place more than three feet deep .
`` He was a bachelor , you say ? ''
`` Was he a politician ?
Had this secret society to do with politics ? ''
`` Well , they were a mighty hard-looking crowd .
They came up to the claim and wanted to know where he was .
I told them that he was gone to Europe and that I did not know where to find him .
They meant him no good -- it was easy to see that . ''
`` About a month before .
I was his best man . ''
Barker looked sternly at the detective .
`` I have seen a good deal of HIM since , '' he answered .
`` If I have seen her , it is because you can not visit a man without knowing his wife .
If you imagine there is any connection -- ''
`` Well , I refuse to answer . ''
`` There was one small point , '' remarked Sherlock Holmes .
`` When you entered the room there was only a candle lighted on the table , was there not ? ''
Inspector MacDonald had sent up a note to the effect that he would wait upon Mrs. Douglas in her room ; but she had replied that she would meet us in the dining room .
She entered now , a tall and beautiful woman of thirty , reserved and self-possessed to a remarkable degree , very different from the tragic and distracted figure I had pictured .
It is true that her face was pale and drawn , like that of one who has endured a great shock ; but her manner was composed , and the finely moulded hand which she rested upon the edge of the table was as steady as my own .
Her sad , appealing eyes travelled from one to the other of us with a curiously inquisitive expression .
That questioning gaze transformed itself suddenly into abrupt speech .
`` Perhaps you can tell us something which may throw some light upon the matter . ''
`` I fear not ; but all I know is at your service . ''
`` I put on my dressing gown and then came down . ''
`` Can you give us any idea how long your husband had been downstairs before you heard the shot ? ''
`` Have you heard him speak of anything which occurred in America and might bring some danger upon him ? ''
`` How did you know it , then ? ''
`` The Valley of Fear , '' the lady answered .
`` That was an expression he has used when I questioned him .
'I have been in the Valley of Fear .
I am not out of it yet . '
-- 'Are we never to get out of the Valley of Fear ? '
I have asked him when I have seen him more serious than usual .
'Sometimes I think that we never shall , ' he has answered . ''
`` You have heard , no doubt , that his wedding ring has been taken .
Does that suggest anything to you ?
Suppose that some enemy of his old life had tracked him down and committed this crime , what possible reason could he have for taking his wedding ring ? ''
My friend had sat with his head upon his hands , sunk in the deepest thought .
Now he rose and rang the bell .
`` Ames , '' he said , when the butler entered , `` where is Mr. Cecil Barker now ? ''
`` I 'll see , sir . ''
Stooping with one of his quick feline pounces , he placed the slipper upon the blood mark on the sill .
He smiled in silence at his colleagues .
`` Man , '' he cried , `` there 's not a doubt of it !
Barker has just marked the window himself .
It 's a good deal broader than any bootmark .
I mind that you said it was a splay-foot , and here 's the explanation .
But what 's the game , Mr. Holmes -- what 's the game ? ''
I bowed with a coldness which showed , I dare say , very plainly the impression which had been produced upon my mind .
`` I fear that you think me callous and hard-hearted , '' said she .
I shrugged my shoulders .
`` It is no business of mine , '' said I .
`` A lie , Watson -- a great , big , thumping , obtrusive , uncompromising lie -- that 's what meets us on the threshold !
There is our starting point .
The whole story told by Barker is a lie .
But Barker 's story is corroborated by Mrs. Douglas .
Therefore she is lying also .
They are both lying , and in a conspiracy .
So now we have the clear problem .
Why are they lying , and what is the truth which they are trying so hard to conceal ?
Let us try , Watson , you and I , if we can get behind the lie and reconstruct the truth .
`` But the gunshot was apparently the cause of death .
Therefore the shot must have been fired some time earlier than we are told .
But there could be no mistake about such a matter as that .
We are in the presence , therefore , of a deliberate conspiracy upon the part of the two people who heard the gunshot -- of the man Barker and of the woman Douglas .
When on the top of this I am able to show that the blood mark on the windowsill was deliberately placed there by Barker , in order to give a false clue to the police , you will admit that the case grows dark against him .
`` I am convinced myself , '' said I , `` that there is an understanding between those two people .
She must be a heartless creature to sit laughing at some jest within a few hours of her husband 's murder . ''
`` We will suppose that this couple are united by the bonds of a guilty love , and that they have determined to get rid of the man who stands between them .
It is a large supposition ; for discreet inquiry among servants and others has failed to corroborate it in any way .
On the contrary , there is a good deal of evidence that the Douglases were very attached to each other . ''
`` Before this avenger got away , Barker and the wife had reached the room .
The assassin convinced them that any attempt to arrest him would lead to the publication of some hideous scandal .
They were converted to this idea , and preferred to let him go .
For this purpose they probably lowered the bridge , which can be done quite noiselessly , and then raised it again .
He made his escape , and for some reason thought that he could do so more safely on foot than on the bicycle .
He therefore left his machine where it would not be discovered until he had got safely away .
So far we are within the bounds of possibility , are we not ? ''
`` Well , Mr. Mac , it is very good and very clear so far as it goes .
That is your end of the story .
My end is that the crime was committed half an hour earlier than reported ; that Mrs. Douglas and Barker are both in a conspiracy to conceal something ; that they aided the murderer's escape -- or at least that they reached the room before he escaped -- and that they fabricated evidence of his escape through the window , whereas in all probability they had themselves let him go by lowering the bridge .
That 's my reading of the first half . ''
The two detectives shook their heads .
`` Well , Mr. Holmes , if this is true , we only tumble out of one mystery into another , '' said the London inspector .
`` Still on the track of the elusive bicyclist ? ''
`` What is the latest news of the ruffian ? ''
`` Ah , I can only give you a very general answer to that for the moment .
By the way , I have been reading a short but clear and interesting account of the old building , purchasable at the modest sum of one penny from the local tobacconist . ''
`` Well , we 're bound to take you on your own terms , '' said the inspector ; `` but when it comes to telling us to abandon the case -- why in the name of goodness should we abandon the case ? ''
`` That sounds more like sanity . ''
`` It 's impossible , '' said the inspector .
`` I 've made inquiry . ''
`` How long is this to last ? ''
asked the inspector finally .
`` And what is it we are watching for ? ''
We were all upon our feet , staggering after him with our stiffened limbs , while he ran swiftly across the bridge and rang violently at the bell .
There was the rasping of bolts from the other side , and the amazed Ames stood in the entrance .
Holmes brushed him aside without a word and , followed by all of us , rushed into the room which had been occupied by the man whom we had been watching .
`` This is what we are after , Mr. Barker -- this bundle , weighted with a dumb-bell , which you have just raised from the bottom of the moat . ''
`` Perhaps I should have said 'replaced it there , ' '' said Holmes .
`` You will remember , Inspector MacDonald , that I was somewhat struck by the absence of a dumb-bell .
I drew your attention to it ; but with the pressure of other events you had hardly the time to give it the consideration which would have enabled you to draw deductions from it .
When water is near and a weight is missing it is not a very far-fetched supposition that something has been sunk in the water .
The idea was at least worth testing ; so with the help of Ames , who admitted me to the room , and the crook of Dr. Watson 's umbrella , I was able last night to fish up and inspect this bundle .
Mrs. Douglas gave a cry of astonishment at Holmes 's words .
The detectives and I must have echoed it , when we were aware of a man who seemed to have emerged from the wall , who advanced now from the gloom of the corner in which he had appeared .
Mrs. Douglas turned , and in an instant her arms were round him .
Barker had seized his outstretched hand .
`` You 'll have it , sir , '' said Douglas .
`` May I smoke as I talk ?
Well , thank you , Mr. Holmes .
You 're a smoker yourself , if I remember right , and you 'll guess what it is to be sitting for two days with tobacco in your pocket and afraid that the smell will give you away . ''
He leaned against the mantelpiece and sucked at the cigar which Holmes had handed him .
`` I 've heard of you , Mr. Holmes .
I never guessed that I should meet you .
But before you are through with that , '' he nodded at my papers , `` you will say I 've brought you something fresh . ''
`` I 'm not going to begin at the beginning .
That 's all there , '' he indicated my bundle of papers , `` and a mighty queer yarn you 'll find it .
It all comes down to this : That there are some men that have good cause to hate me and would give their last dollar to know that they had got me .
So long as I am alive and they are alive , there is no safety in this world for me .
They hunted me from Chicago to California , then they chased me out of America ; but when I married and settled down in this quiet spot I thought my last years were going to be peaceable .
`` I was hanging on the side of the table when Barker came hurrying down .
I heard my wife coming , and I ran to the door and stopped her .
It was no sight for a woman .
I promised I 'd come to her soon .
I said a word or two to Barker -- he took it all in at a glance -- and we waited for the rest to come along .
But there was no sign of them .
Then we understood that they could hear nothing , and that all that had happened was known only to ourselves .
The man whom we had known as Douglas turned up his own coat and cuff to show a brown triangle within a circle exactly like that which we had seen upon the dead man .
`` My rings were put on his finger ; but when it came to the wedding ring , '' he held out his muscular hand , `` you can see for yourselves that I had struck the limit .
I have not moved it since the day I was married , and it would have taken a file to get it off .
I do n't know , anyhow , that I should have cared to part with it ; but if I had wanted to I could n't .
So we just had to leave that detail to take care of itself .
On the other hand , I brought a bit of plaster down and put it where I am wearing one myself at this instant .
You slipped up there , Mr. Holmes , clever as you are ; for if you had chanced to take off that plaster you would have found no cut underneath it .
There was a silence which was broken by Sherlock Holmes .
`` I know nothing of this . ''
Holmes 's face was very white and grave .
`` The story is not over yet , I fear , '' said he .
`` You may find worse dangers than the English law , or even than your enemies from America .
I see trouble before you , Mr. Douglas .
You 'll take my advice and still be on your guard . ''
It was not a cheering prospect .
Through the growing gloom there pulsed the red glow of the furnaces on the sides of the hills .
Great heaps of slag and dumps of cinders loomed up on each side , with the high shafts of the collieries towering above them .
Huddled groups of mean , wooden houses , the windows of which were beginning to outline themselves in light , were scattered here and there along the line , and the frequent halting places were crowded with their swarthy inhabitants .
`` Hullo , mate ! ''
`` You seem heeled and ready . ''
`` Have you heard nothing of doings hereabouts ? ''
`` Why , I thought the country was full of it .
You 'll hear quick enough .
What made you come here ? ''
A hand-grip passed between the two .
McMurdo nodded towards the policemen and smiled .
`` I guess those chaps would be glad to know , '' he said .
`` And the rest . ''
`` That 's the third halt down the line .
Where are you staying ? ''
As they approached the centre of the town the scene was brightened by a row of well-lit stores , and even more by a cluster of saloons and gaming houses , in which the miners spent their hard-earned but generous wages .
`` Well , I thought his name was known clear across the country .
It 's been in the papers often enough . ''
`` Good Lord , mister !
you are queer , if I must say it without offense .
There 's only one set of affairs that you 'll hear of in these parts , and that 's the affairs of the Scowrers . ''
`` Well , I know nothing about them .
It 's only what I have read . ''
`` I thought it was father , '' said she with a pleasing little touch of a German accent .
`` Did you come to see him ?
He is down town .
I expect him back every minute . ''
McMurdo was a man who made his mark quickly .
Wherever he was the folk around soon knew it .
Within a week he had become infinitely the most important person at Shafter 's .
There were ten or a dozen boarders there ; but they were honest foremen or commonplace clerks from the stores , of a very different calibre from the young Irishman .
Of an evening when they gathered together his joke was always the readiest , his conversation the brightest , and his song the best .
He was a born boon companion , with a magnetism which drew good humour from all around him .
And yet he showed again and again , as he had shown in the railway carriage , a capacity for sudden , fierce anger , which compelled the respect and even the fear of those who met him .
For the law , too , and all who were connected with it , he exhibited a bitter contempt which delighted some and alarmed others of his fellow boarders .
He was a dangerous suitor , with his glib Irish tongue , and his pretty , coaxing ways .
There was about him also that glamour of experience and of mystery which attracts a woman 's interest , and finally her love .
He could talk of the sweet valleys of County Monaghan from which he came , of the lovely , distant island , the low hills and green meadows of which seemed the more beautiful when imagination viewed them from this place of grime and snow .
`` Vell , you can lay that she told you truth .
But did she tell you who it vas ? ''
`` He is a boss of Scowrers . ''
`` Maybe in some places .
`` I can but tell you vat the whole vorld knows , mister .
The bosses of the one are the bosses of the other .
If you offend the one , it is the other vat vill strike you .
We have proved it too often . ''
`` Suppose I had been first , Ettie , would I have had a chance ? ''
`` I 'd never hold my head up again if I felt that I had been driven out .
Besides , what is there to be afraid of ?
Are we not free folks in a free country ?
If you love me , and I you , who will dare to come between ? ''
Again there was the struggle upon McMurdo 's face , and again it set like granite .
`` No harm shall come to you , Ettie -- nor to your father either .
As to wicked men , I expect you may find that I am as bad as the worst of them before we 're through . ''
`` I 'll get even with you without needing to dirty my hands , '' said his enemy .
`` You 'll wish you had never set foot in this house before I am through with you ! ''
`` Well , you will know , I 'll promise you that .
You wo n't be much older , either .
Perhaps Miss Ettie can tell you something about it .
As to you , Ettie , you 'll come back to me on your knees -- d 'ye hear , girl ?
-- on your knees -- and then I 'll tell you what your punishment may be .
You've sowed -- and by the Lord , I 'll see that you reap ! ''
He glanced at them both in fury .
Then he turned upon his heel , and an instant later the outer door had banged behind him .
The bar of McGinty 's saloon was crowded as usual ; for it was the favourite loafing place of all the rougher elements of the town .
The man was popular ; for he had a rough , jovial disposition which formed a mask , covering a great deal which lay behind it .
But apart from this popularity , the fear in which he was held throughout the township , and indeed down the whole thirty miles of the valley and past the mountains on each side of it , was enough in itself to fill his bar ; for none could afford to neglect his good will .
McMurdo pushed open the swinging door of the saloon and made his way amid the crowd of men within , through an atmosphere blurred with tobacco smoke and heavy with the smell of spirits .
The place was brilliantly lighted , and the huge , heavily gilt mirrors upon every wall reflected and multiplied the garish illumination .
There were several bartenders in their shirt sleeves , hard at work mixing drinks for the loungers who fringed the broad , brass-trimmed counter .
Having had a good look at his man , McMurdo elbowed his way forward with his usual careless audacity , and pushed himself through the little group of courtiers who were fawning upon the powerful boss , laughing uproariously at the smallest of his jokes .
The young stranger 's bold gray eyes looked back fearlessly through their glasses at the deadly black ones which turned sharply upon him .
`` I 'm new here , Mr .
`` I 've heard that it takes a man to be a brother . ''
`` True for you , Mr. McMurdo .
Why did you leave Chicago ? ''
`` Your work ? ''
he asked , as he handed back the paper .
`` Why the coal country ? ''
`` 'Cause I 'd read in the papers that they were n't too particular in those parts . ''
`` You seem to have a good nerve .
You did n't squirm when I shoved this gun at you . ''
`` It was not me that was in danger . ''
`` By Gar ! ''
McGinty flushed an angry red and then burst into a roar of laughter .
`` Say , we 've had no such holy terror come to hand this many a year .
I reckon the lodge will learn to be proud of you ... .
Well , what the hell do you want ?
And ca n't I speak alone with a gentleman for five minutes but you must butt in on us ? ''
The message was unnecessary ; for the set , cruel face of the man himself was looking over the servant 's shoulder .
He pushed the bartender out and closed the door on him .
`` Yes , it is , Ted Baldwin , '' said McGinty , with a wicked stare .
`` Is it you that would dispute it ? ''
`` But they will forever brighten . ''
Shafter had relented to the extent of letting McMurdo come to his meals there when he liked ; so that his intercourse with Ettie was by no means broken .
On the contrary , it drew closer and more intimate as the weeks went by .
McMurdo shrank away from him .
`` I was never a friend to you nor any other cursed copper in my life , '' said he .
McMurdo had been warned that some ordeal lay before him ; but no one would tell him in what it consisted .
He was led now into an outer room by two solemn brothers .
Through the plank partition he could hear the murmur of many voices from the assembly within .
Once or twice he caught the sound of his own name , and he knew that they were discussing his candidacy .
Then there entered an inner guard with a green and gold sash across his chest .
`` John McMurdo , '' said the voice , `` are you already a member of the Ancient Order of Freemen ? ''
`` Yes , for strangers to travel , '' he answered .
`` Yes , a storm is approaching . ''
There was a general murmur of assent .
`` One last word , Brother McMurdo , '' said McGinty .
`` You have already sworn the oath of secrecy and fidelity , and you are aware that the punishment for any breach of it is instant and inevitable death ? ''
`` Then in the name of Lodge 341 , Vermissa , I welcome you to its privileges and debates .
You will put the liquor on the table , Brother Scanlan , and we will drink to our worthy brother . ''
`` There is a job to be done on Andrew Rae of Rae & Sturmash , coal owners near this place .
You will remember that your lodge owes us a return , having had the service of two brethren in the matter of the patrolman last fall .
You will send two good men , they will be taken charge of by Treasurer Higgins of this lodge , whose address you know .
He will show them when to act and where .
Several young fellows held up their hands .
The Bodymaster looked at them with an approving smile .
`` And time , too ! ''
`` Folk are gettin ' out of hand in these parts .
It was only last week that three of our men were turned off by Foreman Blaker .
It 's been owing him a long time , and he 'll get it full and proper . ''
`` The business end of a buckshot cartridge ! ''
cried the man with a loud laugh .
`` What think you of our ways , Brother ? ''
`` 'T is our new brother , sir , who finds our ways to his taste . ''
`` Your time will come , Brother , '' said the chairman .
`` We have marked you down as a willing man , and we believe that you will do good work in these parts .
There is a small matter to-night in which you may take a hand if it so please you . ''
`` It is my advice , '' the speaker continued , `` that we go easier upon the small men .
On the day that they have all been driven out the power of this society will have been broken . ''
`` I have but to raise my finger , '' cried McGinty , `` and I could put two hundred men into this town that would clear it out from end to end . ''
Then suddenly raising his voice and bending his huge black brows into a terrible frown , `` See here , Brother Morris , I have my eye on you , and have had for some time !
You 've no heart yourself , and you try to take the heart out of others .
It will be an ill day for you , Brother Morris , when your own name comes on our agenda paper , and I 'm thinking that it's just there that I ought to place it . ''
Morris had turned deadly pale , and his knees seemed to give way under him as he fell back into his chair .
He raised his glass in his trembling hand and drank before he could answer .
`` I apologize , Eminent Bodymaster , to you and to every brother in this lodge if I have said more than I should .
I am a faithful member -- you all know that -- and it is my fear lest evil come to the lodge which makes me speak in anxious words .
But I have greater trust in your judgment than in my own , Eminent Bodymaster , and I promise you that I will not offend again . ''
`` Here , you , '' said Baldwin to McMurdo , `` you can stand below at the door and see that the road is kept open for us .
Arthur Willaby can stay with you .
You others come with me .
Have no fears , boys ; for we have a dozen witnesses that we are in the Union Bar at this very moment . ''
`` You 'll kill the man , '' said he .
`` Drop it ! ''
`` It 's truth he says , '' remarked one of the men .
The matter is now in the hands of the police ; but it can hardly be hoped that their exertions will be attended by any better results than in the past .
Some of the men were recognized , and there is hope that a conviction may be obtained .
The source of the outrage was , it need hardly be said , that infamous society which has held this community in bondage for so long a period , and against which the Herald has taken so uncompromising a stand .
Mr. Stanger 's many friends will rejoice to hear that , though he has been cruelly and brutally beaten , and though he has sustained severe injuries about the head , there is no immediate danger to his life .
McMurdo read the note twice with the utmost surprise ; for he could not imagine what it meant or who was the author of it .
Had it been in a feminine hand , he might have imagined that it was the beginning of one of those adventures which had been familiar enough in his past life .
But it was the writing of a man , and of a well educated one , too .
Finally , after some hesitation , he determined to see the matter through .
Miller Hill is an ill-kept public park in the very centre of the town .
In summer it is a favourite resort of the people , but in winter it is desolate enough .
From the top of it one has a view not only of the whole straggling , grimy town , but of the winding valley beneath , with its scattered mines and factories blackening the snow on each side of it , and of the wooded and white-capped ranges flanking it .
McMurdo , who had been watching his companion very narrowly , relaxed somewhat in his bearing .
`` Sure I spoke for myself only , '' said he .
`` I am a newcomer , as you know , and I am strange to it all .
It is not for me to open my mouth , Mr. Morris , and if you think well to say anything to me I am here to hear it . ''
`` Nor did I when I joined it at Philadelphia .
It was just a benefit club and a meeting place for one 's fellows .
Then I heard of this place -- curse the hour that the name first fell upon my ears !
-- and I came to better myself !
My wife and three children came with me .
I started a drygoods store on Market Square , and I prospered well .
The word had gone round that I was a Freeman , and I was forced to join the local lodge , same as you did last night .
I 've the badge of shame on my forearm and something worse branded on my heart .
I found that I was under the orders of a black villain and caught in a meshwork of crime .
What could I do ?
Every word I said to make things better was taken as treason , same as it was last night .
I ca n't get away ; for all I have in the world is in my store .
If I leave the society , I know well that it means murder to me , and God knows what to my wife and children .
Oh , man , it is awful -- awful ! ''
He put his hands to his face , and his body shook with convulsive sobs .
Wait till you have lived here longer .
Look down the valley !
See the cloud of a hundred chimneys that overshadows it !
I tell you that the cloud of murder hangs thicker and lower than that over the heads of the people .
It is the Valley of Fear , the Valley of Death .
The terror is in the hearts of the people from the dusk to the dawn .
Wait , young man , and you will learn for yourself . ''
`` And I refuse it .
That 's our business .
Well , so long , Brother Morris , and may you find things go better with you in the future . ''
`` Nor against me ? ''
`` I 'd like to know , '' said McMurdo , `` how you ever came to learn that I had spoken with Morris at all ? ''
McGinty had instruments enough already ; but he recognized that this was a supremely able one .
He felt like a man holding a fierce bloodhound in leash .
There were curs to do the smaller work ; but some day he would slip this creature upon its prey .
A few members of the lodge , Ted Baldwin among them , resented the rapid rise of the stranger and hated him for it ; but they kept clear of him , for he was as ready to fight as to laugh .
One morning after a sleepless night she determined to see him , possibly for the last time , and make one strong endeavour to draw him from those evil influences which were sucking him down .
She went to his house , as he had often begged her to do , and made her way into the room which he used as his sitting-room .
He was seated at a table , with his back turned and a letter in front of him .
A sudden spirit of girlish mischief came over her -- she was still only nineteen .
He had not heard her when she pushed open the door .
Now she tiptoed forward and laid her hand lightly upon his bended shoulders .
`` Ah , Ettie , I could n't do that . ''
He was so white with passionate earnestness that she could not but believe him .
She felt that he was telling the truth .
He gathered her into his arms and kissed away her fears and doubts .
Ettie threw her arms round her lover 's neck .
`` Give it up , Jack !
For my sake , for God 's sake , give it up !
It was to ask you that I came here to-day .
Oh , Jack , see -- I beg it of you on my bended knees !
Kneeling here before you I implore you to give it up ! ''
`` There is no honour in such a matter . ''
`` Well , well , it 's just how you look at it .
But if you 'll give me six months , I 'll work it so that I can leave without being ashamed to look others in the face . ''
`` They chose us because neither I nor the boy here drink , '' Lawler explained .
`` They can count on us saying no more than we should .
You must not take it amiss , but it is the orders of the County Delegate that we obey . ''
`` That 's true enough , and we 'll talk till the cows come home of the killing of Charlie Williams or of Simon Bird , or any other job in the past .
But till the work is done we say nothing . ''
`` Well , if you wo n't tell us we ca n't make you ; but I 'd be glad to know . ''
The boarding house was near the edge of the town , and soon they were at the crossroads which is beyond its boundary .
Here three men were waiting , with whom Lawler and Andrews held a short , eager conversation .
Then they all moved on together .
It was clearly some notable job which needed numbers .
At this point there are several trails which lead to various mines .
The strangers took that which led to the Crow Hill , a huge business which was in strong hands which had been able , thanks to their energetic and fearless New England manager , Josiah H. Dunn , to keep some order and discipline during the long reign of terror .
When a few of the bravest had rallied , and there was a return to the mine , the murderous gang had vanished in the mists of morning , without a single witness being able to swear to the identity of these men who in front of a hundred spectators had wrought this double crime .
`` I 'll do my best , anyhow .
Who is he , and where shall I find him ? ''
McGinty took his eternal half-chewed , half-smoked cigar from the corner of his mouth , and proceeded to draw a rough diagram on a page torn from his notebook .
`` What 's the man done ? ''
`` Did n't I tell you he shot Jim Carnaway ? ''
`` There 's these two women and the children .
Do they go up too ? ''
Two nights later they met outside the town , all three armed , and one of them carrying a sack stuffed with the powder which was used in the quarries .
It was two in the morning before they came to the lonely house .
The night was a windy one , with broken clouds drifting swiftly across the face of a three-quarter moon .
They had been warned to be on their guard against bloodhounds ; so they moved forward cautiously , with their pistols cocked in their hands .
But there was no sound save the howling of the wind , and no movement but the swaying branches above them .
It was the height of the reign of terror .
McMurdo , who had already been appointed Inner Deacon , with every prospect of some day succeeding McGinty as Bodymaster , was now so necessary to the councils of his comrades that nothing was done without his help and advice .
The more popular he became , however , with the Freemen , the blacker were the scowls which greeted him as he passed along the streets of Vermissa .
In spite of their terror the citizens were taking heart to band themselves together against their oppressors .
Rumours had reached the lodge of secret gatherings in the Herald office and of distribution of firearms among the law-abiding people .
But McGinty and his men were undisturbed by such reports .
They were numerous , resolute , and well armed .
Their opponents were scattered and powerless .
It would all end , as it had done in the past , in aimless talk and possibly in impotent arrests .
So said McGinty , McMurdo , and all the bolder spirits .
`` Can I speak with you freely , Mr .
`` Ah , it 's the first thought that came to you !
So it will be up at the lodge .
Did n't I say to you that it would end in murder ? ''
`` It is , indeed ; but it 's not for me to point out the man that is to be murdered .
I 'd never rest easy again .
And yet it 's our own necks that may be at stake .
In God 's name what shall I do ? ''
He rocked to and fro in his agony of indecision .
This was what McMurdo read :
`` Of the lodge ? ''
`` You would n't kill this man ? ''
And yet it was clear from his actions that he thought more seriously of this new intrusion than his words would show .
It may have been his guilty conscience , it may have been the reputation of the Pinkerton organization , it may have been the knowledge that great , rich corporations had set themselves the task of clearing out the Scowrers ; but , whatever his reason , his actions were those of a man who is preparing for the worst .
Every paper which would incriminate him was destroyed before he left the house .
After that he gave a long sigh of satisfaction ; for it seemed to him that he was safe .
And yet the danger must still have pressed somewhat upon him ; for on his way to the lodge he stopped at old man Shafter 's .
The house was forbidden him ; but when he tapped at the window Ettie came out to him .
The dancing Irish deviltry had gone from her lover 's eyes .
She read his danger in his earnest face .
`` Oh , Jack , it would be the saving of you ! ''
`` God bless you for your trust in me !
It 's a fiend out of hell that I should be if I abused it .
Now , mark you , Ettie , it will be just a word to you , and when it reaches you , you will drop everything and come right down to the waiting room at the depot and stay there till I come for you . ''
`` Indeed , it 's glad we are to see you , Brother ! ''
`` There 's business here that wants a Solomon in judgment to set it right . ''
`` Brother McMurdo claims urgency , '' said McGinty .
`` It 's a claim that by the rules of this lodge takes precedence .
Now Brother , we attend you . ''
There was a dead silence in the room .
It was broken by the chairman .
`` Yes , '' said McMurdo , `` I do . ''
`` Why not go right down now and fix him ? ''
`` Ay , the sooner the better . ''
`` I 'll go to the Patch to-morrow morning .
I 'll find him through the operator .
He can locate him , I guess .
Well , then I 'll tell him that I 'm a Freeman myself .
I 'll offer him all the secrets of the lodge for a price .
You bet he 'll tumble to it .
I 'll tell him the papers are at my house , and that it 's as much as my life would be worth to let him come while folk were about .
He 'll see that that 's horse sense .
Let him come at ten o'clock at night , and he shall see everything .
That will fetch him sure . ''
`` He is coming , '' he said .
`` Well , there would be no harm in that , '' McMurdo answered .
`` I wo n't deny that I have a liking for Morris and would be sorry to see him come to harm .
He has spoken to me once or twice over lodge matters , and though he may not see them the same as you or I , he never seemed the sort that squeals .
But still it is not for me to stand between him and you . ''
`` True for you , '' said McGinty .
`` And we 'll learn from Birdy Edwards himself where he got his news if we have to cut his heart out first .
Did he seem to scent a trap ? ''
`` I guess I took him on his weak point , '' he said .
`` If he could get on a good trail of the Scowrers , he 's ready to follow it into hell .
I took his money , '' McMurdo grinned as he produced a wad of dollar notes , `` and as much more when he has seen all my papers . ''
`` Yes ; but the next step wants considering .
He 's a hard proposition .
I 've fooled him proper , and yet he is likely to be on his guard .
Suppose I show him right into a room with seven men in it where he expected to find me alone .
There is going to be shooting , and somebody is going to be hurt . ''
`` Be quiet , you fool ! ''
`` You 'll be the undoing of us yet ! ''
The trial of the Scowrers was held far from the place where their adherents might have terrified the guardians of the law .
In vain they struggled .
In vain the money of the lodge -- money squeezed by blackmail out of the whole countryside -- was spent like water in the attempt to save them .
That cold , clear , unimpassioned statement from one who knew every detail of their lives , their organization , and their crimes was unshaken by all the wiles of their defenders .
At last after so many years they were broken and scattered .
The cloud was lifted forever from the valley .
`` You have not had a cable , have you ? ''
`` It 's poor Douglas .
They tell me his name is Edwards ; but he will always be Jack Douglas of Benito Canyon to me .
I told you that they started together for South Africa in the Palmyra three weeks ago . ''
`` The ship reached Cape Town last night .
I received this cable from Mrs. Douglas this morning :
`` That is so , Mr. Holmes , though the matter is past and done with .
We were a family of tin-miners at Redruth , but we sold our venture to a company , and so retired with enough to keep us .
I wo n't deny that there was some feeling about the division of the money and it stood between us for a time , but it was all forgiven and forgotten , and we were the best of friends together . ''
`` None at all . ''
`` Why a fire ? ''
`` Had they always a fire in this small room on a spring evening ? ''
`` Our next obvious step is to check , so far as we can , the movements of Mortimer Tregennis after he left the room .
In this there is no difficulty , and they seem to be above suspicion .
Knowing my methods as you do , you were , of course , conscious of the somewhat clumsy water-pot expedient by which I obtained a clearer impress of his foot than might otherwise have been possible .
The wet , sandy path took it admirably .
Last night was also wet , you will remember , and it was not difficult -- having obtained a sample print -- to pick out his track among others and to follow his movements .
He appears to have walked away swiftly in the direction of the vicarage .
`` Did you lose your boat through it ? ''
`` I will take the next . ''
`` I tell you they were relatives . ''
`` It is my business . ''
`` Then his own death was suicide ! ''
I had heard the click of the garden gate , and now the majestic figure of the great African explorer appeared upon the path .
He turned in some surprise towards the rustic arbour in which we sat .
`` Perhaps we can clear the point up before we separate , '' said Holmes .
`` Meanwhile , I am much obliged to you for your courteous acquiescence .
You will excuse this informal reception in the open air , but my friend Watson and I have nearly furnished an additional chapter to what the papers call the Cornish Horror , and we prefer a clear atmosphere for the present .
Perhaps , since the matters which we have to discuss will affect you personally in a very intimate fashion , it is as well that we should talk where there can be no eavesdropping . ''
`` Yes , sir . ''
`` The bluff , '' said Holmes sternly , `` is upon your side , Dr. Leon Sterndale , and not upon mine .
As a proof I will tell you some of the facts upon which my conclusions are based .
Of your return from Plymouth , allowing much of your property to go on to Africa , I will say nothing save that it first informed me that you were one of the factors which had to be taken into account in reconstructing this drama -- ''
`` That is what you may expect to see when I follow you .
You spent a restless night at your cottage , and you formed certain plans , which in the early morning you proceeded to put into execution .
Leaving your door just as day was breaking , you filled your pocket with some reddish gravel that was lying heaped beside your gate . ''
Holmes smiled at the compliment .
`` It took two , or possibly three , handfuls before the lodger came to the window .
You beckoned him to come down .
He dressed hurriedly and descended to his sitting-room .
You entered by the window .
There was an interview -- a short one -- during which you walked up and down the room .
Then you passed out and closed the window , standing on the lawn outside smoking a cigar and watching what occurred .
Finally , after the death of Tregennis , you withdrew as you had come .
Now , Dr. Sterndale , how do you justify such conduct , and what were the motives for your actions ?
If you prevaricate or trifle with me , I give you my assurance that the matter will pass out of my hands forever . ''
`` Yes , Brenda Tregennis , '' repeated our visitor .
`` For years I have loved her .
For years she has loved me .
There is the secret of that Cornish seclusion which people have marvelled at .
It has brought me close to the one thing on earth that was dear to me .
I could not marry her , for I have a wife who has left me for years and yet whom , by the deplorable laws of England , I could not divorce .
For years Brenda waited .
For years I waited .
And this is what we have waited for . ''
A terrible sob shook his great frame , and he clutched his throat under his brindled beard .
Then with an effort he mastered himself and spoke on :
`` The vicar knew .
He was in our confidence .
He would tell you that she was an angel upon earth .
That was why he telegraphed to me and I returned .
What was my baggage or Africa to me when I learned that such a fate had come upon my darling ?
There you have the missing clue to my action , Mr .
`` What were your plans ? ''
he asked at last .
The mere fact that solid men should patronize it was enough in itself to prevent the villainy which afterwards crept in .
For over twenty years , in the days of Jackson , Brain , Cribb , the Belchers , Pearce , Gully , and the rest , the leaders of the Ring were men whose honesty was above suspicion ; and those were just the twenty years when the Ring may , as I have said , have served a national purpose .
You have heard how Pearce saved the Bristol girl from the burning house , how Jackson won the respect and friendship of the best men of his age , and how Gully rose to a seat in the first Reformed Parliament .
These were the men who set the standard , and their trade carried with it this obvious recommendation , that it is one in which no drunken or foul-living man could long succeed .
There were exceptions among them , no doubt -- bullies like Hickman and brutes like Berks ; in the main , I say again that they were honest men , brave and enduring to an incredible degree , and a credit to the country which produced them .
It was , as you will see , my fate to see something of them , and I speak of what I know .
In our own village , I can assure you that we were very proud of the presence of such a man as Champion Harrison , and if folks stayed at the inn , they would walk down as far as the smithy just to have the sight of him .
And he was worth seeing , too , especially on a winter 's night when the red glare of the forge would beat upon his great muscles and upon the proud , hawk-face of Boy Jim as they heaved and swayed over some glowing plough coulter , framing themselves in sparks with every blow .
He would strike once with his thirty-pound swing sledge , and Jim twice with his hand hammer ; and the `` Clunk -- clink , clink !
clunk -- clink , clink ! ''
would bring me flying down the village street , on the chance that , since they were both at the anvil , there might be a place for me at the bellows .
Only once during those village years can I remember Champion Harrison showing me for an instant the sort of man that he had been .
It chanced one summer morning , when Boy Jim and I were standing by the smithy door , that there came a private coach from Brighton , with its four fresh horses , and its brass-work shining , flying along with such a merry rattle and jingling , that the Champion came running out with a hall-fullered shoe in his tongs to have a look at it .
A gentleman in a white coachman 's cape -- a Corinthian , as we would call him in those days -- was driving , and half a dozen of his fellows , laughing and shouting , were on the top behind him .
It may have been that the bulk of the smith caught his eye , and that he acted in pure wantonness , or it may possibly have been an accident , but , as he swung past , the twenty-foot thong of the driver 's whip hissed round , and we heard the sharp snap of it across Harrison 's leather apron .
`` I bid you have a care , master , or there will be some one-eyed folk along the road you drive . ''
This one swung himself off the box-seat with the alacrity of a man who has no doubts about the upshot of the quarrel , and after hanging his caped coat upon the swingle-bar , he daintily turned up the ruffled cuffs of his white cambric shirt .
Encouraged by these cries , the young aristocrat advanced upon his man .
The smith never moved , but his mouth set grim and hard , while his tufted brows came down over his keen , grey eyes .
The tongs had fallen , and his hands were hanging free .
Something in the assured voice , and something also in the quiet pose , warned the young lord of his danger .
I saw him look hard at his antagonist , and as he did so , his hands and his jaw dropped together .
Smoked , by Gad ! ''
`` It 's Jack Harrison the bruiser !
Lord Frederick was going to take on the ex-champion .
Give him one on the apron , Fred , and see what happens . ''
But we are used to associate beauty with softness in a man .
I do not know why they should be so coupled , and they never were with Jim .
Of all men that I have known , he was the most iron-hard in body and in mind .
Who was there among us who could walk with him , or run with him , or swim with him ?
Who on all the country side , save only Boy Jim , would have swung himself over Wolstonbury Cliff , and clambered down a hundred feet with the mother hawk flapping at his ears in the vain struggle to hold him from her nest ?
He was but sixteen , with his gristle not yet all set into bone , when he fought and beat Gipsy Lee , of Burgess Hill , who called himself the `` Cock of the South Downs . ''
It was after this that Champion Harrison took his training as a boxer in hand .
`` And the ghost walks ? ''
`` Because it is in the keeping of the law .
Lord Avon had no children , and Sir Lothian Hume -- the same who was at the card-party -- is his nephew and heir .
But he can touch nothing until he can prove Lord Avon to be dead . ''
`` I 'll open a window easy enough . ''
`` Do n't you think we 've gone far enough , Jim ? ''
said I , with my teeth chattering .
`` Then I will . ''
He gripped the sill , and had his knee on it in an instant .
`` Now , Roddy , give me your hands . ''
With a pull he had me up beside him , and a moment later we were both in the haunted house .
`` What an old drum of a place it is ! ''
he cried ; `` we 'll strike a light , Roddy , and see where we are . ''
`` This is where they played the cards , Jim , '' said I , in a hushed voice .
`` It was on that very table . ''
`` I 'm not afraid , uncle .
I never was afraid ; but spirits are new to me , and -- ''
And then there were the smugglers !
The Downs swarmed with them , for since there might be no lawful trade betwixt France and England , it had all to run in that channel .
I have been up on St. John 's Common upon a dark night , and , lying among the bracken , I have seen as many as seventy mules and a man at the head of each go flitting past me as silently as trout in a stream .
Not one of them but bore its two ankers of the right French cognac , or its bale of silk of Lyons and lace of Valenciennes .
I knew Dan Scales , the head of them , and I knew Tom Hislop , the riding officer , and I remember the night they met .
It was Tom who paid a poet from Brighton to write the lines for the tombstone , which we all thought were very true and good , beginning -
There was more of it , and I dare say it is all still to be read in Patcham Churchyard .
It was so rare to hear my mother say a hard word against anybody ( unless it were General Buonaparte ) that I was across the room and at the window in a jump .
A pony-chaise was coming slowly down the village street , and in it was the queerest-looking person that I had ever seen .
She was very stout , with a face that was of so dark a red that it shaded away into purple over the nose and cheeks .
She wore a great hat with a white curling ostrich feather , and from under its brim her two bold , black eyes stared out with a look of anger and defiance as if to tell the folk that she thought less of them than they could do of her .
She had some sort of scarlet pelisse with white swans-down about her neck , and she held the reins slack in her hands , while the pony wandered from side to side of the road as the fancy took him .
Each time the chaise swayed , her head with the great hat swayed also , so that sometimes we saw the crown of it and sometimes the brim .
`` Yes , ma'am , I thank you . ''
`` Why , no , ma'am , I have all that I lack . ''
`` But I 've promised , Jim , and you would n't make me out a liar .
She does but want to talk with you , for it is a lonely life she leads . ''
`` What would she want to talk with such as me about ? ''
She threw open a door as she spoke , and there , in a reclining chair at the further end of the room , we caught a glimpse of a figure all lumped together , huge and shapeless , with tails of black hair hanging down .
I did as she asked , and read out : `` Miss Polly Hinton , as 'Peggy , ' in The Country Wife , played for her benefit at the Haymarket Theatre , September 14th , 1782 . ''
`` Oh , you rude little boy , to say it in such a tone , '' said she ; `` as if a play-actress was n't as good as any one else .
Why , 't was but the other day that the Duke of Clarence , who may come to call himself King of England , married Mrs. Jordan , who is herself only a play-actress .
And whom think you that this one is ? ''
`` Nor I either . ''
`` Well , '' said she , `` I am not in voice , and it is ill to play in a little room with but two to listen , but you must conceive me to be the Queen of the Peruvians , who is exhorting her countrymen to rise up against the Spaniards , who are oppressing them . ''
`` And who wrote it , ma'am ? ''
`` It was but the thought of that poor woman and her child . ''
`` Yes , father , '' said I , with some confidence .
`` Yes , father , '' said I , though with less confidence than before .
`` Well , how far is it from Port Mahon to Algeciras ? ''
`` If Ushant lay three leagues upon your starboard quarter , what would be your nearest English port ? ''
`` Well , I do n't see that your geography is much better than your history , '' said he .
`` You 'd never get your certificate at this rate .
Can you do addition ?
Well , then , let us see if you can tot up my prize-money . ''
He shot a mischievous glance at my mother as he spoke , and she laid down her knitting on her lap and looked very earnestly at him .
My dear mother had borne her long struggle without a sign all these years , but now that she was so suddenly eased of it she fell sobbing upon his neck .
It was a long time before my father had a thought to spare upon my examination in arithmetic .
My father had been placed on half-pay , like so many others of the old war officers , and so , for nearly two years , he was able to remain with us .
During all this time I can only once remember that there was the slightest disagreement between him and my mother .
It chanced that I was the cause of it , and as great events sprang out of it , I must tell you how it came about .
It was indeed the first of a series of events which affected not only my fortunes , but those of very much more important people .
`` Nay , you misjudge him , Anson , '' said my mother , warmly .
`` There is no one with a better heart than Charles ; but his own life moves so smoothly that he can not understand that others may have trouble .
During all these years I have known that I had but to say the word to receive as much as I wished from him . ''
`` But Charles has great power and influence in London .
He could make Rodney known to all the great people .
Surely you would not stand in the way of his advancement . ''
`` Let us hear what he says , then , '' said my father ; and this was the letter which she read to him -
`` MY DEAR SISTER MARY ,
`` You are too hard on him , Anson .
You will think better of him when you know him .
But he says that he will be here next week , and this is Thursday , and the best curtains unhung , and no lavender in the sheets ! ''
`` That is very well , '' he cried .
`` If you go into the Navy , as you are likely to do , you go as an officer , and it is you who do the ordering .
If I go in , it is as one who was born to receive orders . ''
`` An officer gets his orders from those above him . ''
A smile flickered over the dark face of the servant , but his features reset themselves instantly into their usual mask of respectful observance .
`` It is the refection , madam , '' said he .
`` Will you permit me to lay the table ?
Sir Charles is accustomed to partake of certain dishes and to drink certain wines , so that we usually bring them with us when we visit . ''
He opened the basket , and in a minute he had the table all shining with silver and glass , and studded with dainty dishes .
So quick and neat and silent was he in all he did , that my father was as taken with him as I was .
`` Ah , pardon me , sister Mary , '' cried my uncle , `` I am old-fashioned enough to have principles -- an anachronism , I know , in this lax age .
One of them is never to allow my batterie de toilette out of my sight when I am travelling .
I can not readily forget the agonies which I endured some years ago through neglecting this precaution .
I will do Ambrose the justice to say that it was before he took charge of my affairs .
I was compelled to wear the same ruffles upon two consecutive days .
On the third morning my fellow was so affected by the sight of my condition , that he burst into tears and laid out a pair which he had stolen from me . ''
`` You are free of my box , as being a relative by marriage .
You are free also , nephew , and I pray you to take a pinch .
It is the most intimate sign of my goodwill .
Outside ourselves there are four , I think , who have had access to it -- the Prince , of course ; Mr Pitt ; Monsieur Otto , the French Ambassador ; and Lord Hawkesbury .
I have sometimes thought that I was premature with Lord Hawkesbury . ''
`` No , I read little or nothing , '' said he , when my father marvelled where he got his knowledge .
`` The fact is that I can hardly pick up a print without seeing some allusion to myself : 'Sir C. T. does this , ' or 'Sir C. T. says the other , ' so I take them no longer .
But if a man is in my position all knowledge comes to him .
The Duke of York tells me of the Army in the morning , and Lord Spencer chats with me of the Navy in the afternoon , and Dundas whispers me what is going forward in the Cabinet , so that I have little need of the Times or the Morning Chronicle . ''
`` I suppose , '' said he , `` that this is your first visit to Friar's Oak ? ''
`` I stayed with the unfortunate Lord Avon .
It was the occasion when he was accused of slaying his younger brother and fled from the country . ''
`` Many a time have I asked myself that question , and it comes home to me more to-night than ever . ''
`` I wish I could think it were not so .
I have thought sometimes that it was this very pride , turning suddenly to madness , which drove him to it .
You have heard how he returned the money which we had lost ? ''
`` 'Charles , ' said he , 'I can not abide to think that you should have lost this money in my house .
You will find it here upon your table . '
`` Well , then , I had finished my toilet in an hour or so -- for I was less exigeant in those days than now -- and I met Sir Lothian Hume at breakfast .
His experience had been the same as my own , and he was eager to see Captain Barrington ; and to ascertain why he had directed his brother to return the money to us .
We were talking the matter over when suddenly I raised my eyes to the corner of the ceiling , and I saw -- I saw -- ''
`` I know not how things are at Cliffe Royal now , '' said he , thoughtfully .
`` It was not a cheery house , even before this shadow fell upon it .
A fitter stage was never set forth for such a tragedy .
But seventeen years have passed , and perhaps even that horrible ceiling -- ''
`` Uncle , '' said I , `` I saw a figure as plainly as I see that fire , and I heard the steps as clearly as I hear the crackle of the fagots .
Besides , we could not both be deceived . ''
`` You will , I am sure , forgive me , Sir Charles , if you will call to mind the relation in which I stood to Lord Avon . ''
He spoke with some dignity of manner , and with a bow he left the room .
I put my arms about her to console her , but she wept so that , for all my seventeen years and pride of manhood , it set me weeping also , and with such a hiccoughing noise , since I had not a woman 's knack of quiet tears , that it finally turned her own grief to laughter .
`` And play-actresses also , Roddy .
And you will not cast your underclothing until June is in .
Young Master Overton came by his death through it .
Think well of your dress , Roddy , so as to do your uncle credit , for it is the thing for which he is himself most famed .
You have but to do what he will direct .
But if there is a time when you are not meeting grand people , you can wear out your country things , for your brown coat is as good as new , and the blue one , if it were ironed and relined , would take you through the summer .
I have put out your Sunday clothes with the nankeen vest , since you are to see the Prince to-morrow , and you will wear your brown silk stockings and buckle shoes .
Be guarded in crossing the London streets , for I am told that the hackney coaches are past all imagining .
Fold your clothes when you go to bed , Roddy , and do not forget your evening prayers , for , oh , my dear boy , the days of temptation are at hand , when I will no longer be with you to help you . ''
`` Well , nephew , '' he cried , `` what do you think of the prospect of coming to town with me ? ''
`` You 'll find him a chip of good wood , sir , '' said my father .
`` The clothes are very well for Friar 's Oak , sister Mary , '' said he .
`` And yet you can understand that they might seem rococo in the Mall .
If you leave him in my hands I shall see to the matter . ''
My parents tried to thank him , but he cut them short .
`` Yes , the Bristol yellowman has been the winning colour of late .
How d 'ye do , Mrs. Harrison ?
I do n't suppose you remember me ? ''
She had come out from the house , and I noticed that her worn face -- on which some past terror seemed to have left its shadow -- hardened into stern lines as she looked at my uncle .
`` That 's the way with her , Sir Charles , '' said Harrison , resting his great hand upon the woman 's shoulder .
`` She 's got my promise , and she holds me to it !
There was never a better or more hard-working wife , but she ai n't what you 'd call a patron of sport , and that 's a fact . ''
`` And then to live for weeks afterwards with the fear that every knock at the door may be to tell us that the other is dead , and that my man may have to stand in the dock and take his trial for murder . ''
`` That 's my nephew , Sir Charles . ''
`` No , Sir Charles .
He 's been with me here since he was as high as that hammer . ''
My uncle turned to Boy Jim .
`` Tut , Harrison , let the lad come ! ''
`` No , no , Sir Charles .
It 's dangerous company for a lad of his mettle .
There 's plenty for him to do when I 'm away . ''
`` Let go her head ! ''
cried he to the ostler , and with a snap , a crack , and a jingle , away we went upon our journey .
`` A baritone , I should fancy ? ''
`` A small book of rhymes may be had for half a crown .
Vers de Societe are a great assistance to a young man .
If you have the ladies on your side , it does not matter whom you have against you .
You must learn to open a door , to enter a room , to present a snuff- box , raising the lid with the forefinger of the hand in which you hold it .
You must acquire the bow for a man , with its necessary touch of dignity , and that for a lady , which can not be too humble , and should still contain the least suspicion of abandon .
You must cultivate a manner with women which shall be deprecating and yet audacious .
Have you any eccentricity ? ''
We could hardly believe our eyes when we alighted and found that it was really so .
He had most certainly taken his seat there at Friar 's Oak , and from there on we had come without a break as fast as the mares could travel .
Whither , then , could he have vanished to ?
It was but a short walk , and yet it took us some time , for my uncle stalked along with great dignity , his lace-bordered handkerchief in one hand , and his cane with the clouded amber head dangling from the other .
Every one that we met seemed to know him , and their hats flew from their heads as we passed .
He took little notice of these greetings , save to give a nod to one , or to slightly raise his forefinger to another .
It chanced , however , that as we turned into the Pavilion Grounds , we met a magnificent team of four coal-black horses , driven by a rough-looking , middle-aged fellow in an old weather-stained cape .
There was nothing that I could see to distinguish him from any professional driver , save that he was chatting very freely with a dainty little woman who was perched on the box beside him .
`` What d'you think of my team of blacks ? ''
`` By George , yes , Letty is right ! ''
`` D'you start to- morrow ? ''
`` God help the Dutch public ! ''
muttered my uncle , as the fat little man bustled off with his news to some new-comer .
`` That 's the Prince 's famous cook , nephew .
He has not his equal in England for a filet saute aux champignons .
He manages his master 's money affairs . ''
`` The cook ! ''
I exclaimed , in bewilderment .
`` No respectable house would touch them , '' he whispered .
`` Ah , Mellish , is the Prince within ? ''
`` Any one with him ? ''
I followed him through the strangest succession of rooms , full of curious barbaric splendour which impressed me as being very rich and wonderful , though perhaps I should think differently now .
Gold and scarlet in arabesque designs gleamed upon the walls , with gilt dragons and monsters writhing along cornices and out of corners .
Look where I would , on panel or ceiling , a score of mirrors flashed back the picture of the tall , proud , white-faced man , and the youth who walked so demurely at his elbow .
Finally , a footman opened a door , and we found ourselves in the Prince 's own private apartment .
`` That 's the very place for a furniture man , '' said the man with the red nose .
`` It should be the longest bench in the world , Sherry , '' answered the Prince , `` for a good many of his subjects will want seats on it .
Very glad to see you back , Tregellis , but you must really be more careful what you bring in upon your skirts .
It was only yesterday that we had an infernal Dutchman here howling about some arrears of interest and the deuce knows what .
'My good fellow , ' said I , 'as long as the Commons starve me , I have to starve you , ' and so the matter ended . ''
`` Well , sir !
And what then , sir ? ''
cried Francis , who appeared to be an irascible , rough-tongued man .
`` You will permit me to tell the story in my own way , Sir Philip , '' said the Prince , with dignity .
`` I was about to say that our metal was so light that I give you my word , gentlemen , that I carried my port broadside in one coat pocket , and my starboard in the other .
Up we came to the big Frenchman , took her fire , and scraped the paint off her before we let drive .
But it was no use .
By George , gentlemen , our balls just stuck in her timbers like stones in a mud wall .
She had her nettings up , but we scrambled aboard , and at it we went hammer and anvil .
It was a sharp twenty minutes , but we beat her people down below , made the hatches fast on them , and towed her into Seaham .
Surely you were with us , Sherry ? ''
`` I used to go when I needed exercise , '' said my uncle , carelessly .
`` But I have taken to tennis now instead .
A painful incident happened the last time that I was out , and it sickened me of it . ''
`` You killed your man -- ? ''
`` No , no , sir , it was worse than that .
I had a coat that Weston has never equalled .
To say that it fitted me is not to express it .
It WAS me -- like the hide on a horse .
I 've had sixty from him since , but he could never approach it .
The sit of the collar brought tears into my eyes , sir , when first I saw it ; and as to the waist -- ''
`` I 've run down from Chertsey , sir , just to shake you by the hand , and to make sure that the Tories have not carried you off . ''
`` If poor Avon were here we might do something with him , for he was Harrison 's first patron , and the man was devoted to him .
But his wife is too strong for me .
And now , sir , I must leave you , for I have had the misfortune to-day to lose the best valet in England , and I must make inquiry for him .
I thank your Royal Highness for your kindness in receiving my nephew in so gracious a fashion . ''
My uncle and I were up betimes next morning , but he was much out of temper , for no news had been heard of his valet Ambrose .
He had indeed become like one of those ants of which I have read , who are so accustomed to be fed by smaller ants that when they are left to themselves they die of hunger .
It was only by the aid of a man whom the landlord procured , and of Fox 's valet , who had been sent expressly across , that his toilet was at last performed .
As our tandem came alongside of the four-in-hand , with the two bonny bay mares gleaming like shot-silk in the sunshine , a murmur of admiration rose from the crowd .
My uncle , in his fawn-coloured driving-coat , with all his harness of the same tint , looked the ideal of a Corinthian whip ; while Sir John Lade , with his many-caped coat , his white hat , and his rough , weather-beaten face , might have taken his seat with a line of professionals upon any ale-house bench without any one being able to pick him out as one of the wealthiest landowners in England .
It was an age of eccentricity , but he had carried his peculiarities to a length which surprised even the out- and-outers by marrying the sweetheart of a famous highwayman when the gallows had come between her and her lover .
She was perched by his side , looking very smart in a flowered bonnet and grey travelling-dress , while in front of them the four splendid coal- black horses , with a flickering touch of gold upon their powerful , well-curved quarters , were pawing the dust in their eagerness to be off .
`` They have four to two , '' said I .
`` We 're on the side road to Godstone and Warlingham , '' said my uncle .
`` I suppose he thought that he could make better time by getting out of the way of the market carts .
But we 've got the deuce of a hill to come down .
You 'll see some fun , nephew , or I am mistaken . ''
`` Dusty work ! ''
said my uncle , quietly .
`` Fan 'em , Jack !
`` No , by George ! ''
`` Fan 'em , Jack ; keep on fanning 'em ! ''
Had she done it an instant sooner we should have crashed against the wood-work , carried it away , and been hurled into the deep gully below .
As it was , it was not the powerful haunch of the black leader which caught our wheel , but the forequarter , which had not weight enough to turn us from our course .
I saw a red wet seam gape suddenly through the black hair , and next instant we were flying alone down the road , whilst the four-in-hand had halted , and Sir John and his lady were down in the road together tending to the wounded horse .
I had the idea , which a country-bred lad brings up with him , that London was merely a wilderness of houses , but I was astonished now to see the green slopes and the lovely spring trees showing between .
`` Yes , those are the Privy Gardens , '' said my uncle , `` and there is the window out of which Charles took his last step on to the scaffold .
You would n't think the mares had come fifty miles , would you ?
See how les petites cheries step out for the credit of their master .
Look at the barouche , with the sharp-featured man peeping out of the window .
That 's Pitt , going down to the House .
We are coming into Pall Mall now , and this great building on the left is Carlton House , the Prince 's Palace .
There 's St. James 's , the big , dingy place with the clock , and the two red-coated sentries before it .
And here's the famous street of the same name , nephew , which is the very centre of the world , and here 's Jermyn Street opening out of it , and finally , here 's my own little box , and we are well under the five hours from Brighton Old Square . ''
`` Why , George , '' cried my uncle , `` I thought you were with your regiment . ''
The Tenth was ordered to Manchester , and they could hardly expect me to go to a place like that .
Besides , I found the major monstrous rude . ''
My uncle laughed , and Brummell looked me up and down with his large , intolerant eyes .
`` My dear Tregellis , you are infallible upon a cravat , but you must allow me the right of my own judgment upon vests .
I like it vastly as it stands , but a touch of red sprig would give it the finish that it needs . ''
`` That young man is destined to take my place , '' said my uncle , gravely , when Brummell had departed .
`` He is quite young and of no descent , but he has made his way by his cool effrontery , his natural taste , and his extravagance of speech .
There is no man who can be impolite in so polished a fashion .
He has a half-smile , and a way of raising his eyebrows , for which he will be shot one of these mornings .
Already his opinion is quoted in the clubs as a rival to my own .
Well , every man has his day , and when I am convinced that mine is past , St. James 's Street shall know me no more , for it is not in my nature to be second to any man .
But now , nephew , in that buff and blue suit you may pass anywhere ; so , if you please , we will step into my vis-a-vis , and I will show you something of the town . ''
It was in Watier 's that night , seated by my uncle on one of the red velvet settees at the side of the room , that I had pointed out to me some of those singular characters whose fame and eccentricities are even now not wholly forgotten in the world .
The long , many-pillared room , with its mirrors and chandeliers , was crowded with full- blooded , loud-voiced men-about-town , all in the same dark evening dress with white silk stockings , cambric shirt-fronts , and little , flat chapeau-bras under their arms .
`` The acid-faced old gentleman with the thin legs is the Marquis of Queensberry , '' said my uncle .
`` His chaise was driven nineteen miles in an hour in a match against the Count Taafe , and he sent a message fifty miles in thirty minutes by throwing it from hand to hand in a cricket-ball .
The man he is talking to is Sir Charles Bunbury , of the Jockey Club , who had the Prince warned off the Heath at Newmarket on account of the in-and-out riding of Sam Chifney , his jockey .
There 's Captain Barclay going up to them now .
He knows more about training than any man alive , and he has walked ninety miles in twenty-one hours .
You have only to look at his calves to see that Nature built him for it .
There 's another walker there , the man with a flowered vest standing near the fireplace .
That is Buck Whalley , who walked to Jerusalem in a long blue coat , top-boots , and buckskins . ''
`` Evening , Tregellis ! ''
An elderly , vacant-looking man had stopped before us and was looking me up and down .
`` He congratulated him warmly , and confessed that he had always underrated his intelligence .
He is to live with the young couple , and make a handsome allowance on condition that the bride sticks to her old duties .
By the way , there was a rumour that you were about to marry , Tregellis . ''
`` Lost like the deuce , '' he snapped .
`` Could n't you ? ''
`` Play a hundred a trick and a thousand on the rub , losing steadily for five hours , and see what you think of it . ''
`` It is just possible that I may be Lord Avon . ''
`` I wo n't have you use that word , Sir Lothian , '' cried my uncle , sharply .
`` You were there as I was .
You know that he was a murderer . ''
`` Well , to let that point pass , it is monstrous to suppose that the title and the estates can remain hung up in this way for ever .
I'm the heir , Tregellis , and I 'm going to have my rights . ''
`` His rights would be a long drop and a cracked spine , '' Sir Lothian answered , and then , changing his manner suddenly , he laid his hand upon my uncle 's sleeve .
`` A good sportsman , nephew , '' said he .
`` A bold rider , the best pistol-shot in England , but .
a dangerous man ! ''
`` How are you , Berks ? ''
`` Say 'sir ' when you speak to a genelman , '' said Belcher , and with a sudden tilt of the table he sent Berks flying almost into my uncle's arms .
`` I 've often wondered why you never had a shy at my belt .
I tell you honestly , between man and man , I 'm very glad you did n't . ''
`` So I 've heard .
Who 's the youngster beside him ?
He looks a tidy chap . ''
`` You must put a stopper on 'im gov'nor , '' said several of the other prize-fighters .
`` 'E ai n't what you 'd call a charmer when 'e's sober , but there 's no standing 'im when 'e 's fresh . ''
`` No , you do n't , Joe , '' said Jackson , laying his hand upon Berks's chest , as he tried to push his way through the crowd .
`` You 've got to keep your place , Joe , or we 'll put you where you can make all the noise you like . ''
The supper was laid in a large room , with Union Jacks and mottoes hung thickly upon the walls .
The tables were arranged in three sides of a square , my uncle occupying the centre of the principal one , with the Prince upon his right and Lord Sele upon his left .
By his wise precaution the seats had been allotted beforehand , so that the gentlemen might be scattered among the professionals and no risk run of two enemies finding themselves together , or a man who had been recently beaten falling into the company of his conqueror .
For my own part , I had Champion Harrison upon one side of me and a stout , florid-faced man upon the other , who whispered to me that he was `` Bill Warr , landlord of the One Tun public-house , of Jermyn Street , and one of the gamest men upon the list . ''
`` You should take to my job , '' said Harrison .
`` I 'm a smith by trade , and I 've not put on half a stone in fifteen years . ''
But if there were no men at the tables who could have held their own against Jackson or Jem Belcher , there were others of a different race and type who had qualities which made them dangerous bruisers .
A little way down the room I saw the black face and woolly head of Bill Richmond , in a purple-and-gold footman 's livery -- destined to be the predecessor of Molineaux , Sutton , and all that line of black boxers who have shown that the muscular power and insensibility to pain which distinguish the African give him a peculiar advantage in the sports of the ring .
He could boast also of the higher honour of having been the first born American to win laurels in the British ring .
There also I saw the keen features of Dada Mendoza , the Jew , just retired from active work , and leaving behind him a reputation for elegance and perfect science which has , to this day , never been exceeded .
The worst fault that the critics could find with him was that there was a want of power in his blows -- a remark which certainly could not have been made about his neighbour , whose long face , curved nose , and dark , flashing eyes proclaimed him as a member of the same ancient race .
This was the formidable Dutch Sam , who fought at nine stone six , and yet possessed such hitting powers , that his admirers , in after years , were willing to back him against the fourteen-stone Tom Cribb , if each were strapped a-straddle to a bench .
Half a dozen other sallow Hebrew faces showed how energetically the Jews of Houndsditch and Whitechapel had taken to the sport of the land of their adoption , and that in this , as in more serious fields of human effort , they could hold their own with the best .
`` Why , it 's old Tom Faulkner the cricketer ! ''
cried Harrison , following the line of Bill Warr 's stubby forefinger .
`` He 's the fastest bowler in the Midlands , and at his best there were n't many boxers in England that could stand up against him . ''
`` You 're right there , Jack 'Arrison .
'E was one of the three who came up to fight when the best men of Birmingham challenged the best men of London .
'E 's an evergreen , is Tom .
Why , he was turned five- and-fifty when he challenged and beat , after fifty minutes of it , Jack Thornhill , who was tough enough to take it out of many a youngster .
It 's better to give odds in weight than in years . ''
`` 'E was so , '' said Bill Warr .
`` 'E would fight like a stag , and 'e was that 'ard that 'e would let any swell knock 'im down for 'alf-a- crown .
'E 'ad no face to spoil , d 'ye see , for 'e was always the ugliest man in England .
But 'e 's been on the shelf now for near sixty years , and it cost 'im many a beatin ' before 'e could understand that 'is strength was slippin ' away from 'im . ''
`` Let 'em 'ave it , Buckhorse !
Give it 'em straight !
Tell us how the millin ' coves did it in your time . ''
`` I am informed , '' said Sir John Lade , `` that Crab Wilson 's age is twenty-three , and that , although he has never fought a regular P.R .
battle , he has none the less fought within ropes for a stake on many occasions . ''
`` Long enough and heavy enough for anything on two legs , '' said Jackson , and the professionals all murmured their assent .
`` The battle to take place on Tuesday , May the 18th , at the hour of ten in the morning , at a spot to be afterwards named .
The ring to be twenty foot square .
Neither to fall without a knock-down blow , subject to the decision of the umpires .
Three umpires to be chosen upon the ground , namely , two in ordinary and one in reference .
Does that meet your wishes , Sir Charles ? ''
`` Is this genuine ? ''
`` What weight is he , Bill ? ''
`` Perhaps your Royal Highness has a preference , '' said my uncle .
`` They ca n't fight here with all this litter , '' said my uncle .
`` Where shall it be ? ''
`` I was sure that Harrison would not stand in the way of sport , '' said my uncle .
`` We are glad that you have stepped up , that we might consult you as to the arrangements for giving effect to your very sporting challenge . ''
Jim looked at him with disgust in every line of his face .
`` I should be glad to try you , if I may . ''
`` If it please you , '' he cried , `` there is no need to go so far .
My coach-house at the back of the yard is empty , and a better place for a mill you 'll never find . ''
`` I 'd stop it if I were you , '' he whispered .
`` He 's since my time . ''
It was a large room with a wooden floor and an open square in the ceiling , which was fringed with the heads of the ostlers and stable boys who were looking down from the harness-room above .
A carriage- lamp was slung in each corner , and a very large stable-lantern hung from a rafter in the centre .
A coil of rope had been brought in , and under the direction of Jackson four men had been stationed to hold it .
`` Very good , Craven !
I think , Craven , that I shall trouble you for that hundred . ''
The two men had stood up to each other , Jim as light upon his feet as a goat , with his left well out and his right thrown across the lower part of his chest , while Berks held both arms half extended and his feet almost level , so that he might lead off with either side .
For an instant they looked each other over , and then Berks , ducking his head and rushing in with a handover-hand style of hitting , bored Jim down into his corner .
It was a backward slip rather than a knockdown , but a thin trickle of blood was seen at the corner of Jim 's mouth .
In an instant the seconds had seized their men and carried them back into their corners .
`` I take you twice in hundreds . ''
This round was a good deal shorter than that which had preceded it .
Berks 's orders evidently were to close at any cost , and so make use of his extra weight and strength before the superior condition of his antagonist could have time to tell .
On the other hand , Jim , after his experience in the last round , was less disposed to make any great exertion to keep him at arms ' length .
He led at Berks's head , as he came rushing in , and missed him , receiving a severe body blow in return , which left the imprint of four angry knuckles above his ribs .
As they closed Jim caught his opponent 's bullet head under his arm for an instant , and put a couple of half-arm blows in ; but the prize-fighter pulled him over by his weight , and the two fell panting side by side upon the ground .
Jim sprang up , however , and walked over to his corner , while Berks , distressed by his evening 's dissipation , leaned one arm upon Mendoza and the other upon Dutch Sam as he made for his seat .
`` Give us time to get the lid off our pepper-box , '' said Mendoza .
`` We mean to make a night of it . ''
`` Looks like it , '' said Jack Harrison .
`` He 's shut one of his eyes already .
Even money that my boy wins it ! ''
`` Two pound four and threepence , '' cried Harrison , counting out all his worldly wealth .
`` Get your left on his mark , boy , '' they shouted , `` then go to his head with the right . ''
`` For all that , '' said another , `` I am confident that if Joe Berks had been sober he would have eaten him .
Besides , the lad was in training , and the other would burst like an overdone potato if he were hit .
I never saw a man so soft , or with his wind in such condition .
Put the men in training , and it 's a horse to a hen on the bruiser . ''
I thought as much , '' grumbled the smith .
`` Well , it is no doing of mine , Jim , and you must bear witness to that when we go home again .
I do n't know what -- but , there , it is done , and it can't be helped .
After all , she 's -- Now , the deuce take my clumsy tongue ! ''
`` Here 's Cuddie Collingwood , '' whispered my father .
`` Halloa , Lieutenant Stone ! ''
cried the famous admiral very cheerily .
`` I have scarce caught a glimpse of you since you came aboard the Excellent after St. Vincent .
You had the luck to be at the Nile also , I understand ? ''
`` Your plight was better than mine , Sir Cuthbert , '' said a voice from behind us , and a large man in the full uniform of a post-captain took a step forward to include himself in our circle .
His mastiff face was heavy with emotion , and he shook his head miserably as he spoke .
`` Yes , yes , Troubridge , I can understand and sympathize with your feelings . ''
`` I passed through torment that night , Collingwood .
It left a mark on me that I shall never lose until I go over the ship 's side in a canvas cover .
To have my beautiful Culloden laid on a sandbank just out of gunshot .
To hear and see the fight the whole night through , and never to pull a lanyard or take the tompions out of my guns .
Twice I opened my pistol-case to blow out my brains , and it was but the thought that Nelson might have a use for me that held me back . ''
`` I 'm not clever enough or slow enough for their Z-Z fashions , '' said he .
`` We got alongside and slapped it in through their port-holes until they struck their colours .
But where have you been , Sir Cuthbert ? ''
`` Bullets , '' said Troubridge .
`` There 's a man whose life might help you to trim your own course , '' said my father , as we took our seats at a vacant table .
`` He is ever the same quiet gentleman , with his thoughts busy for the comfort of his ship 's company , and his heart with his wife and children whom he has so seldom seen .
It is said in the fleet that an oath has never passed his lips , Rodney , though how he managed when he was first lieutenant of a raw crew is more than I can conceive .
But they all love Cuddie , for they know he 's an angel to fight .
How d 'ye do , Captain Foley ?
My respects , Sir Ed'ard !
Why , if they could but press the company , they would man a corvette with flag officers . ''
`` There 's many a man here , Rodney , '' continued my father , as he glanced about him , `` whose name may never find its way into any book save his own ship 's log , but who in his own way has set as fine an example as any admiral of them all .
We know them , and talk of them in the fleet , though they may never be bawled in the streets of London .
There 's as much seamanship and pluck in a good cutter action as in a line-o'-battleship fight , though you may not come by a title nor the thanks of Parliament for it .
There 's Hamilton , for example , the quiet , pale-faced man who is learning against the pillar .
It was he who , with six rowing-boats , cut out the 44-gun frigate Hermione from under the muzzles of two hundred shore-guns in the harbour of Puerto Cabello .
No finer action was done in the whole war .
There 's Jaheel Brenton , with the whiskers .
It was he who attacked twelve Spanish gunboats in his one little brig , and made four of them strike to him .
There 's Walker , of the Rose cutter , who , with thirteen men , engaged three French privateers with crews of a hundred and forty-six .
He sank one , captured one , and chased the third .
How are you , Captain Ball ?
I hope I see you well ? ''
`` In the Speedy , '' said Cochrane , `` the sailcloth was so thin that , when I made my observation , I always took my meridian through the foretopsail and my horizon through the foresail . ''
`` I do not claim higher ability , sir . ''
`` I am surprised , Captain Bulkeley , '' Cochran retorted hotly , `` that you should venture to couple the names of privateersman and King's officer . ''
When at last the door opened , both my father and I sprang to our feet , expecting to find ourselves face to face with the greatest living Englishman .
It was a very different person , however , who swept into the room .
`` Ah , '' she cried , with an affected and exaggerated start , `` you know me , then ? ''
`` I had come to ask you , sir , if you could assist me to a ship . ''
`` She must and she shall be ready , '' cried Nelson , with extraordinary vehemence .
if the devil stands at the door , I sail on Wednesday .
Who knows what these rascals may be doing in my absence ?
It maddens me to think of the deviltries which they may be devising .
At this very instant , dear lady , the Queen , OUR Queen , may be straining her eyes for the topsails of Nelson 's ships . ''
`` East-south-east , '' my father answered , readily .
`` Then you need no help from me , '' said Nelson , with some bitterness .
`` If you have either guineas or interest you can climb over the heads of old sea-officers , though you may not know the poop from the galley , or a carronade from a long nine .
Nevertheless -- But what the deuce have we here ? ''
And now the day of the great fight began to approach .
Even the imminent outbreak of war and the renewed threats of Napoleon were secondary things in the eyes of the sportsmen -- and the sportsmen in those days made a large half of the population .
In the club of the patrician and the plebeian gin-shop , in the coffee-house of the merchant or the barrack of the soldier , in London or the provinces , the same question was interesting the whole nation .
Every west- country coach brought up word of the fine condition of Crab Wilson , who had returned to his own native air for his training , and was known to be under the immediate care of Captain Barclay , the expert .
On the other hand , although my uncle had not yet named his man , there was no doubt amongst the public that Jim was to be his nominee , and the report of his physique and of his performance found him many backers .
On the whole , however , the betting was in favour of Wilson , for Bristol and the west country stood by him to a man , whilst London opinion was divided .
Three to two were to be had on Wilson at any West End club two days before the battle .
I had twice been down to Crawley to see Jim in his training quarters , where I found him undergoing the severe regimen which was usual .
From early dawn until nightfall he was running , jumping , striking a bladder which swung upon a bar , or sparring with his formidable trainer .
His eyes shone and his skin glowed with exuberent health , and he was so confident of success that my own misgivings vanished as I watched his gallant bearing and listened to his quiet and cheerful words .
`` You are an active young fellow , nephew , '' said he .
`` Do you not think that you could engage to climb round the furniture of an ordinary room without setting foot upon the ground ?
Some little tour-de-force of the sort is in excellent taste .
There was a captain in the Guards who attained considerable social success by doing it for a small wager .
Lady Lieven , who is exceedingly exigeant , used to invite him to her evenings merely that he might exhibit it . ''
`` Then I fear , sir , that there is none for me , '' said I .
`` But my father has every hope that Lord Nelson will find me a position in the fleet .
If I have been a failure in town , I am none the less conscious of your kindness in trying to advance my interests , and I hope that , should I receive my commission , I may be a credit to you yet . ''
`` You show me in this instant , young man , d 'ye 'ear ?
Let me see your master , or it 'll be the worse for you . ''
The bruiser very calmly seated himself astride of a chair with his arms resting upon the back of it .
`` If anything had gone wrong I should have heard . ''
`` I 'll tell you what I mean , sir .
You know that 'e ai n't to be overmuch depended on at any time , and that 'e 'ad a grudge against your man 'cause 'e laid 'im out in the coach-'ouse .
Well , last night about ten o'clock in 'e comes into my bar , and the three bloodiest rogues in London at 'is 'eels .
There was Red Ike , 'im that was warned off the ring 'cause 'e fought a cross with Bittoon ; and there was Fightin ' Yussef , who would sell 'is mother for a seven-shillin'-bit ; the third was Chris McCarthy , who is a fogle-snatcher by trade , with a pitch outside the 'Aymarket Theatre .
You do n't often see four such beauties together , and all with as much as they could carry , save only Chris , who is too leary a cove to drink when there 's somethin ' goin ' forward .
For my part , I showed 'em into the parlour , not 'cos they was worthy of it , but 'cos I knew right well they would start bashin ' some of my customers , and maybe get my license into trouble if I left 'em in the bar .
I served 'em with drink , and stayed with 'em just to see that they did n't lay their 'ands on the stuffed parroquet and the pictures .
`` I 'll see to it , sir , '' said I , and away I ran to the mews in Little Ryder Street , where my uncle stabled his horses .
The groom was away , and I had to send a lad in search of him , while with the help of the livery-man I dragged the curricle from the coach-house and brought the two mares out of their stalls .
It was half an hour , or possibly three-quarters , before everything had been found , and Lorimer was already waiting in Jermyn Street with the inevitable baskets , whilst my uncle stood in the open door of his house , clad in his long fawn-coloured driving-coat , with no sign upon his calm pale face of the tumult of impatience which must , I was sure , be raging within .
`` And the odds 'ave risen to ten to one . ''
`` In that case we may be too late . ''
`` Has he passed ? ''
`` If Belcher were with him I should have no fear .
But you can not tell what diablerie they may be up to .
Let us only find him safe and sound , and I 'll never lose sight of him until I see him in the ring .
We 'll sit up on guard with our pistols , nephew , and I only trust that these villains may be indiscreet enough to attempt it .
But they must have been very sure of success before they put the odds up to such a figure , and it is that which alarms me . ''
`` Where is Belcher ? ''
`` He has gone to his room , sir .
I believe that he should have a clear twelve hours ' sleep before fighting . ''
`` It is a pity to wake him . ''
We passed along the low-roofed , devious corridors of the old- fashioned inn to the back of the house .
`` This is my room , sir , '' said Belcher , nodding to a door upon the right .
`` This one upon the left is his . ''
He threw it open as he spoke .
`` Here 's Sir Charles Tregellis come to see you , Jim , '' said he ; and then , `` Good Lord , what is the meaning of this ? ''
`` A woman ! ''
`` By Heaven , you 're right , nephew , '' said my uncle .
`` That is perfectly certain , '' said my uncle .
`` There 's not a moment to be lost .
We must divide and search in different directions , unless we can get some clue as to where they have gone . ''
`` Well , master , I 've been in an ' out of the stables this hour back .
We ca n't pack in another 'orse , and there 's no use tryin ' .
I dare n't 'ardly give them their feed , for , if they was to thicken out just ever so little -- ''
I cast a quick glance at my uncle , and I saw that the shadow had deepened upon his face .
`` Well , sir , it was a kind of a cry out yonder as if some one 'ad got 'imself into trouble .
I thought , maybe , two sparks were fightin ' , and I took no partic'lar notice . ''
`` Was it distant ? ''
All through that weary night my uncle and I , with Belcher , Berkeley Craven , and a dozen of the Corinthians , searched the country side for some trace of our missing man , but save for that ill-boding splash upon the road not the slightest clue could be obtained as to what had befallen him .
No one had seen or heard anything of him , and the single cry in the night of which the ostler told us was the only indication of the tragedy which had taken place .
In small parties we scoured the country as far as East Grinstead and Bletchingley , and the sun had been long over the horizon before we found ourselves back at Crawley once more with heavy hearts and tired feet .
My uncle , who had driven to Reigate in the hope of gaining some intelligence , did not return until past seven o'clock , and a glance at his face gave us the same black news which he gathered from ours .
`` No , '' said I .
`` I know of none . ''
This theory sounded so reasonable that it seemed to lift a little of the weight from my heart , but I could see that from my uncle 's point of view it was a poor consolation .
`` Listen to that ! ''
Out of the babel of voices and roaring of wheels outside the window a single sentence struck sharply on our ears .
`` Even money upon Sir Charles 's nominee ! ''
`` But not to me , '' I cried .
`` It 's John Cumming , the landlord of the inn at Friar 's Oak .
I 've known him ever since I was a boy , and I ca n't be mistaken . ''
`` Nothing at all , in all probability , '' answered my uncle .
`` He is backing young Jim because he knows him , and because he has more brandy than sense .
His drunken confidence set others to do the same , and so the odds came down . ''
It was close upon nine o'clock when we were ready to start for the Downs , and by that time my uncle 's curricle was almost the only vehicle left in the village street .
The night before they had lain with their wheels interlocking and their shafts under each other's bodies , as thick as they could fit , from the old church to the Crawley Elm , spanning the road five-deep for a good half-mile in length .
Now the grey village street lay before us almost deserted save by a few women and children .
Men , horses , carriages -- all were gone .
My uncle drew on his driving-gloves and arranged his costume with punctilious neatness ; but I observed that he glanced up and down the road with a haggard and yet expectant eye before he took his seat .
I sat behind with Belcher , while the Hon .
Berkeley Craven took the place beside him .
We could hear a sound like the waves upon the beach , long before we came in sight of that mighty multitude , and then at last , on a sudden dip of the road , we saw it lying before us , a whirlpool of humanity with an open vortex in the centre .
All round , the thousands of carriages and horses were dotted over the moor , and the slopes were gay with tents and booths .
A spot had been chosen for the ring , where a great basin had been hollowed out in the ground , so that all round that natural amphitheatre a crowd of thirty thousand people could see very well what was going on in the centre .
As we drove up a buzz of greeting came from the people upon the fringe which was nearest to us , spreading and spreading , until the whole multitude had joined in the acclamation .
Then an instant later a second shout broke forth , beginning from the other side of the arena , and the faces which had been turned towards us whisked round , so that in a twinkling the whole foreground changed from white to dark .
`` What do you mean by asking me such a question ? ''
`` I promise you that we shall , '' answered my uncle , grimly .
`` Meanwhile , I hold you to the terms of your wager .
Unless you produce your nominee within five-and-twenty minutes , I claim the match . ''
`` I could not wish a better one . ''
In the meantime the last of the carriages had come up , and the horses had all been picketed upon the moor .
The stragglers who had dotted the grass had closed in until the huge crowd was one unit with a single mighty voice , which was already beginning to bellow its impatience .
Looking round , there was hardly a moving object upon the whole vast expanse of green and purple down .
A belated gig was coming at full gallop down the road which led from the south , and a few pedestrians were still trailing up from Crawley , but nowhere was there a sign of the missing man .
Sir Lothian Hume had been looking impatiently at his watch , and now he shut it with a triumphant snap .
`` Time is not up , '' said Craven .
`` I have still five minutes . ''
My uncle looked round with despairing eyes .
`` It 's a cross !
It 's a cross !
It 's a fake ! ''
`` Two minutes , Tregellis ! ''
There was a sudden swirl in the crowd , a rush , a shout , and high up in the air there spun an old black hat , floating over the heads of the ring-siders and flickering down within the ropes .
`` Your friend has certainly cut it rather fine , nephew . ''
Looking down at the crowd , we had seen the head and shoulders of a powerful and strenuous man moving slowly forward , and leaving behind him a long V-shaped ripple upon its surface like the wake of a swimming dog .
Now , as he pushed his way through the looser fringe the head was raised , and there was the grinning , hardy face of the smith looking up at us .
He had left his hat in the ring , and was enveloped in an overcoat with a blue bird's-eye handkerchief tied round his neck .
As he emerged from the throng he let his great-coat fly loose , and showed that he was dressed in his full fighting kit -- black drawers , chocolate stockings , and white shoes .
She hurried away , and I saw her afterwards seated amongst the bracken , her back turned towards the multitude , and her hands over her ears , cowering and wincing in an agony of apprehension .
`` I beg to lodge a formal protest against these proceedings , '' said he .
`` Sir Charles Tregellis is quite within his rights , '' said Craven , firmly .
`` He undertook to produce a man who should be within the age limits stipulated , and I understand that Harrison fulfils all the conditions .
You are over five-and-thirty , Harrison ? ''
`` Sir , '' said my uncle , raising his hat in his most impressive manner , `` I am infinitely obliged to you .
With the referee 's permission , there is nothing for it but to shift the stakes . ''
`` What do you think of your chances , Harrison ? ''
I heard my uncle ask , as the two mares picked their way over the broken ground .
`` I 'm always in training , sir .
I work hard from morning to night , and I drink little else than water .
I do n't think that Captain Barclay can do much better with all his rules . ''
The proceedings might have opened by an impromptu bye-battle between the indignant cockney and the gentleman from Bristol , but a prolonged roar of applause broke in upon their altercation .
It was caused by the appearance in the ring of Crab Wilson , followed by Dutch Sam and Mendoza carrying the basin , sponge , brandy-bladder , and other badges of their office .
As he entered Wilson pulled the canary-yellow handkerchief from his waist , and going to the corner post , he tied it to the top of it , where it remained fluttering in the breeze .
He then took a bundle of smaller ribands of the same colour from his seconds , and walking round , he offered them to the noblemen and Corinthians at half-a-guinea apiece as souvenirs of the fight .
His brisk trade was only brought to an end by the appearance of Harrison , who climbed in a very leisurely manner over the ropes , as befitted his more mature years and less elastic joints .
The yell which greeted him was even more enthusiastic than that which had heralded Wilson , and there was a louder ring of admiration in it , for the crowd had already had their opportunity of seeing Wilson's physique , whilst Harrison 's was a surprise to them .
`` May I ask , Mr .
Referee , whether these two men have been weighed ? ''
asked Sir Lothian Hume , standing up in the outer ring .
`` Beat , is he ? ''
`` You 'll need to rent this field before you can beat him , for he 'll stand a month of that kind of fly-flappin ' . ''
He was swinging a towel in front of Harrison as he spoke , whilst Baldwin mopped him with the sponge .
And Harrison went in , in such fashion that no man who saw him do it will ever forget it .
Crab Wilson , as game as a pebble , met him with a flush hit every time , but no human strength or human science seemed capable of stopping the terrible onslaught of this iron man .
Round after round he scrambled his way in , slap-bang , right and left , every hit tremendously sent home .
Sometimes he covered his own face with his left , and sometimes he disdained to use any guard at all , but his springing hits were irresistible .
The rain lashed down upon them , pouring from their faces and running in crimson trickles over their bodies , but neither gave any heed to it save to manoeuvre always with the view of bringing it in to each other's eyes .
But round after round the west-countryman fell , and round after round the betting rose , until the odds were higher in our favour than ever they had been against us .
With a sinking heart , filled with pity and admiration for these two gallant men , I longed that every bout might be the last , and yet the `` Time ! ''
was hardly out of Jackson 's mouth before they had both sprung from their second 's knees , with laughter upon their mutilated faces and chaffing words upon their bleeding lips .
It may have been a humble object-lesson , but I give you my word that many a time in my life I have braced myself to a hard task by the remembrance of that morning upon Crawley Downs , asking myself if my manhood were so weak that I would not do for my country , or for those whom I loved , as much as these two would endure for a paltry stake and for their own credit amongst their fellows .
Such a spectacle may brutalize those who are brutal , but I say that there is a spiritual side to it also , and that the sight of the utmost human limit of endurance and courage is one which bears a lesson of its own .
`` I wo n't be taken away !
Who dares say so ? ''
cried Wilson , who was back , after another fall , upon his second 's knee .
`` You have already an account to answer for with me , '' said Hume , with his sinister sneer , and as he spoke he was swept by the rush of the crowd into my uncle 's very arms .
The two men 's faces were not more than a few inches apart , and Sir Lothian 's bold eyes had to sink before the imperious scorn which gleamed coldly in those of my uncle .
`` My man has the fight in hand . ''
`` Well , I see no help for it .
As referee I order that the men be withdrawn , and that the stakes be returned to their owners . ''
`` I ought to be pole-axed , I ought , '' he cried in bitter repentance .
`` I asked for you , Sir Charles , as I 'm a livin ' man , I did , but you were n't there , and what with bein ' so pleased at gettin ' such odds when I knew Harrison was goin ' to fight , an ' what with the landlord at the George wantin ' me to try his own specials , I let my senses go clean away from me .
And now it 's only after the fight is over that I see you , Sir Charles , an ' if you lay that whip over my back , it's only what I deserve . ''
He whipped up the mares , and now from the curve of the road we could see the high dark pinnacles of the old Manor-house shooting up above the ancient oaks which ring it round .
The sight of it , with its bloodstained and ghost-blasted reputation , would in itself have been enough to send a thrill through my nerves ; but when the words of my uncle made me suddenly realize that this strange summons was indeed for the two men who were concerned in that old-world tragedy , and that it was the playmate of my youth who had sent it , I caught my breath as I seemed vaguely to catch a glimpse of some portentous thing forming itself in front of us .
The rusted gates between the crumbling heraldic pillars were folded back , and my uncle flicked the mares impatiently as we flew up the weed-grown avenue , until he pulled them on their haunches before the time-blotched steps .
The front door was open , and Boy Jim was waiting there to meet us .
But it was a different Boy Jim from him whom I had known and loved .
There was a change in him somewhere , a change so marked that it was the first thing that I noticed , and yet so subtle that I could not put words to it .
He was not better dressed than of old , for I well knew the old brown suit that he wore .
`` Hush , mother ! ''
said Jim , turning his lips to her cheek .
`` There are some things which are between ourselves .
But tell me , Sir Charles , how went the fight ? ''
The yellow barouche had swung into the avenue , and a few moments later the weary , panting horses had pulled up behind our curricle .
Sir Lothian sprang out , looking as black as a thunder-cloud .
`` Stay where you are , Corcoran , '' said he ; and I caught a glimpse of a bottle-green coat which told me who was his travelling companion .
`` Well , '' he continued , looking round him with an insolent stare , `` I should vastly like to know who has had the insolence to give me so pressing an invitation to visit my own house , and what in the devil you mean by daring to trespass upon my grounds ? ''
Our enemy said nothing ; but his little grey eyes slid round with a most murderous glance in our direction .
`` In God 's name , then , tell us who your father is ! ''
There was an instant of silence , broken by a deep oath from Sir Lothian Hume -
`` No Charles , '' said he .
`` You believed me to have done this deed , Charles .
I read it in your eyes and in your manner on that terrible morning .
You never asked me for an explanation .
You never considered how impossible such a crime must be for a man of my character .
At the first breath of suspicion you , my intimate friend , the man who knew me best , set me down as a thief and a murderer . ''
`` You have explained , sir ; but it is for others in another place to say if that explanation is satisfactory . ''
Two blazing dark eyes flashed out of the pale haggard face with as strange and sudden an effect as if a stream of light were to beat through the windows of a shattered and ruined house .
`` My word is proof to those who know me . ''
`` A very pretty conspiracy this , '' he cried , `` with a criminal , an actress , and a prize-fighter all playing their parts .
Sir Charles Tregellis , you shall hear from me again !
And you also , my lord ! ''
He turned upon his heel and strode from the room .
`` No , no , let him go .
It is as well , for I have already made up my mind that my duty to you , my son , outweighs that which I owe , and have at such bitter cost fulfilled , to my brother and my family . ''
`` I saw you , Ned , upon that accursed night . ''
`` I thank God that I hear you say so . ''
`` It has been pricked with a pin . ''
`` It is the king of clubs . ''
`` They will arrest me ! ''
`` I must submit to the degradation of an arrest . ''
`` I have not the honour , Sir James . ''
`` You will allow me to observe , sir , that I have personal interests of the highest importance involved in this matter , I have every reason to believe that there is a conspiracy afoot which will affect my position as heir to Lord Avon 's titles and estates .
I desire his safe custody in order that this matter may be cleared up , and I call upon you , as a magistrate , to execute your warrant . ''
`` Yours is a true heart , James . ''
Sir Lothian shrugged his shoulders , and looked blackly at the magistrate .
Then he turned to my uncle .
`` There is a small matter still open between us , '' said he .
`` Would you kindly give me the name of a friend ?
Mr. Corcoran , who is outside in my barouche , would act for me , and we might meet to- morrow morning . ''
And so this strange conference ended .
As for me , I had sprung to the side of the old friend of my boyhood , and was trying to tell him my joy at his good fortune , and listening to his assurance that nothing that could ever befall him could weaken the love that he bore me .
My uncle touched me on the shoulder , and we were about to leave , when Ambrose , whose bronze mask had been drawn down once more over his fiery passions , came demurely towards him .
`` Beg your pardon , Sir Charles , '' said he ; `` but it shocks me very much to see your cravat . ''
Of all the amazing things which had happened , this seemed to have impressed my uncle most , and he recurred to it again and again .
That a man whom he had come to regard as a machine for tying cravats and brewing chocolate should suddenly develop fiery human passions was indeed a prodigy .
If his silver razor-heater had taken to evil ways he could not have been more astounded .
`` No , no ; I shall make the effort .
Ambrose , you will bring up the batteris de toilette at five . ''
`` I do n't know whether you would care to use my barkers , '' said my father .
`` I 've had 'em in fourteen actions , and up to thirty yards you could n't wish a better tool . ''
I need not tell you how my dear mother wept over me and fondled me , for you who have mothers will know for yourselves , and you who have not will never understand how warm and snug the home nest can be .
How I had chafed and longed for the wonders of town , and yet , now that I had seen more than my wildest dreams had ever deemed possible , my eyes had rested upon nothing which was so sweet and so restful as our own little sitting-room , with its terra-cotta- coloured walls , and those trifles which are so insignificant in themselves , and yet so rich in memories -- the blow-fish from the Moluccas , the narwhal 's horn from the Arctic , and the picture of the Ca Ira , with Lord Hotham in chase !
How cheery , too , to see at one side of the shining grate my father with his pipe and his merry red face , and on the other my mother with her fingers ever turning and darting with her knitting-needles !
As I looked at them I marvelled that I could ever have longed to leave them , or that I could bring myself to leave them again .
In the yellow glare of the carriage-lamp I saw the baronet look up at our windows , and if hatred could have killed , his eyes would have been as deadly as his pistol .
`` He 's napped it this time !
Get 'im by the wrists , Jim !
Now , all together ! ''
It is , however , unfortunately impossible entirely to separate the sensational from the criminal , and a chronicler is left in the dilemma that he must either sacrifice details which are essential to his statement and so give a false impression of the problem , or he must use matter which chance , and not choice , has provided him with .
With this short preface I shall turn to my notes of what proved to be a strange , though a peculiarly terrible , chain of events .
It was a blazing hot day in August .
Baker Street was like an oven , and the glare of the sunlight upon the yellow brickwork of the house across the road was painful to the eye .
It was hard to believe that these were the same walls which loomed so gloomily through the fogs of winter .
Our blinds were half-drawn , and Holmes lay curled upon the sofa , reading and re-reading a letter which he had received by the morning post .
For myself , my term of service in India had trained me to stand heat better than cold , and a thermometer at ninety was no hardship .
But the morning paper was uninteresting .
Everybody was out of town , and I yearned for the glades of the New Forest or the shingle of Southsea .
A depleted bank account had caused me to postpone my holiday , and as to my companion , neither the country nor the sea presented the slightest attraction to him .
He loved to lie in the very center of five millions of people , with his filaments stretching out and running through them , responsive to every little rumour or suspicion of unsolved crime .
Appreciation of nature found no place among his many gifts , and his only change was when he turned his mind from the evil-doer of the town to track down his brother of the country .
Finding that Holmes was too absorbed for conversation I had tossed aside the barren paper , and leaning back in my chair I fell into a brown study .
Suddenly my companion 's voice broke in upon my thoughts : `` You are right , Watson , '' said he .
`` It does seem a most preposterous way of settling a dispute . ''
`` Most preposterous ! ''
I exclaimed , and then suddenly realizing how he had echoed the inmost thought of my soul , I sat up in my chair and stared at him in blank amazement .
`` What is this , Holmes ? ''
`` This is beyond anything which I could have imagined . ''
He laughed heartily at my perplexity .
`` You remember , '' said he , `` that some little time ago when I read you the passage in one of Poe 's sketches in which a close reasoner follows the unspoken thoughts of his companion , you were inclined to treat the matter as a mere tour-de-force of the author .
On my remarking that I was constantly in the habit of doing the same thing you expressed incredulity . ''
`` Oh , no ! ''
`` Perhaps not with your tongue , my dear Watson , but certainly with your eyebrows .
So when I saw you throw down your paper and enter upon a train of thought , I was very happy to have the opportunity of reading it off , and eventually of breaking into it , as a proof that I had been in rapport with you . ''
But I was still far from satisfied .
`` In the example which you read to me , '' said I , `` the reasoner drew his conclusions from the actions of the man whom he observed .
If I remember right , he stumbled over a heap of stones , looked up at the stars , and so on .
But I have been seated quietly in my chair , and what clues can I have given you ? ''
`` You do yourself an injustice .
The features are given to man as the means by which he shall express his emotions , and yours are faithful servants . ''
`` Do you mean to say that you read my train of thoughts from my features ? ''
`` Your features and especially your eyes .
Perhaps you can not yourself recall how your reverie commenced ? ''
`` No , I can not . ''
`` Then I will tell you .
After throwing down your paper , which was the action which drew my attention to you , you sat for half a minute with a vacant expression .
Then your eyes fixed themselves upon your newly framed picture of General Gordon , and I saw by the alteration in your face that a train of thought had been started .
But it did not lead very far .
Your eyes flashed across to the unframed portrait of Henry Ward Beecher which stands upon the top of your books .
Then you glanced up at the wall , and of course your meaning was obvious .
You were thinking that if the portrait were framed it would just cover that bare space and correspond with Gordon 's picture there . ''
`` You have followed me wonderfully ! ''
`` So far I could hardly have gone astray .
But now your thoughts went back to Beecher , and you looked hard across as if you were studying the character in his features .
Then your eyes ceased to pucker , but you continued to look across , and your face was thoughtful .
You were recalling the incidents of Beecher 's career .
I was well aware that you could not do this without thinking of the mission which he undertook on behalf of the North at the time of the Civil War , for I remember your expressing your passionate indignation at the way in which he was received by the more turbulent of our people .
You felt so strongly about it that I knew you could not think of Beecher without thinking of that also .
When a moment later I saw your eyes wander away from the picture , I suspected that your mind had now turned to the Civil War , and when I observed that your lips set , your eyes sparkled , and your hands clenched I was positive that you were indeed thinking of the gallantry which was shown by both sides in that desperate struggle .
But then , again , your face grew sadder , you shook your head .
You were dwelling upon the sadness and horror and useless waste of life .
Your hand stole towards your own old wound and a smile quivered on your lips , which showed me that the ridiculous side of this method of settling international questions had forced itself upon your mind .
At this point I agreed with you that it was preposterous and was glad to find that all my deductions had been correct . ''
`` And now that you have explained it , I confess that I am as amazed as before . ''
`` It was very superficial , my dear Watson , I assure you .
I should not have intruded it upon your attention had you not shown some incredulity the other day .
But I have in my hands here a little problem which may prove to be more difficult of solution than my small essay in thought reading .
Have you observed in the paper a short paragraph referring to the remarkable contents of a packet sent through the post to Miss Cushing , of Cross Street , Croydon ? ''
`` No , I saw nothing . ''
then you must have overlooked it .
Just toss it over to me .
Here it is , under the financial column .
Perhaps you would be good enough to read it aloud . ''
I picked up the paper which he had thrown back to me and read the paragraph indicated .
It was headed , `` A Gruesome Packet . ''
`` Miss Susan Cushing , living at Cross Street , Croydon , has been made the victim of what must be regarded as a peculiarly revolting practical joke unless some more sinister meaning should prove to be attached to the incident .
At two o'clock yesterday afternoon a small packet , wrapped in brown paper , was handed in by the postman .
A cardboard box was inside , which was filled with coarse salt .
On emptying this , Miss Cushing was horrified to find two human ears , apparently quite freshly severed .
The box had been sent by parcel post from Belfast upon the morning before .
There is no indication as to the sender , and the matter is the more mysterious as Miss Cushing , who is a maiden lady of fifty , has led a most retired life , and has so few acquaintances or correspondents that it is a rare event for her to receive anything through the post .
Some years ago , however , when she resided at Penge , she let apartments in her house to three young medical students , whom she was obliged to get rid of on account of their noisy and irregular habits .
The police are of opinion that this outrage may have been perpetrated upon Miss Cushing by these youths , who owed her a grudge and who hoped to frighten her by sending her these relics of the dissecting-rooms .
Some probability is lent to the theory by the fact that one of these students came from the north of Ireland , and , to the best of Miss Cushing 's belief , from Belfast .
In the meantime , the matter is being actively investigated , Mr. Lestrade , one of the very smartest of our detective officers , being in charge of the case . ''
`` So much for the Daily Chronicle , '' said Holmes as I finished reading .
`` Now for our friend Lestrade .
I had a note from him this morning , in which he says : `` I think that this case is very much in your line .
We have every hope of clearing the matter up , but we find a little difficulty in getting anything to work upon .
We have , of course , wired to the Belfast post-office , but a large number of parcels were handed in upon that day , and they have no means of identifying this particular one , or of remembering the sender .
The box is a half-pound box of honeydew tobacco and does not help us in any way .
The medical student theory still appears to me to be the most feasible , but if you should have a few hours to spare I should be very happy to see you out here .
I shall be either at the house or in the police-station all day .
`` What say you , Watson ?
Can you rise superior to the heat and run down to Croydon with me on the off chance of a case for your annals ? ''
`` I was longing for something to do . ''
`` You shall have it then .
Ring for our boots and tell them to order a cab .
I 'll be back in a moment when I have changed my dressing-gown and filled my cigar-case . ''
A shower of rain fell while we were in the train , and the heat was far less oppressive in Croydon than in town .
Holmes had sent on a wire , so that Lestrade , as wiry , as dapper , and as ferret-like as ever , was waiting for us at the station .
A walk of five minutes took us to Cross Street , where Miss Cushing resided .
It was a very long street of two-story brick houses , neat and prim , with whitened stone steps and little groups of aproned women gossiping at the doors .
Halfway down , Lestrade stopped and tapped at a door , which was opened by a small servant girl .
Miss Cushing was sitting in the front room , into which we were ushered .
She was a placid-faced woman , with large , gentle eyes , and grizzled hair curving down over her temples on each side .
A worked antimacassar lay upon her lap and a basket of coloured silks stood upon a stool beside her .
It was a small shed in the narrow garden which ran behind the house .
Lestrade went in and brought out a yellow cardboard box , with a piece of brown paper and some string .
There was a bench at the end of the path , and we all sat down while Homes examined one by one , the articles which Lestrade had handed to him .
`` You are sure of it ? ''
`` You have two sisters , I believe . ''
`` And here at my elbow is another portrait , taken at Liverpool , of your younger sister , in the company of a man who appears to be a steward by his uniform .
I observe that she was unmarried at the time . ''
you do n't know Sarah 's temper or you would wonder no more .
I tried it when I came to Croydon , and we kept on until about two months ago , when we had to part .
I do n't want to say a word against my own sister , but she was always meddlesome and hard to please , was Sarah . ''
`` Miss Sarah Cushing is extremely ill , '' said he .
`` She has been suffering since yesterday from brain symptoms of great severity .
As her medical adviser , I can not possibly take the responsibility of allowing anyone to see her .
I should recommend you to call again in ten days . ''
He drew on his gloves , closed the door , and marched off down the street .
`` Well , if we ca n't we ca n't , '' said Holmes , cheerfully .
`` Perhaps she could not or would not have told you much . ''
`` I have found out everything ! ''
Lestrade stared at him in amazement .
`` You are joking . ''
`` It is fairly complete in essentials .
We know who the author of the revolting business is , although one of the victims still escapes us .
Of course , you have formed your own conclusions . ''
`` As a medical man , you are aware , Watson , that there is no part of the body which varies so much as the human ear .
Each ear is as a rule quite distinctive and differs from all other ones .
In last year's Anthropological Journal you will find two short monographs from my pen upon the subject .
I had , therefore , examined the ears in the box with the eyes of an expert and had carefully noted their anatomical peculiarities .
Imagine my surprise , then , when on looking at Miss Cushing I perceived that her ear corresponded exactly with the female ear which I had just inspected .
The matter was entirely beyond coincidence .
There was the same shortening of the pinna , the same broad curve of the upper lobe , the same convolution of the inner cartilage .
In all essentials it was the same ear .
`` 'It was in this way .
We had gone on the May Day for a round voyage of seven days , but a hogshead got loose and started one of our plates , so that we had to put back into port for twelve hours .
I left the ship and came home , thinking what a surprise it would be for my wife , and hoping that maybe she would be glad to see me so soon .
The thought was in my head as I turned into my own street , and at that moment a cab passed me , and there she was , sitting by the side of Fairbairn , the two chatting and laughing , with never a thought for me as I stood watching them from the footpath .
`` 'Well , I took to my heels , and I ran after the cab .
I had a heavy oak stick in my hand , and I tell you I saw red from the first ; but as I ran I got cunning , too , and hung back a little to see them without being seen .
They pulled up soon at the railway station .
There was a good crowd round the booking-office , so I got quite close to them without being seen .
They took tickets for New Brighton .
So did I , but I got in three carriages behind them .
When we reached it they walked along the Parade , and I was never more than a hundred yards from them .
At last I saw them hire a boat and start for a row , for it was a very hot day , and they thought , no doubt , that it would be cooler on the water .
`` 'It was just as if they had been given into my hands .
There was a bit of a haze , and you could not see more than a few hundred yards .
I hired a boat for myself , and I pulled after them .
I could see the blur of their craft , but they were going nearly as fast as I , and they must have been a long mile from the shore before I caught them up .
The haze was like a curtain all round us , and there were we three in the middle of it .
My God , shall I ever forget their faces when they saw who was in the boat that was closing in upon them ?
He swore like a madman and jabbed at me with an oar , for he must have seen death in my eyes .
I got past it and got one in with my stick that crushed his head like an egg .
I would have spared her , perhaps , for all my madness , but she threw her arms round him , crying out to him , and calling him `` Alec . ''
I struck again , and she lay stretched beside him .
I was like a wild beast then that had tasted blood .
If Sarah had been there , by the Lord , she should have joined them .
I pulled out my knife , and -- well , there !
I 've said enough .
It gave me a kind of savage joy when I thought how Sarah would feel when she had such signs as these of what her meddling had brought about .
Then I tied the bodies into the boat , stove a plank , and stood by until they had sunk .
I knew very well that the owner would think that they had lost their bearings in the haze , and had drifted off out to sea .
I cleaned myself up , got back to land , and joined my ship without a soul having a suspicion of what had passed .
That night I made up the packet for Sarah Cushing , and next day I sent it from Belfast .
I moved my head to look at the cabinet behind me .
When I turned again , Sherlock Holmes was standing smiling at me across my study table .
I rose to my feet , stared at him for some seconds in utter amazement , and then it appears that I must have fainted for the first and the last time in my life .
Certainly a gray mist swirled before my eyes , and when it cleared I found my collar-ends undone and the tingling after-taste of brandy upon my lips .
Holmes was bending over my chair , his flask in his hand .
`` It came about in this way .
The instant that the Professor had disappeared , it struck me what a really extraordinarily lucky chance Fate had placed in my way .
I knew that Moriarty was not the only man who had sworn my death .
There were at least three others whose desire for vengeance upon me would only be increased by the death of their leader .
They were all most dangerous men .
One or other would certainly get me .
On the other hand , if all the world was convinced that I was dead they would take liberties , these men , they would soon lay themselves open , and sooner or later I could destroy them .
Then it would be time for me to announce that I was still in the land of the living .
So rapidly does the brain act that I believe I had thought this all out before Professor Moriarty had reached the bottom of the Reichenbach Fall .
`` At last , when you had all formed your inevitable and totally erroneous conclusions , you departed for the hotel , and I was left alone .
I had imagined that I had reached the end of my adventures , but a very unexpected occurrence showed me that there were surprises still in store for me .
A huge rock , falling from above , boomed past me , struck the path , and bounded over into the chasm .
For an instant I thought that it was an accident , but a moment later , looking up , I saw a man 's head against the darkening sky , and another stone struck the very ledge upon which I was stretched , within a foot of my head .
Of course , the meaning of this was obvious .
Moriarty had not been alone .
A confederate -- and even that one glance had told me how dangerous a man that confederate was -- had kept guard while the Professor had attacked me .
From a distance , unseen by me , he had been a witness of his friend 's death and of my escape .
He had waited , and then making his way round to the top of the cliff , he had endeavoured to succeed where his comrade had failed .
`` Because , my dear Watson , I had the strongest possible reason for wishing certain people to think that I was there when I was really elsewhere . ''
`` And you thought the rooms were watched ? ''
`` How do you know ? ''
`` That you , Lestrade ? ''
`` I confess that you had one small surprise for me , '' said Holmes .
`` I did not anticipate that you would yourself make use of this empty house and this convenient front window .
I had imagined you as operating from the street , where my friend , Lestrade and his merry men were awaiting you .
With that exception , all has gone as I expected . ''
Mr. Sherlock Holmes was leaning back in his chair after his whimsical protest , and was unfolding his morning paper in a leisurely fashion , when our attention was arrested by a tremendous ring at the bell , followed immediately by a hollow drumming sound , as if someone were beating on the outer door with his fist .
As it opened there came a tumultuous rush into the hall , rapid feet clattered up the stair , and an instant later a wild-eyed and frantic young man , pale , disheveled , and palpitating , burst into the room .
He looked from one to the other of us , and under our gaze of inquiry he became conscious that some apology was needed for this unceremonious entry .
`` Mr. John Hector McFarlane ? ''
McFarlane turned to us with a gesture of despair , and sank into his chair once more like one who is crushed .
`` None the less , with your permission , I should be much interested to hear his account . ''
Lestrade looked at his watch .
`` I 'll give you half an hour , '' said he .
`` 'Here is my will , ' said he .
'I want you , Mr. McFarlane , to cast it into proper legal shape .
I will sit here while you do so . '
`` One moment ! ''
`` Who opened the door ? ''
`` A middle-aged woman , who was , I suppose , his housekeeper . ''
`` Exactly , '' said McFarlane .
`` Well , what do YOU make of it ? ''
My friend seemed struck by this remark .
I do not know how far Sherlock Holmes took any sleep that night , but when I came down to breakfast I found him pale and harassed , his bright eyes the brighter for the dark shadows round them .
The carpet round his chair was littered with cigarette-ends and with the early editions of the morning papers .
An open telegram lay upon the table .
`` It is Lestrade 's little cock-a-doodle of victory , '' Holmes answered , with a bitter smile .
`` And yet it may be premature to abandon the case .
After all , important fresh evidence is a two-edged thing , and may possibly cut in a very different direction to that which Lestrade imagines .
Take your breakfast , Watson , and we will go out together and see what we can do .
I feel as if I shall need your company and your moral support today . ''
My friend had no breakfast himself , for it was one of his peculiarities that in his more intense moments he would permit himself no food , and I have known him presume upon his iron strength until he has fainted from pure inanition .
`` At present I can not spare energy and nerve force for digestion , '' he would say in answer to my medical remonstrances .
I was not surprised , therefore , when this morning he left his untouched meal behind him , and started with me for Norwood .
A crowd of morbid sightseers were still gathered round Deep Dene House , which was just such a suburban villa as I had pictured .
Within the gates Lestrade met us , his face flushed with victory , his manner grossly triumphant .
`` Well , Mr. Holmes , have you proved us to be wrong yet ?
Have you found your tramp ? ''
Something in his tone caught my ear , and I turned to look at him .
An extraordinary change had come over his face .
It was writhing with inward merriment .
His two eyes were shining like stars .
It seemed to me that he was making desperate efforts to restrain a convulsive attack of laughter .
`` Yes , some of us are a little too much inclined to be cock-sure , Mr. Holmes , '' said Lestrade .
The man 's insolence was maddening , but we could not resent it .
`` By the way , Lestrade , who made this remarkable discovery ? ''
`` It was the housekeeper , Mrs. Lexington , who drew the night constable's attention to it . ''
Lestrade looked at Holmes as if he thought he was going out of his mind .
I confess that I was myself surprised both at his hilarious manner and at his rather wild observation .
`` Only this : that I KNOW that that mark was not there when I examined the hall yesterday .
And now , Watson , let us have a little stroll round in the sunshine . ''
`` I think I can . ''
`` I have no doubt they are , though I fail to see what their voices have to do with it . ''
`` Just once more , gentlemen , and all together . ''
A lath-and-plaster partition had been run across the passage six feet from the end , with a door cunningly concealed in it .
It was lit within by slits under the eaves .
A few articles of furniture and a supply of food and water were within , together with a number of books and papers .
`` Well , that 's likely enough . ''
`` That 's for a jury to decide , '' said Lestrade .
`` Anyhow , we shall have you on a charge of conspiracy , if not for attempted murder . ''
`` I fancy that , for some few years , you will find your time very fully occupied , '' said he .
`` By the way , what was it you put into the wood-pile besides your old trousers ?
A dead dog , or rabbits , or what ?
Dear me , how very unkind of you !
Well , well , I daresay that a couple of rabbits would account both for the blood and for the charred ashes .
If ever you write an account , Watson , you can make rabbits serve your turn . ''
He wheeled round upon his stool , with a steaming test-tube in his hand , and a gleam of amusement in his deep-set eyes .
`` I ought to make you sign a paper to that effect . ''
`` I see no connection . ''
I looked with amazement at the absurd hieroglyphics upon the paper .
`` Why , Holmes , it is a child 's drawing , '' I cried .
`` Well , Mr. Holmes , what do you make of these ? ''
`` They told me that you were fond of queer mysteries , and I do n't think you can find a queerer one than that .
I sent the paper on ahead , so that you might have time to study it before I came . ''
`` Do n't you think , Mr. Cubitt , '' said he , at last , `` that your best plan would be to make a direct appeal to your wife , and to ask her to share her secret with you ? ''
`` Then I will help you with all my heart .
In the first place , have you heard of any strangers being seen in your neighbourhood ? ''
`` What , the man who draws them ? ''
`` Yes , I saw him at his work .
But I will tell you everything in order .
When I got back after my visit to you , the very first thing I saw next morning was a fresh crop of dancing men .
They had been drawn in chalk upon the black wooden door of the tool-house , which stands beside the lawn in full view of the front windows .
I took an exact copy , and here it is . ''
He unfolded a paper and laid it upon the table .
Here is a copy of the hieroglyphics :
`` 'What , be driven out of our own house by a practical joker ? '
'Why , we should have the whole county laughing at us . '
`` Yes , it is very short , but I made a copy of it , and here it is . ''
`` Tell me , '' said Holmes -- and I could see by his eyes that he was much excited -- '' was this a mere addition to the first or did it appear to be entirely separate ? ''
`` I have nothing more to say , Mr. Holmes , except that I was angry with my wife that night for having held me back when I might have caught the skulking rascal .
She said that she feared that I might come to harm .
For an instant it had crossed my mind that perhaps what she really feared was that HE might come to harm , for I could not doubt that she knew who this man was , and what he meant by these strange signals .
But there is a tone in my wife 's voice , Mr. Holmes , and a look in her eyes which forbid doubt , and I am sure that it was indeed my own safety that was in her mind .
There 's the whole case , and now I want your advice as to what I ought to do .
My own inclination is to put half a dozen of my farm lads in the shrubbery , and when this fellow comes again to give him such a hiding that he will leave us in peace for the future . ''
`` I must go back to-day .
I would not leave my wife alone all night for anything .
She is very nervous , and begged me to come back . ''
Holmes bent over this grotesque frieze for some minutes , and then suddenly sprang to his feet with an exclamation of surprise and dismay .
His face was haggard with anxiety .
`` It 's a terrible business , '' said the stationmaster .
`` They are shot , both Mr. Hilton Cubitt and his wife .
She shot him and then herself -- so the servants say .
He 's dead and her life is despaired of .
Dear , dear , one of the oldest families in the county of Norfolk , and one of the most honoured . ''
`` I have only the evidence of the dancing men , '' said Holmes .
`` I will explain the matter to you later .
Meanwhile , since it is too late to prevent this tragedy , I am very anxious that I should use the knowledge which I possess in order to insure that justice be done .
Will you associate me in your investigation , or will you prefer that I should act independently ? ''
`` I should be proud to feel that we were acting together , Mr. Holmes , '' said the inspector , earnestly .
`` You have acted with great discretion .
Who sent for you ? ''
The study proved to be a small chamber , lined on three sides with books , and with a writing-table facing an ordinary window , which looked out upon the garden .
Our first attention was given to the body of the unfortunate squire , whose huge frame lay stretched across the room .
His disordered dress showed that he had been hastily aroused from sleep .
The bullet had been fired at him from the front , and had remained in his body , after penetrating the heart .
His death had certainly been instantaneous and painless .
There was no powder-marking either upon his dressing-gown or on his hands .
According to the country surgeon , the lady had stains upon her face , but none upon her hand .
`` Whom do you suspect ? ''
`` Very lonely , sir . ''
I had so many letters now that I could proceed with considerable confidence to the second message , which worked out in this fashion :
`` But why should he come . ''
`` Mrs. Hilton Cubitt was seriously injured , and is at death 's door . ''
`` You wrote it ?
There was no one on earth outside the Joint who knew the secret of the dancing men .
How came you to write it ? ''
`` What one man can invent another can discover , '' said Holmes .
There is a cab coming to convey you to Norwich , Mr. Slaney .
But meanwhile , you have time to make some small reparation for the injury you have wrought .
Are you aware that Mrs. Hilton Cubitt has herself lain under grave suspicion of the murder of her husband , and that it was only my presence here , and the knowledge which I happened to possess , which has saved her from the accusation ?
The least that you owe her is to make it clear to the whole world that she was in no way , directly or indirectly , responsible for his tragic end . ''
`` No , she is not conscious .
Mr. Sherlock Holmes , I only hope that if ever again I have an important case , I shall have the good fortune to have you by my side . ''
She glanced down in surprise at her own feet , and I observed the slight roughening of the side of the sole caused by the friction of the edge of the pedal .
`` My father is dead , Mr. Holmes .
He was James Smith , who conducted the orchestra at the old Imperial Theatre .
My mother and I were left without a relation in the world except one uncle , Ralph Smith , who went to Africa twenty-five years ago , and we have never had a word from him since .
When father died , we were left very poor , but one day we were told that there was an advertisement in the TIMES , inquiring for our whereabouts .
You can imagine how excited we were , for we thought that someone had left us a fortune .
We went at once to the lawyer whose name was given in the paper .
There we met two gentlemen , Mr. Carruthers and Mr. Woodley , who were home on a visit from South Africa .
They said that my uncle was a friend of theirs , that he had died some months before in great poverty in Johannesburg , and that he had asked them with his last breath to hunt up his relations , and see that they were in no want .
It seemed strange to us that Uncle Ralph , who took no notice of us when he was alive , should be so careful to look after us when he was dead , but Mr. Carruthers explained that the reason was that my uncle had just heard of the death of his brother , and so felt responsible for our fate . ''
`` Excuse me , '' said Holmes .
`` When was this interview ? ''
`` And now , Mr. Holmes , I come at last to the special thing which has caused me to ask your advice to-day .
You must know that every Saturday forenoon I ride on my bicycle to Farnham Station , in order to get the 12:22 to town .
The road from Chiltern Grange is a lonely one , and at one spot it is particularly so , for it lies for over a mile between Charlington Heath upon one side and the woods which lie round Charlington Hall upon the other .
You could not find a more lonely tract of road anywhere , and it is quite rare to meet so much as a cart , or a peasant , until you reach the high road near Crooksbury Hill .
Two weeks ago I was passing this place , when I chanced to look back over my shoulder , and about two hundred yards behind me I saw a man , also on a bicycle .
He seemed to be a middle-aged man , with a short , dark beard .
I looked back before I reached Farnham , but the man was gone , so I thought no more about it .
But you can imagine how surprised I was , Mr. Holmes , when , on my return on the Monday , I saw the same man on the same stretch of road .
My astonishment was increased when the incident occurred again , exactly as before , on the following Saturday and Monday .
He always kept his distance and did not molest me in any way , but still it certainly was very odd .
I mentioned it to Mr. Carruthers , who seemed interested in what I said , and told me that he had ordered a horse and trap , so that in future I should not pass over these lonely roads without some companion .
`` Two or three minutes . ''
`` He is in the Midland Electrical Company , at Coventry . ''
`` Have you had any other admirers ? ''
`` There was this dreadful man , Woodley , if you can call him an admirer . ''
`` Who was he ? ''
`` What does he do for a living ? ''
`` You will let me know any fresh development , Miss Smith .
I am very busy just now , but I will find time to make some inquiries into your case .
In the meantime , take no step without letting me know .
Good-bye , and I trust that we shall have nothing but good news from you . ''
Our first effort must be to find who are the tenants of Charlington Hall .
Then , again , how about the connection between Carruthers and Woodley , since they appear to be men of such a different type ?
How came they BOTH to be so keen upon looking up Ralph Smith's relations ?
What sort of a menage is it which pays double the market price for a governess but does not keep a horse , although six miles from the station ?
Odd , Watson -- very odd ! ''
A quarter of an hour passed , and then a second cyclist appeared .
This time it was the young lady coming from the station .
I saw her look about her as she came to the Charlington hedge .
An instant later the man emerged from his hiding-place , sprang upon his cycle , and followed her .
In all the broad landscape those were the only moving figures , the graceful girl sitting very straight upon her machine , and the man behind her bending low over his handle-bar with a curiously furtive suggestion in every movement .
She looked back at him and slowed her pace .
He at once stopped , too , keeping two hundred yards behind her .
Her next movement was as unexpected as it was spirited .
She suddenly whisked her wheels round and dashed straight at him .
He was as quick as she , however , and darted off in desperate flight .
Presently she came back up the road again , her head haughtily in the air , not deigning to take any further notice of her silent attendant .
He had turned also , and still kept his distance until the curve of the road hid them from my sight .
Holmes 's quiet day in the country had a singular termination , for he arrived at Baker Street late in the evening , with a cut lip and a discoloured lump upon his forehead , besides a general air of dissipation which would have made his own person the fitting object of a Scotland Yard investigation .
He was immensely tickled by his own adventures and laughed heartily as he recounted them .
`` I found that country pub which I had already recommended to your notice , and there I made my discreet inquiries .
I was in the bar , and a garrulous landlord was giving me all that I wanted .
Williamson is a white-bearded man , and he lives alone with a small staff of servants at the Hall .
There is some rumor that he is or has been a clergyman , but one or two incidents of his short residence at the Hall struck me as peculiarly unecclesiastical .
I have already made some inquiries at a clerical agency , and they tell me that there WAS a man of that name in orders , whose career has been a singularly dark one .
The landlord further informed me that there are usually week-end visitors -- 'a warm lot , sir ' -- at the Hall , and especially one gentleman with a red moustache , Mr. Woodley by name , who was always there .
We had got as far as this , when who should walk in but the gentleman himself , who had been drinking his beer in the tap-room and had heard the whole conversation .
What did I want ?
What did I mean by asking questions ?
He had a fine flow of language , and his adjectives were very vigorous .
He ended a string of abuse by a vicious backhander , which I failed to entirely avoid .
The next few minutes were delicious .
It was a straight left against a slogging ruffian .
I emerged as you see me .
Mr. Woodley went home in a cart .
So ended my country trip , and it must be confessed that , however enjoyable , my day on the Surrey border has not been much more profitable than your own . ''
From the instant that we passed the rise , we could no longer see the vehicle , but we hastened onward at such a pace that my sedentary life began to tell upon me , and I was compelled to fall behind .
Holmes , however , was always in training , for he had inexhaustible stores of nervous energy upon which to draw .
His springy step never slowed until suddenly , when he was a hundred yards in front of me , he halted , and I saw him throw up his hand with a gesture of grief and despair .
At the same instant an empty dog-cart , the horse cantering , the reins trailing , appeared round the curve of the road and rattled swiftly towards us .
`` You 're the man we want to see .
Where is Miss Violet Smith ? ''
he said , in his quick , clear way .
He ran distractedly , his pistol in his hand , towards a gap in the hedge .
Holmes followed him , and I , leaving the horse grazing beside the road , followed Holmes .
`` Come on ! ''
cried our guide , `` come on ! ''
He rushed across the glade , Holmes and I at his heels .
As we approached , the lady staggered against the trunk of the tree for support .
Williamson , the ex-clergyman , bowed to us with mock politeness , and the bully , Woodley , advanced with a shout of brutal and exultant laughter .
His revolver cracked , and I saw the blood spurt from the front of Woodley 's waistcoat .
He spun round with a scream and fell upon his back , his hideous red face turning suddenly to a dreadful mottled pallor .
The old man , still clad in his surplice , burst into such a string of foul oaths as I have never heard , and pulled out a revolver of his own , but , before he could raise it , he was looking down the barrel of Holmes's weapon .
`` You have heard of me , I see .
I will represent the official police until their arrival .
Here , you ! ''
he shouted to a frightened groom , who had appeared at the edge of the glade .
Take this note as hard as you can ride to Farnham . ''
He scribbled a few words upon a leaf from his notebook .
`` Give it to the superintendent at the police-station .
Until he comes , I must detain you all under my personal custody . ''
`` We had a license for the marriage .
I have it here in my pocket . ''
`` Well , '' said I , `` you call that love , Mr. Carruthers , but I should call it selfishness . ''
Carruthers took a telegram from his pocket `` That 's it , '' said he .
The old man is dead .
`` Lie number one , '' said the old man ; `` I never saw either of them until two months ago , and I have never been in Africa in my life , so you can put that in your pipe and smoke it , Mr. Busybody Holmes ! ''
Holmes rose and tossed the end of his cigarette into the grate .
`` I have been very obtuse , Watson , '' said he .
`` When in your report you said that you had seen the cyclist as you thought arrange his necktie in the shrubbery , that alone should have told me all .
However , we may congratulate ourselves upon a curious and , in some respects , a unique case .
I perceive three of the county constabulary in the drive , and I am glad to see that the little ostler is able to keep pace with them , so it is likely that neither he nor the interesting bridegroom will be permanently damaged by their morning 's adventures .
I think , Watson , that in your medical capacity , you might wait upon Miss Smith and tell her that if she is sufficiently recovered , we shall be happy to escort her to her mother 's home .
If she is not quite convalescent you will find that a hint that we were about to telegraph to a young electrician in the Midlands would probably complete the cure .
As to you , Mr. Carruthers , I think that you have done what you could to make amends for your share in an evil plot .
There is my card , sir , and if my evidence can be of help in your trial , it shall be at your disposal . ''
We have had some dramatic entrances and exits upon our small stage at Baker Street , but I can not recollect anything more sudden and startling than the first appearance of Thorneycroft Huxtable , M.A.
, Ph.D. , etc .
His card , which seemed too small to carry the weight of his academic distinctions , preceded him by a few seconds , and then he entered himself -- so large , so pompous , and so dignified that he was the very embodiment of self-possession and solidity .
And yet his first action , when the door had closed behind him , was to stagger against the table , whence he slipped down upon the floor , and there was that majestic figure prostrate and insensible upon our bearskin hearth-rug .
Holmes shot out his long , thin arm and picked out Volume `` H '' in his encyclopaedia of reference .
`` When Lord Saltire 's disappearance was discovered , I at once called a roll of the whole establishment -- boys , masters , and servants .
It was then that we ascertained that Lord Saltire had not been alone in his flight .
Heidegger , the German master , was missing .
His room was on the second floor , at the farther end of the building , facing the same way as Lord Saltire 's .
His bed had also been slept in , but he had apparently gone away partly dressed , since his shirt and socks were lying on the floor .
He had undoubtedly let himself down by the ivy , for we could see the marks of his feet where he had landed on the lawn .
His bicycle was kept in a small shed beside this lawn , and it also was gone .
`` He had been with me for two years , and came with the best references , but he was a silent , morose man , not very popular either with masters or boys .
No trace could be found of the fugitives , and now , on Thursday morning , we are as ignorant as we were on Tuesday .
Inquiry was , of course , made at once at Holdernesse Hall .
It is only a few miles away , and we imagined that , in some sudden attack of homesickness , he had gone back to his father , but nothing had been heard of him .
The Duke is greatly agitated , and , as to me , you have seen yourselves the state of nervous prostration to which the suspense and the responsibility have reduced me .
Mr. Holmes , if ever you put forward your full powers , I implore you to do so now , for never in your life could you have a case which is more worthy of them . ''
`` Yes , sir , and it has proved most disappointing .
An apparent clue was at once obtained , since a boy and a young man were reported to have been seen leaving a neighbouring station by an early train .
Only last night we had news that the couple had been hunted down in Liverpool , and they prove to have no connection whatever with the matter in hand .
Then it was that in my despair and disappointment , after a sleepless night , I came straight to you by the early train . ''
`` And yet the problem should be capable of ultimate solution .
I shall be very happy to look into it .
Have you been able to trace any connection between the missing boy and this German master ? ''
`` That is certainly very singular .
Had the boy a bicycle ? ''
`` Was any other bicycle missing ? ''
`` Is that certain ? ''
`` Then what is the theory in your mind ? ''
`` Then how could you know ? ''
`` But surely , Mr. Wilder -- -- ''
`` Just as you like , Mr. Holmes .
Any information which Mr. Wilder or I can give you is , of course , at your disposal . ''
`` It will probably be necessary for me to see you at the Hall , '' said Holmes .
`` I would only ask you now , sir , whether you have formed any explanation in your own mind as to the mysterious disappearance of your son ? ''
The nobleman 's reply was interrupted by his secretary , who broke in with some heat .
`` How many letters did your Grace write that day ? ''
`` For my own part , '' the Duke continued , `` I have advised the police to turn their attention to the south of France .
I have already said that I do not believe that the Duchess would encourage so monstrous an action , but the lad had the most wrong-headed opinions , and it is possible that he may have fled to her , aided and abetted by this German .
I think , Dr. Huxtable , that we will now return to the Hall . ''
`` This case grows upon me , Watson , '' said he .
`` There are decidedly some points of interest in connection with it .
In this early stage , I want you to realize those geographical features which may have a good deal to do with our investigation .
`` In the van of the gipsies who camped on the moor .
They left on Tuesday .
To-day the police traced them down and examined their caravan .
This was found . ''
`` I have done the lawn and the bicycle shed , '' said he .
`` I have also had a rumble through the Ragged Shaw .
Now , Watson , there is cocoa ready in the next room .
I must beg you to hurry , for we have a great day before us . ''
And yet it opened in the blackest disappointment .
With high hopes we struck across the peaty , russet moor , intersected with a thousand sheep paths , until we came to the broad , light-green belt which marked the morass between us and Holdernesse .
Certainly , if the lad had gone homeward , he must have passed this , and he could not pass it without leaving his traces .
But no sign of him or the German could be seen .
With a darkening face my friend strode along the margin , eagerly observant of every muddy stain upon the mossy surface .
Sheep-marks there were in profusion , and at one place , some miles down , cows had left their tracks .
`` Do you observe , '' said Holmes , `` that the rider is now undoubtedly forcing the pace ?
There can be no doubt of it .
Look at this impression , where you get both tires clear .
The one is as deep as the other .
That can only mean that the rider is throwing his weight on to the handle-bar , as a man does when he is sprinting .
he has had a fall . ''
`` First of all , I wish to impress upon you that the boy certainly left of his own free-will .
He got down from his window and he went off , either alone or with someone .
That is sure . ''
`` Let us continue our reconstruction .
He meets his death five miles from the school -- not by a bullet , mark you , which even a lad might conceivably discharge , but by a savage blow dealt by a vigorous arm .
The lad , then , HAD a companion in his flight .
And the flight was a swift one , since it took five miles before an expert cyclist could overtake them .
Yet we survey the ground round the scene of the tragedy .
What do we find ?
A few cattle-tracks , nothing more .
I took a wide sweep round , and there is no path within fifty yards .
Another cyclist could have had nothing to do with the actual murder , nor were there any human foot-marks . ''
`` A most illuminating remark .
It IS impossible as I state it , and therefore I must in some respect have stated it wrong .
Yet you saw for yourself .
Can you suggest any fallacy ? ''
`` Tut , tut , we have solved some worse problems .
At least we have plenty of material , if we can only use it .
Come , then , and , having exhausted the Palmer , let us see what the Dunlop with the patched cover has to offer us . ''
As we approached the forbidding and squalid inn , with the sign of a game-cock above the door , Holmes gave a sudden groan , and clutched me by the shoulder to save himself from falling .
He had had one of those violent strains of the ankle which leave a man helpless .
With difficulty he limped up to the door , where a squat , dark , elderly man was smoking a black clay pipe .
`` Well , then hop . ''
`` Pals of the Dook , I suppose ? ''
said the landlord , surveying our mud-stained garments with ironical eyes .
`` I have n't got a bicycle . ''
Well , now , Watson , how many cows did you see on the moor ? ''
`` Yes , it is strange . ''
`` Now , Watson , make an effort , throw your mind back .
Can you see those tracks upon the path ? ''
`` Yes , I can . ''
`` And what is your conclusion ? ''
`` Only that it is a remarkable cow which walks , canters , and gallops .
Watson , it was no brain of a country publican that thought out such a blind as that .
The coast seems to be clear , save for that lad in the smithy .
Let us slip out and see what we can see . ''
`` You 're welcome to all you can find out in my smithy , '' said he .
`` But look here , mister , I do n't care for folk poking about my place without my leave , so the sooner you pay your score and get out of this the better I shall be pleased . ''
We did not go very far along the road , for Holmes stopped the instant that the curve hid us from the landlord 's view .
Together we stole down to the road and crept across to the door of the inn .
The bicycle still leaned against the wall .
Holmes struck a match and held it to the back wheel , and I heard him chuckle as the light fell upon a patched Dunlop tire .
Up above us was the lighted window .
`` Come , my friend , '' said he , `` our day 's work has been quite long enough .
I think that we have gathered all that we can .
It 's a long walk to the school , and the sooner we get started the better . ''
`` You have come to see his Grace ?
I am sorry , but the fact is that the Duke is far from well .
He has been very much upset by the tragic news .
We received a telegram from Dr. Huxtable yesterday afternoon , which told us of your discovery . ''
`` I think , your Grace , that I could speak more freely in Mr. Wilder's absence . ''
The man turned a shade paler and cast a malignant glance at Holmes .
`` Yes , yes , you had better go .
Now , Mr. Holmes , what have you to say ? ''
`` I fancy that I see your Grace 's check-book upon the table , '' said he .
`` I should be glad if you would make me out a check for six thousand pounds .
It would be as well , perhaps , for you to cross it .
The Capital and Counties Bank , Oxford Street branch are my agents . ''
`` Is this a joke , Mr. Holmes ?
It is hardly a subject for pleasantry . ''
`` I saw you together last night . ''
The Duke took a pen in his quivering fingers and opened his check-book .
`` I shall be as good as my word , Mr. Holmes .
I am about to write your check , however unwelcome the information which you have gained may be to me .
When the offer was first made , I little thought the turn which events might take .
But you and your friend are men of discretion , Mr .
The Duke leaned back in his chair and stared with amazement at my friend .
It was Holmes 's turn to look astonished .
`` I confess that this is entirely new to me , your Grace .
I must beg you to be more explicit . ''
`` This is , indeed , a most serious matter .
Even more culpable in my opinion , your Grace , is your attitude towards your younger son .
You leave him in this den for three days . ''
`` I will help you , but on one condition only .
It is that you ring for the footman and let me give such orders as I like . ''
Without a word , the Duke pressed the electric bell .
`` You will be glad to hear , '' said Holmes , `` that your young master is found .
It is the Duke 's desire that the carriage shall go at once to the Fighting Cock Inn to bring Lord Saltire home .
`` In that case , '' said Holmes , rising , `` I think that my friend and I can congratulate ourselves upon several most happy results from our little visit to the North .
There is one other small point upon which I desire some light .
This fellow Hayes had shod his horses with shoes which counterfeited the tracks of cows .
Was it from Mr. Wilder that he learned so extraordinary a device ? ''
`` These shoes , '' it ran , `` were dug up in the moat of Holdernesse Hall .
They are for the use of horses , but they are shaped below with a cloven foot of iron , so as to throw pursuers off the track .
They are supposed to have belonged to some of the marauding Barons of Holdernesse in the Middle Ages . ''
Holmes opened the case , and moistening his finger he passed it along the shoe .
A thin film of recent mud was left upon his skin .
`` And I return with an excellent appetite .
There can be no question , my dear Watson , of the value of exercise before breakfast .
But I am prepared to bet that you will not guess the form that my exercise has taken . ''
`` I will not attempt it . ''
`` And what had you to report ? ''
`` Failure , sir , absolute failure . ''
`` You have made no progress ? ''
`` It was the man 's own pouch , sir .
His initials were inside it .
And it was of sealskin , -- and he was an old sealer . ''
`` I know your methods , sir , and I applied them .
Before I permitted anything to be moved , I examined most carefully the ground outside , and also the floor of the room .
There were no footmarks . ''
`` I must admit both your points , '' said he .
`` I confess that this notebook , which did not appear at the inquest , modifies any views which I may have formed .
I had come to a theory of the crime in which I can find no place for this .
Have you endeavoured to trace any of the securities here mentioned ? ''
`` Surely there is some discolouration here , '' said he .
`` Which proves , of course , that the book was dropped after the crime was committed . ''
`` I suppose that none of these securities have been found among the property of the dead man ? ''
`` A sheath-knife , still in its sheath .
It lay at the feet of the dead man .
Mrs. Carey has identified it as being her husband 's property . ''
Stanley Hopkins gave a cry of joy .
Stanley Hopkins led us first to the house , where he introduced us to a haggard , gray-haired woman , the widow of the murdered man , whose gaunt and deep-lined face , with the furtive look of terror in the depths of her red-rimmed eyes , told of the years of hardship and ill-usage which she had endured .
With her was her daughter , a pale , fair-haired girl , whose eyes blazed defiantly at us as she told us that she was glad that her father was dead , and that she blessed the hand which had struck him down .
It was a terrible household that Black Peter Carey had made for himself , and it was with a sense of relief that we found ourselves in the sunlight again and making our way along a path which had been worn across the fields by the feet of the dead man .
`` Someone has tried to force this also .
Whoever it was has failed to make his way in .
He must have been a very poor burglar . ''
`` I think that fortune is very kind to us . ''
`` It is very probable .
He came expecting to find the door open .
He tried to get in with the blade of a very small penknife .
He could not manage it .
What would he do ? ''
In absolute silence we crouched amongst the bushes , waiting for whatever might come .
At first the steps of a few belated villagers , or the sound of voices from the village , lightened our vigil , but one by one these interruptions died away , and an absolute stillness fell upon us , save for the chimes of the distant church , which told us of the progress of the night , and for the rustle and whisper of a fine rain falling amid the foliage which roofed us in .
Neligan was my father . ''
`` You have not been here before last night ? ''
The wretched man collapsed .
He sank his face in his hands , and trembled all over .
`` You really think that your solution must be correct ? ''
The second man was a long , dried-up creature , with lank hair and sallow cheeks .
His name was Hugh Pattins .
He also received his dismissal , his half-sovereign , and the order to wait .
`` Dundee , I suppose ? ''
`` Well , well , '' said Holmes , good-humouredly .
`` We all learn by experience , and your lesson this time is that you should never lose sight of the alternative .
You were so absorbed in young Neligan that you could not spare a thought to Patrick Cairns , the true murderer of Peter Carey . ''
`` I 'll tell it you from the beginning .
Just sit me up a little , so as I can speak easy .
It was in '83 that it happened -- August of that year .
Peter Carey was master of the SEA UNICORN , and I was spare harpooner .
We were coming out of the ice-pack on our way home , with head winds and a week 's southerly gale , when we picked up a little craft that had been blown north .
There was one man on her -- a landsman .
The crew had thought she would founder and had made for the Norwegian coast in the dinghy .
I guess they were all drowned .
Well , we took him on board , this man , and he and the skipper had some long talks in the cabin .
All the baggage we took off with him was one tin box .
So far as I know , the man 's name was never mentioned , and on the second night he disappeared as if he had never been .
It was given out that he had either thrown himself overboard or fallen overboard in the heavy weather that we were having .
Only one man knew what had happened to him , and that was me , for , with my own eyes , I saw the skipper tip up his heels and put him over the rail in the middle watch of a dark night , two days before we sighted the Shetland Lights .
Well , I kept my knowledge to myself , and waited to see what would come of it .
When we got back to Scotland it was easily hushed up , and nobody asked any questions .
A stranger died by accident and it was nobody 's business to inquire .
Shortly after Peter Carey gave up the sea , and it was long years before I could find where he was .
I guessed that he had done the deed for the sake of what was in that tin box , and that he could afford now to pay me well for keeping my mouth shut .
I found out where he was through a sailor man that had met him in London , and down I went to squeeze him .
The first night he was reasonable enough , and was ready to give me what would make me free of the sea for life .
We were to fix it all two nights later .
When I came , I found him three parts drunk and in a vile temper .
We sat down and we drank and we yarned about old times , but the more he drank the less I liked the look on his face .
I spotted that harpoon upon the wall , and I thought I might need it before I was through .
Then at last he broke out at me , spitting and cursing , with murder in his eyes and a great clasp-knife in his hand .
He had not time to get it from the sheath before I had the harpoon through him .
what a yell he gave !
and his face gets between me and my sleep .
I stood there , with his blood splashing round me , and I waited for a bit , but all was quiet , so I took heart once more .
I looked round , and there was the tin box on the shelf .
I had as much right to it as Peter Carey , anyhow , so I took it with me and left the hut .
Like a fool I left my baccy-pouch upon the table .
`` Because an illustrious client has placed her piteous case in my hands .
It is the Lady Eva Blackwell , the most beautiful debutante of last season .
She is to be married in a fortnight to the Earl of Dovercourt .
This fiend has several imprudent letters -- imprudent , Watson , nothing worse -- which were written to an impecunious young squire in the country .
They would suffice to break off the match .
Milverton will send the letters to the Earl unless a large sum of money is paid him .
I have been commissioned to meet him , and -- to make the best terms I can . ''
`` Dr. Watson is my friend and partner . ''
`` What are your terms ? ''
`` My dear sir , it is painful for me to discuss it , but if the money is not paid on the 14th , there certainly will be no marriage on the 18th . ''
His insufferable smile was more complacent than ever .
`` I am aware that what you say is true about the lady 's resources , '' said he .
`` At the same time you must admit that the occasion of a lady's marriage is a very suitable time for her friends and relatives to make some little effort upon her behalf .
They may hesitate as to an acceptable wedding present .
Let me assure them that this little bundle of letters would give more joy than all the candelabra and butter-dishes in London . ''
`` Mr. Holmes , Mr. Holmes , '' he said , turning the front of his coat and exhibiting the butt of a large revolver , which projected from the inside pocket .
`` I have been expecting you to do something original .
This has been done so often , and what good has ever come from it ?
I assure you that I am armed to the teeth , and I am perfectly prepared to use my weapons , knowing that the law will support me .
Besides , your supposition that I would bring the letters here in a notebook is entirely mistaken .
I would do nothing so foolish .
And now , gentlemen , I have one or two little interviews this evening , and it is a long drive to Hampstead . ''
He stepped forward , took up his coat , laid his hand on his revolver , and turned to the door .
I picked up a chair , but Holmes shook his head , and I laid it down again .
With bow , a smile , and a twinkle , Milverton was out of the room , and a few moments after we heard the slam of the carriage door and the rattle of the wheels as he drove away .
`` You 'll be interested to hear that I 'm engaged . ''
`` Good heavens , Holmes ! ''
I had a catching of the breath , and my skin went cold at the words , which were slowly uttered in a tone of concentrated resolution .
As a flash of lightning in the night shows up in an instant every detail of a wild landscape , so at one glance I seemed to see every possible result of such an action -- the detection , the capture , the honoured career ending in irreparable failure and disgrace , my friend himself lying at the mercy of the odious Milverton .
`` I can see that you have a strong , natural turn for this sort of thing .
Very good , do you make the masks .
We shall have some cold supper before we start .
It is now nine-thirty .
At eleven we shall drive as far as Church Row .
It is a quarter of an hour 's walk from there to Appledore Towers .
We shall be at work before midnight .
Milverton is a heavy sleeper , and retires punctually at ten-thirty .
With any luck we should be back here by two , with the Lady Eva 's letters in my pocket . ''
I felt Holmes 's hand steal into mine and give me a reassuring shake , as if to say that the situation was within his powers , and that he was easy in his mind .
I was not sure whether he had seen what was only too obvious from my position , that the door of the safe was imperfectly closed , and that Milverton might at any moment observe it .
In my own mind I had determined that if I were sure , from the rigidity of his gaze , that it had caught his eye , I would at once spring out , throw my great coat over his head , pinion him , and leave the rest to Holmes .
But Milverton never looked up .
He was languidly interested by the papers in his hand , and page after page was turned as he followed the argument of the lawyer .
At least , I thought , when he has finished the document and the cigar he will go to his room , but before he had reached the end of either , there came a remarkable development , which turned our thoughts into quite another channel .
So this was the explanation of the unlocked door and of the nocturnal vigil of Milverton .
There was the gentle rustle of a woman 's dress .
I had closed the slit between the curtains as Milverton 's face had turned in our direction , but now I ventured very carefully to open it once more .
He had resumed his seat , the cigar still projecting at an insolent angle from the corner of his mouth .
In front of him , in the full glare of the electric light , there stood a tall , slim , dark woman , a veil over her face , a mantle drawn round her chin .
Her breath came quick and fast , and every inch of the lithe figure was quivering with strong emotion .
`` You will ruin no more lives as you have ruined mine .
You will wring no more hearts as you wrung mine .
I will free the world of a poisonous thing .
Take that , you hound -- and that !
-- and that ! ''
No interference upon our part could have saved the man from his fate , but , as the woman poured bullet after bullet into Milverton 's shrinking body I was about to spring out , when I felt Holmes 's cold , strong grasp upon my wrist .
I understood the whole argument of that firm , restraining grip -- that it was no affair of ours , that justice had overtaken a villain , that we had our own duties and our own objects , which were not to be lost sight of .
But hardly had the woman rushed from the room when Holmes , with swift , silent steps , was over at the other door .
He turned the key in the lock .
At the same instant we heard voices in the house and the sound of hurrying feet .
The revolver shots had roused the household .
With perfect coolness Holmes slipped across to the safe , filled his two arms with bundles of letters , and poured them all into the fire .
Again and again he did it , until the safe was empty .
Someone turned the handle and beat upon the outside of the door .
Holmes looked swiftly round .
The letter which had been the messenger of death for Milverton lay , all mottled with his blood , upon the table .
Holmes tossed it in among the blazing papers .
Then he drew the key from the outer door , passed through after me , and locked it on the outside .
`` This way , Watson , '' said he , `` we can scale the garden wall in this direction . ''
I could not have believed that an alarm could have spread so swiftly .
Looking back , the huge house was one blaze of light .
The front door was open , and figures were rushing down the drive .
The whole garden was alive with people , and one fellow raised a view-halloa as we emerged from the veranda and followed hard at our heels .
Holmes seemed to know the grounds perfectly , and he threaded his way swiftly among a plantation of small trees , I close at his heels , and our foremost pursuer panting behind us .
It was a six-foot wall which barred our path , but he sprang to the top and over .
As I did the same I felt the hand of the man behind me grab at my ankle , but I kicked myself free and scrambled over a grass-strewn coping .
I fell upon my face among some bushes , but Holmes had me on my feet in an instant , and together we dashed away across the huge expanse of Hampstead Heath .
We had run two miles , I suppose , before Holmes at last halted and listened intently .
All was absolute silence behind us .
We had shaken off our pursuers and were safe .
`` A murder -- a most dramatic and remarkable murder .
I know how keen you are upon these things , and I would take it as a great favour if you would step down to Appledore Towers , and give us the benefit of your advice .
It is no ordinary crime .
We have had our eyes upon this Mr. Milverton for some time , and , between ourselves , he was a bit of a villain .
He is known to have held papers which he used for blackmailing purposes .
These papers have all been burned by the murderers .
No article of value was taken , as it is probable that the criminals were men of good position , whose sole object was to prevent social exposure . ''
`` Yes , there were two of them .
They were as nearly as possible captured red-handed .
We have their footmarks , we have their description , it 's ten to one that we trace them .
The first fellow was a bit too active , but the second was caught by the under-gardener , and only got away after a struggle .
He was a middle-sized , strongly built man -- square jaw , thick neck , moustache , a mask over his eyes . ''
`` Oh , no , Mr. Holmes -- nothing very particular . ''
The man in the dressing-gown turned upon us with a most melancholy face .
`` And what became of the bust ? ''
asked Holmes , after a careful study of this picture .
`` The most practical way of getting at it , in my opinion , is to identify the dead man .
There should be no difficulty about that .
When we have found who he is and who his associates are , we should have a good start in learning what he was doing in Pitt Street last night , and who it was who met him and killed him on the doorstep of Mr. Horace Harker .
Don't you think so ? ''
`` Well , that 's all we could reasonably expect from Morse Hudson , '' said Holmes , as we emerged from the shop .
`` We have this Beppo as a common factor , both in Kennington and in Kensington , so that is worth a ten-mile drive .
Now , Watson , let us make for Gelder & Co. , of Stepney , the source and origin of the busts .
I shall be surprised if we do n't get some help down there . ''
In rapid succession we passed through the fringe of fashionable London , hotel London , theatrical London , literary London , commercial London , and , finally , maritime London , till we came to a riverside city of a hundred thousand souls , where the tenement houses swelter and reek with the outcasts of Europe .
Here , in a broad thoroughfare , once the abode of wealthy City merchants , we found the sculpture works for which we searched .
Outside was a considerable yard full of monumental masonry .
Inside was a large room in which fifty workers were carving or moulding .
The manager , a big blond German , received us civilly and gave a clear answer to all Holmes 's questions .
A reference to his books showed that hundreds of casts had been taken from a marble copy of Devine 's head of Napoleon , but that the three which had been sent to Morse Hudson a year or so before had been half of a batch of six , the other three being sent to Harding Brothers , of Kensington .
There was no reason why those six should be different from any of the other casts .
He could suggest no possible cause why anyone should wish to destroy them -- in fact , he laughed at the idea .
Their wholesale price was six shillings , but the retailer would get twelve or more .
The cast was taken in two moulds from each side of the face , and then these two profiles of plaster of Paris were joined together to make the complete bust .
The work was usually done by Italians , in the room we were in .
When finished , the busts were put on a table in the passage to dry , and afterwards stored .
That was all he could tell us .
But the production of the photograph had a remarkable effect upon the manager .
His face flushed with anger , and his brows knotted over his blue Teutonic eyes .
The founder of that great emporium proved to be a brisk , crisp little person , very dapper and quick , with a clear head and a ready tongue .
`` What luck , Mr .
`` Let us get to the open window .
We will nab him as he climbs out , '' Lestrade whispered .
But before we could move , the man had emerged again .
As he came out into the glimmering patch of light , we saw that he carried something white under his arm .
He looked stealthily all round him .
The silence of the deserted street reassured him .
Turning his back upon us he laid down his burden , and the next instant there was the sound of a sharp tap , followed by a clatter and rattle .
The man was so intent upon what he was doing that he never heard our steps as we stole across the grass plot .
With the bound of a tiger Holmes was on his back , and an instant later Lestrade and I had him by either wrist , and the handcuffs had been fastened .
As we turned him over I saw a hideous , sallow face , with writhing , furious features , glaring up at us , and I knew that it was indeed the man of the photograph whom we had secured .
`` Mr. Josiah Brown , I suppose ? ''
When we met again next evening , Lestrade was furnished with much information concerning our prisoner .
His name , it appeared , was Beppo , second name unknown .
He was a well-known ne'er-do-well among the Italian colony .
He had once been a skilful sculptor and had earned an honest living , but he had taken to evil courses and had twice already been in jail -- once for a petty theft , and once , as we had already heard , for stabbing a fellow-countryman .
He could talk English perfectly well .
His reasons for destroying the busts were still unknown , and he refused to answer any questions upon the subject , but the police had discovered that these same busts might very well have been made by his own hands , since he was engaged in this class of work at the establishment of Gelder & Co. To all this information , much of which we already knew , Holmes listened with polite attention , but I , who knew him so well , could clearly see that his thoughts were elsewhere , and I detected a mixture of mingled uneasiness and expectation beneath that mask which he was wont to assume .
At last he started in his chair , and his eyes brightened .
There had been a ring at the bell .
A minute later we heard steps upon the stairs , and an elderly red-faced man with grizzled side-whiskers was ushered in .
In his right hand he carried an old-fashioned carpet-bag , which he placed upon the table .
Holmes took a paper from his pocket and laid a ten-pound note upon the table .
We sat in silence for a moment .
`` I trust , Mr. Holmes , that you can spare me a few hours of your valuable time .
We have had a very painful incident at St. Luke 's , and really , but for the happy chance of your being in town , I should have been at a loss what to do . ''
My friend 's temper had not improved since he had been deprived of the congenial surroundings of Baker Street .
Without his scrapbooks , his chemicals , and his homely untidiness , he was an uncomfortable man .
He shrugged his shoulders in ungracious acquiescence , while our visitor in hurried words and with much excitable gesticulation poured forth his story .
`` You are aware , Mr. Holmes , that our college doors are double -- a green baize one within and a heavy oak one without .
As I approached my outer door , I was amazed to see a key in it .
For an instant I imagined that I had left my own there , but on feeling in my pocket I found that it was all right .
The only duplicate which existed , so far as I knew , was that which belonged to my servant , Bannister -- a man who has looked after my room for ten years , and whose honesty is absolutely above suspicion .
I found that the key was indeed his , that he had entered my room to know if I wanted tea , and that he had very carelessly left the key in the door when he came out .
His visit to my room must have been within a very few minutes of my leaving it .
His forgetfulness about the key would have mattered little upon any other occasion , but on this one day it has produced the most deplorable consequences .
`` The first page on the floor , the second in the window , the third where you left it , '' said he .
`` No one else in your room ? ''
`` Where is Bannister now ? ''
`` Then it amounts to this , Mr. Soames : that , unless the Indian student recognized the roll as being proofs , the man who tampered with them came upon them accidentally without knowing that they were there . ''
Holmes gave an enigmatic smile .
The lecturer unlocked the outer door and ushered us into his room .
We stood at the entrance while Holmes made an examination of the carpet .
`` By the window there . ''
Mr. Soames was somewhat overwhelmed by this flood of information .
`` I can follow the other points , '' said he , `` but really , in this matter of the length -- -- ''
`` Surely there is another alternative , Mr. Holmes .
I do n't know whether you observed my bedroom window ? ''
`` And they are all in for this examination ? ''
`` Let us hear the suspicions .
I will look after the proofs . ''
He was a little , white-faced , clean-shaven , grizzly-haired fellow of fifty .
He was still suffering from this sudden disturbance of the quiet routine of his life .
His plump face was twitching with his nervousness , and his fingers could not keep still .
`` Anyone in the room could get out ? ''
`` Yes , sir .
Such a thing has never happened during the many years that I have been here .
I nearly fainted , sir . ''
`` So I understand .
Where were you when you began to feel bad ? ''
`` I should like to have a peep at each of them , '' said Holmes .
`` Is it possible ? ''
Holmes 's response was a curious one .
`` Really , Mr. Holmes , I can not undertake to say .
He is taller than the Indian , not so tall as Gilchrist .
I suppose five foot six would be about it . ''
`` That is very important , '' said Holmes .
`` And now , Mr. Soames , I wish you good-night . ''
`` Well , Watson , what do you think of it ? ''
Holmes asked , as we came out into the main street .
`` Quite a little parlour game -- sort of three-card trick , is it not ?
There are your three men .
It must be one of them .
You take your choice .
Which is yours ? ''
`` The foul-mouthed fellow at the top .
He is the one with the worst record .
And yet that Indian was a sly fellow also .
Why should he be pacing his room all the time ? ''
`` He looked at us in a queer way . ''
There were only four stationers of any consequences in the town , and at each Holmes produced his pencil chips , and bid high for a duplicate .
All were agreed that one could be ordered , but that it was not a usual size of pencil and that it was seldom kept in stock .
My friend did not appear to be depressed by his failure , but shrugged his shoulders in half-humorous resignation .
Holmes made no further allusion to the matter that day , though he sat lost in thought for a long time after our belated dinner .
At eight in the morning , he came into my room just as I finished my toilet .
`` I think so . ''
`` Why , Holmes , you had only two yesterday . ''
`` You will kindly close the door , '' said Holmes .
`` Now , Bannister , will you please tell us the truth about yesterday 's incident ? ''
`` Well , then , I must make some suggestions to you .
When you sat down on that chair yesterday , did you do so in order to conceal some object which would have shown who had been in the room ? ''
Bannister licked his dry lips .
The man 's face set in sullen defiance .
`` No , sir , there was no one . ''
An instant later the tutor returned , bringing with him the student .
He was a fine figure of a man , tall , lithe , and agile , with a springy step and a pleasant , open face .
His troubled blue eyes glanced at each of us , and finally rested with an expression of blank dismay upon Bannister in the farther corner .
have you nothing to add ? ''
`` It was simple enough , sir , if you only had known , but , with all your cleverness , it was impossible that you could know .
Time was , sir , when I was butler to old Sir Jabez Gilchrist , this young gentleman 's father .
When he was ruined I came to the college as servant , but I never forgot my old employer because he was down in the world .
I watched his son all I could for the sake of the old days .
Well , sir , when I came into this room yesterday , when the alarm was given , the very first thing I saw was Mr. Gilchrist 's tan gloves a-lying in that chair .
I knew those gloves well , and I understood their message .
If Mr. Soames saw them , the game was up .
I flopped down into that chair , and nothing would budge me until Mr. Soames he went for you .
Then out came my poor young master , whom I had dandled on my knee , and confessed it all to me .
Was n't it natural , sir , that I should save him , and was n't it natural also that I should try to speak to him as his dead father would have done , and make him understand that he could not profit by such a deed ?
Could you blame me , sir ? ''
Amid the droning of the wind there had come the stamping of a horse's hoofs , and the long grind of a wheel as it rasped against the curb .
The cab which I had seen had pulled up at our door .
`` I 've seen nothing later than the fifteenth century to-day . ''
`` In the meantime the housekeeper had also arrived upon the scene , but she was just too late to catch the young man 's dying words .
Leaving Susan with the body , she hurried to the professor 's room .
He was sitting up in bed , horribly agitated , for he had heard enough to convince him that something terrible had occurred .
Mrs. Marker is prepared to swear that the professor was still in his night-clothes , and indeed it was impossible for him to dress without the help of Mortimer , whose orders were to come at twelve o'clock .
The professor declares that he heard the distant cry , but that he knows nothing more .
He can give no explanation of the young man 's last words , 'The professor -- it was she , ' but imagines that they were the outcome of delirium .
He believes that Willoughby Smith had not an enemy in the world , and can give no reason for the crime .
His first action was to send Mortimer , the gardener , for the local police .
A little later the chief constable sent for me .
Nothing was moved before I got there , and strict orders were given that no one should walk upon the paths leading to the house .
It was a splendid chance of putting your theories into practice , Mr. Sherlock Holmes .
There was really nothing wanting . ''
`` I must ask you first , Mr. Holmes , to glance at this rough plan , which will give you a general idea of the position of the professor 's study and the various points of the case .
It will help you in following my investigation . ''
Well , then , these tracks upon the grass , were they coming or going ? ''
`` A large foot or a small ? ''
`` You could not distinguish . ''
The idea crossed my mind .
But we found the knife some feet away from the body , so that seems impossible .
Then , of course , there are the man 's own dying words .
And , finally , there was this very important piece of evidence which was found clasped in the dead man 's right hand . ''
`` Of course you would .
Meanwhile , have you anything more to tell us about the case ? ''
`` If it is not asking too much , Mr. Holmes .
There 's a train from Charing Cross to Chatham at six in the morning , and we should be at Yoxley Old Place between eight and nine . ''
`` Have you had inquiries made at inns and lodgings ? ''
`` Yes , yes : someone has passed along , '' said Holmes , stooping over the grass border .
`` Our lady must have picked her steps carefully , must she not , since on the one side she would leave a track on the path , and on the other an even clearer one on the soft bed ? ''
`` On this strip of grass ? ''
`` Yes , sir . ''
`` I am sure you did not , for a duster would have swept away these shreds of varnish .
Who has the key of this bureau ? ''
`` That settles this exit .
Then no doubt the lady went out the way she came .
I understand that this other passage leads only to the professor's room .
There is no exit that way ? ''
Holmes had lit a cigarette and was shooting little darting glances all over the room .
`` I am a connoisseur , '' said he , taking another cigarette from the box -- his fourth -- and lighting it from the stub of that which he had finished .
`` I will not trouble you with any lengthy cross-examination , Professor Coram , since I gather that you were in bed at the time of the crime , and could know nothing about it .
I would only ask this : What do you imagine that this poor fellow meant by his last words : 'The professor -- it was she ' ? ''
Holmes picked up the key , and looked at it for an instant , then he handed it back .
Stanley Hopkins had laid his hand upon her arm and claimed her as his prisoner , but she waved him aside gently , and yet with an over-mastering dignity which compelled obedience .
The old man lay back in his chair with a twitching face , and stared at her with brooding eyes .
The old man reached out a trembling hand and helped himself to a cigarette .
`` I am in your hands , Anna , '' said he .
`` You were always good to me . ''
`` You were always a noble woman , Anna , '' said the old man , puffing at his cigarette .
`` A simple case , and yet , in some ways , an instructive one , '' Holmes remarked , as we travelled back to town .
`` It hinged from the outset upon the pince-nez .
But for the fortunate chance of the dying man having seized these , I am not sure that we could ever have reached our solution .
It was clear to me , from the strength of the glasses , that the wearer must have been very blind and helpless when deprived of them .
When you asked me to believe that she walked along a narrow strip of grass without once making a false step , I remarked , as you may remember , that it was a noteworthy performance .
In my mind I set it down as an impossible performance , save in the unlikely case that she had a second pair of glasses .
I was forced , therefore , to consider seriously the hypothesis that she had remained within the house .
On perceiving the similarity of the two corridors , it became clear that she might very easily have made such a mistake , and , in that case , it was evident that she must have entered the professor 's room .
I was keenly on the alert , therefore , for whatever would bear out this supposition , and I examined the room narrowly for anything in the shape of a hiding-place .
The carpet seemed continuous and firmly nailed , so I dismissed the idea of a trap-door .
There might well be a recess behind the books .
As you are aware , such devices are common in old libraries .
I observed that books were piled on the floor at all other points , but that one bookcase was left clear .
This , then , might be the door .
I could see no marks to guide me , but the carpet was of a dun colour , which lends itself very well to examination .
I therefore smoked a great number of those excellent cigarettes , and I dropped the ash all over the space in front of the suspected bookcase .
It was a simple trick , but exceedingly effective .
I then went downstairs , and I ascertained , in your presence , Watson , without your perceiving the drift of my remarks , that Professor Coram's consumption of food had increased -- as one would expect when he is supplying a second person .
We then ascended to the room again , when , by upsetting the cigarette-box , I obtained a very excellent view of the floor , and was able to see quite clearly , from the traces upon the cigarette ash , that the prisoner had in our absence come out from her retreat .
Well , Hopkins , here we are at Charing Cross , and I congratulate you on having brought your case to a successful conclusion .
You are going to headquarters , no doubt .
I think , Watson , you and I will drive together to the Russian Embassy . ''
`` Mr. Sherlock Holmes ? ''
`` Yes , there is a late train -- quarter-past eleven . ''
`` What did you do next ? ''
`` I wired to Lord Mount-James . ''
This throws new light upon the matter .
Lord Mount-James is one of the richest men in England . ''
`` And your friend was closely related ? ''
Cyril Overton pressed his hands to his head .
`` I can make nothing of it , '' said he .
`` Well , well , I have a clear day , and I shall be happy to look into the matter , '' said Holmes .
`` I should strongly recommend you to make your preparations for your match without reference to this young gentleman .
It must , as you say , have been an overpowering necessity which tore him away in such a fashion , and the same necessity is likely to hold him away .
Let us step round together to the hotel , and see if the porter can throw any fresh light upon the matter . ''
`` Were you on duty all day yesterday ? ''
There were a number of letters , bills , and notebooks , which Holmes turned over and examined with quick , nervous fingers and darting , penetrating eyes .
`` Nothing here , '' he said , at last .
`` By the way , I suppose your friend was a healthy young fellow -- nothing amiss with him ? ''
`` Not a day .
He has been laid up with a hack , and once he slipped his knee-cap , but that was nothing . ''
`` This gentleman , Mr. Staunton 's friend , was referred to me by Scotland Yard . ''
`` I am Cyril Overton . ''
`` In that case , no doubt his family -- -- ''
`` I quite understand your position , '' said Holmes , with a mischievous twinkle in his eyes .
`` Perhaps you do n't quite understand mine .
Godfrey Staunton appears to have been a poor man .
If he has been kidnapped , it could not have been for anything which he himself possesses .
The fame of your wealth has gone abroad , Lord Mount-James , and it is entirely possible that a gang of thieves have secured your nephew in order to gain from him some information as to your house , your habits , and your treasure . ''
The young woman turned over a sheaf of counterfoils .
The young woman separated one of the forms .
`` And what have you gained ? ''
`` A starting-point for our investigation . ''
He hailed a cab .
`` King 's Cross Station , '' said he .
`` I have heard your name , Mr. Sherlock Holmes , and I am aware of your profession -- one of which I by no means approve . ''
`` No doubt , Doctor ; and yet the conversation may prove more important than the treatise .
Incidentally , I may tell you that we are doing the reverse of what you very justly blame , and that we are endeavouring to prevent anything like public exposure of private matters which must necessarily follow when once the case is fairly in the hands of the official police .
You may look upon me simply as an irregular pioneer , who goes in front of the regular forces of the country .
I have come to ask you about Mr. Godfrey Staunton . ''
`` He is an intimate friend of mine . ''
`` He left his hotel last night -- he has not been heard of . ''
`` To-morrow is the 'Varsity football match . ''
Holmes replaced the bill in his notebook .
`` If you prefer a public explanation , it must come sooner or later , '' said he .
`` I have already told you that I can hush up that which others will be bound to publish , and you would really be wiser to take me into your complete confidence . ''
`` It 's been out three hours , '' said Holmes ; `` started at half-past six , and here it is back again .
That gives a radius of ten or twelve miles , and he does it once , or sometimes twice , a day . ''
I can assure you that you are wasting your time in dogging my movements .
I have , as you discovered last night , a window at the back of my brougham , and if you desire a twenty-mile ride which will lead you to the spot from which you started , you have only to follow me .
Meanwhile , I can inform you that no spying upon me can in any way help Mr. Godfrey Staunton , and I am convinced that the best service you can do to that gentleman is to return at once to London and to report to your employer that you are unable to trace him .
Your time in Cambridge will certainly be wasted .
Yours faithfully , LESLIE ARMSTRONG .
`` Then our friend Overton 's forebodings have been justified , '' said Holmes .
`` Personally I am in agreement with Dr. Armstrong , and football does not come within my horizon .
Early to bed to-night , Watson , for I foresee that to-morrow may be an eventful day . ''
He will be clever if he can drive where I can not follow him .
When you have finished , come downstairs with me , and I will introduce you to a detective who is a very eminent specialist in the work that lies before us . ''
`` A threadbare and venerable device , but useful upon occasion .
I walked into the doctor 's yard this morning , and shot my syringe full of aniseed over the hind wheel .
A draghound will follow aniseed from here to John o'Groat 's , and our friend , Armstrong , would have to drive through the Cam before he would shake Pompey off his trail .
Oh , the cunning rascal !
This is how he gave me the slip the other night . ''
He sprang through a gate into a field , dragging the reluctant Pompey after him .
We had hardly got under the shelter of the hedge when the carriage rattled past .
I caught a glimpse of Dr. Armstrong within , his shoulders bowed , his head sunk on his hands , the very image of distress .
I could tell by my companion 's graver face that he also had seen .
`` Are you Mr. Godfrey Staunton ? ''
`` So , gentlemen , '' said he , `` you have attained your end and have certainly chosen a particularly delicate moment for your intrusion .
I would not brawl in the presence of death , but I can assure you that if I were a younger man your monstrous conduct would not pass with impunity . ''
A minute later , the grim doctor and ourselves were in the sitting-room below .
`` Come , Watson , '' said he , and we passed from that house of grief into the pale sunlight of the winter day .
`` Come , Watson , come ! ''
`` The game is afoot .
Into your clothes and come ! ''
`` I will , my dear Watson , I will .
At present I am , as you know , fairly busy , but I propose to devote my declining years to the composition of a textbook , which shall focus the whole art of detection into one volume .
Our present research appears to be a case of murder . ''
`` Sir Eustace Brackenstall , the driver tells me . ''
`` I thought they had better hear your ladyship 's story first . ''
`` It is nothing .
It has no connection with this hideous business to-night .
If you and your friend will sit down , I will tell you all I can .
`` Any questions , Mr .
`` I will not impose any further tax upon Lady Brackenstall 's patience and time , '' said Holmes .
`` Before I go into the dining-room , I should like to hear your experience . ''
He looked at the maid .
`` That is likely enough .
If she seemed to be senseless , they would not take her life .
What about this poor fellow , Hopkins ?
I seem to have heard some queer stories about him . ''
`` No doubt that is true , and yet they drank some wine , I understand . ''
These three glasses upon the sideboard have been untouched , I suppose ? ''
As a matter of fact , that screw was not used .
This bottle was opened by a pocket screw , probably contained in a knife , and not more than an inch and a half long .
If you will examine the top of the cork , you will observe that the screw was driven in three times before the cork was extracted .
It has never been transfixed .
This long screw would have transfixed it and drawn it up with a single pull .
When you catch this fellow , you will find that he has one of these multiplex knives in his possession . ''
During our return journey , I could see by Holmes 's face that he was much puzzled by something which he had observed .
Every now and then , by an effort , he would throw off the impression , and talk as if the matter were clear , but then his doubts would settle down upon him again , and his knitted brows and abstracted eyes would show that his thoughts had gone back once more to the great dining-room of the Abbey Grange , in which this midnight tragedy had been enacted .
At last , by a sudden impulse , just as our train was crawling out of a suburban station , he sprang on to the platform and pulled me out after him .
`` Can you see them in your mind 's eye ? ''
The household at the Abbey Grange were much surprised at our return , but Sherlock Holmes , finding that Stanley Hopkins had gone off to report to headquarters , took possession of the dining-room , locked the door upon the inside , and devoted himself for two hours to one of those minute and laborious investigations which form the solid basis on which his brilliant edifices of deduction were reared .
Seated in a corner like an interested student who observes the demonstration of his professor , I followed every step of that remarkable research .
The window , the curtains , the carpet , the chair , the rope -- each in turn was minutely examined and duly pondered .
The body of the unfortunate baronet had been removed , and all else remained as we had seen it in the morning .
Finally , to my astonishment , Holmes climbed up on to the massive mantelpiece .
Far above his head hung the few inches of red cord which were still attached to the wire .
For a long time he gazed upward at it , and then in an attempt to get nearer to it he rested his knee upon a wooden bracket on the wall .
This brought his hand within a few inches of the broken end of the rope , but it was not this so much as the bracket itself which seemed to engage his attention .
Finally , he sprang down with an ejaculation of satisfaction .
Holmes rose from his chair .
`` I have told you all I know . ''
No , Mr. Holmes had no desire to see him , but would be glad to know more about his record and character .
Before evening , we had a visit from Inspector Stanley Hopkins .
Things were not going very well with him .
`` Yes , I got it . ''
`` I am very glad if I have helped you . ''
`` Ah , that 's the question , of course .
But I commend the idea to your mind .
You might possibly find that there was something in it .
You won't stop for dinner ?
Well , good-bye , and let us know how you get on . ''
`` A very sensible reply , Watson .
You must look at it this way : what I know is unofficial , what he knows is official .
I have the right to private judgment , but he has none .
He must disclose all , or he is a traitor to his service .
In a doubtful case I would not put him in so painful a position , and so I reserve my information until my own mind is clear upon the matter . ''
Holmes smoked for some time in silence .
Then he crossed the room , and shook our visitor by the hand .
`` And the police have n't , nor will they , to the best of my belief .
Now , look here , Captain Crocker , this is a very serious matter , though I am willing to admit that you acted under the most extreme provocation to which any man could be subjected .
I am not sure that in defence of your own life your action will not be pronounced legitimate .
However , that is for a British jury to decide .
Meanwhile I have so much sympathy for you that , if you choose to disappear in the next twenty-four hours , I will promise you that no one will hinder you . ''
`` Certainly it will come out . ''
The sailor flushed with anger .
`` When I discovered my loss , Mr. Holmes , which was at eight o'clock this morning , I at once informed the Prime Minister .
It was at his suggestion that we have both come to you . ''
`` My wife had gone to the theatre .
I waited up for her .
It was half-past eleven before we went to our room . ''
`` No one is ever permitted to enter that room save the house-maid in the morning , and my valet , or my wife 's maid , during the rest of the day .
They are both trusty servants who have been with us for some time .
Besides , neither of them could possibly have known that there was anything more valuable than the ordinary departmental papers in my despatch-box . ''
Sherlock Holmes rose with a smile .
`` You are two of the most busy men in the country , '' said he , `` and in my own small way I have also a good many calls upon me .
I regret exceedingly that I can not help you in this matter , and any continuation of this interview would be a waste of time . ''
`` Then I will tell you , relying entirely upon your honour and that of your colleague , Dr. Watson .
I may appeal to your patriotism also , for I could not imagine a greater misfortune for the country than that this affair should come out . ''
`` You may safely trust us . ''
`` Yes , sir , a cipher telegram has been despatched . ''
`` Perhaps he desires the publication of the letter . ''
`` It is your misfortune , my dear fellow .
No one can blame you .
There is no precaution which you have neglected .
Now , Mr. Holmes , you are in full possession of the facts .
What course do you recommend ? ''
`` I believe you are right , Mr. Holmes .
He would take so valuable a prize to headquarters with his own hands .
I think that your course of action is an excellent one .
Meanwhile , Hope , we can not neglect all our other duties on account of this one misfortune .
Should there be any fresh developments during the day we shall communicate with you , and you will no doubt let us know the results of your own inquiries . ''
`` Is that Eduardo Lucas of Godolphin Street ? ''
`` You will not see him . ''
`` Well , Watson , what do you make of this ? ''
asked Holmes , after a long pause .
`` And yet the motives of women are so inscrutable .
You remember the woman at Margate whom I suspected for the same reason .
No powder on her nose -- that proved to be the correct solution .
How can you build on such a quicksand ?
Their most trivial action may mean volumes , or their most extraordinary conduct may depend upon a hairpin or a curling tongs .
Good-morning , Watson . ''
All that day and the next and the next Holmes was in a mood which his friends would call taciturn , and others morose .
He ran out and ran in , smoked incessantly , played snatches on his violin , sank into reveries , devoured sandwiches at irregular hours , and hardly answered the casual questions which I put to him .
It was evident to me that things were not going well with him or his quest .
He would say nothing of the case , and it was from the papers that I learned the particulars of the inquest , and the arrest with the subsequent release of John Mitton , the valet of the deceased .
The coroner 's jury brought in the obvious Wilful Murder , but the parties remained as unknown as ever .
No motive was suggested .
The room was full of articles of value , but none had been taken .
The dead man 's papers had not been tampered with .
They were carefully examined , and showed that he was a keen student of international politics , an indefatigable gossip , a remarkable linguist , and an untiring letter writer .
He had been on intimate terms with the leading politicians of several countries .
But nothing sensational was discovered among the documents which filled his drawers .
As to his relations with women , they appeared to have been promiscuous but superficial .
He had many acquaintances among them , but few friends , and no one whom he loved .
His habits were regular , his conduct inoffensive .
His death was an absolute mystery and likely to remain so .
`` What do you think of that , Holmes ? ''
I had read the account aloud to him , while he finished his breakfast .
`` Our French friends seem to have touched the spot this time .
No doubt it 's just as they say .
She knocked at the door -- surprise visit , I guess , for he kept his life in water-tight compartments -- he let her in , could n't keep her in the street .
She told him how she had traced him , reproached him .
One thing led to another , and then with that dagger so handy the end soon came .
It was n't all done in an instant , though , for these chairs were all swept over yonder , and he had one in his hand as if he had tried to hold her off with it .
We 've got it all clear as if we had seen it . ''
`` Well , I 'm sure you would never guess in a hundred years what we did find .
You see that stain on the carpet ?
Well , a great deal must have soaked through , must it not ? ''
`` Undoubtedly it must . ''
`` Yes , so you would say .
But the fact remains that there is n't . ''
`` But the under side is as stained as the upper .
It must have left a mark . ''
Lestrade chuckled with delight at having puzzled the famous expert .
The big constable , very hot and penitent , sidled into the room .
`` What time was it ? ''
The lady sprang to her feet , with the colour all dashed in an instant from her beautiful face .
Her eyes glazed -- she tottered -- I thought that she would faint .
Then with a grand effort she rallied from the shock , and a supreme astonishment and indignation chased every other expression from her features .
`` You are trying to frighten me .
It is not a very manly thing , Mr. Holmes , to come here and browbeat a woman .
You say that you know something .
What is it that you know ? ''
Her courage was admirable .
Even now she would not own defeat .
`` Is Mr. Trelawney Hope at home ? ''
`` Still a quarter of an hour , '' said he .
`` Very good , I shall wait . ''
Holmes raised the lady .
`` I am thankful , madam , that you have come to your senses even at this last moment !
There is not an instant to lose .
Where is the letter ? ''
`` Purely negative as yet , '' my friend answered .
`` I have inquired at every point where it might be , and I am sure that there is no danger to be apprehended . ''
`` But why should anyone take it in order to keep it in his house ? ''
`` No , no , I had everything out . ''
He paused , and the three culprits were beginning to cool down and congratulate themselves , when he began again .
`` By no means , '' his father returned with decision .
`` Girdlestone and Co. are not an insurance office .
The labourer is worthy of his hire , but when his work in this world is over , his family must fall back upon what has been saved by his industry and thrift .
It would be a dangerous precedent for us to allow pensions to the wives of these sailors , for it would deprive the others of all motive for laying their money by , and would indirectly encourage vice and dissipation . ''
`` Yes , I am going up to him now . ''
A look of interest came over Girdlestone 's face .
`` And the balance ? ''
`` Then , old friend , her fortune reverts to you , for there is none who will use it so well .
Those are the terms of the will .
But you will guard her and care for her , as I would myself .
She is a tender plant , John , too weak to grow alone .
Promise me that you will do right by her -- promise it ? ''
`` Now , repeat after me , I swear and solemnly pledge myself -- ''
`` To treasure and guard as if she were my own -- '' in the deep bass of the merchant .
`` And as I treat her , so may my own flesh and blood treat me ! ''
`` Are you going ? ''
the invalid asked sadly , for he had taken up his hat and stick .
`` I took a brandy and seltzer on the way to the office , '' he answered carelessly .
`` I needed one to steady me . ''
`` I was playing cards with Major Clutterbuck and one or two others .
We kept it up rather late . ''
`` With Major Clutterbuck ? ''
`` Well , go your own way , '' said Girdlestone shortly .
Hard to all the world , he was soft only in this one direction .
From childhood every discussion between father and son had ended with the same words .
`` Yes , I dropped in there on my way to the office .
I would hold on to those .
They will go up for some days yet . ''
`` It seems to be a praiseworthy object , '' the merchant said gravely .
The shambling little clerk was still standing at the door watching the retreating figure of the millionaire , and mentally splicing together his fragmentary remarks into a symmetrical piece of advice which might be carried home and digested at leisure , when his attention was attracted to a pale-faced woman , with a child in her arms , who was hanging about the entrance .
She looked up at the clerk in a wistful way , as if anxious to address him and yet afraid to do so .
Then noting , perhaps , some gleam of kindness in his yellow wrinkled face , she came across to him .
`` D 'ye think I could see Muster Girdlestone , sir , '' she asked , with a curtsey ; `` or , maybe , you 're Mr. Girdlestone yourself ? ''
The woman was wretchedly dressed , and her eyelids were swollen and red as from long crying .
The merchant looked with a surprised and suspicious eye at his visitor when she was ushered in .
`` Take a seat , my good woman , '' he said .
`` What can I do for you ? ''
`` Hudson -- Hudson -- ca n't remember the name , '' said Girdlestone , shaking his head reflectively .
`` Bless you , sir ! ''
said the widow , still furtively rubbing her eyes with the corner of her little shawl .
`` You 're a real kind gentleman .
It does me good to hear you talk . ''
`` We have all our burdens and misfortunes , '' continued the senior partner .
`` Some have more , some have less .
To-day is your turn , to-morrow it may be mine .
But let us struggle on to the great goal , and the weight of our burden need never cause us to sink by the wayside .
And now I must wish you a very good morning , Mrs. Hudson .
Believe me , you have my hearty sympathy . ''
This invitation was so far complied with that the handle turned , and the door revolved slowly upon its hinges .
Nothing more substantial than a strong smell of spirituous liquors , however , entered the apartment .
`` Ivory , an ' gold dust , an ' skins , an ' resin , an ' cochineal , an ' gums , an ' ebony , an ' rice , an ' tobacco , an ' fruits , an ' nuts in bulk .
If there 's a better cargo about , I 'd like to see it , '' the sailor said defiantly .
`` Belay , there , belay ! ''
His coppery face was a shade darker than usual , and his bilious eyes had a venomous gleam in them .
`` Do n't you beat me down , curse you ! ''
he hissed , advancing to the table and leaning his hands upon it while he pushed his angry face forward until it was within a foot of that of the merchant .
`` Do n't you try that game on , mate , for I am a free-born British seaman , and I am under the thumb of no man . ''
`` You 're drunk , '' said the senior partner .
`` Sit down ! ''
`` You 'd reduce my screw , would ye ? ''
roared Captain Hamilton Miggs , working himself into a fury .
`` Me that has worked for ye , and slaved for ye , and risked my life for ye .
You try it on , guv'nor ; just you try it on !
Suppose I let out that little story o ' the painting out o ' the marks -- where would the firm of Girdlestone be then !
I guess you'd rather double my wage than have that yarn goin ' about . ''
`` Do you mean to assert that it was ? ''
`` Shall I send in the policeman , sir ? ''
asked Gilray , opening the door .
`` I 'll go back and be damned to it ! ''
said the captain recklessly , plunging his hands into the pockets of his pea jacket and plumping back into his chair .
`` There is always a risk , my dear captain .
There is nothing in the world without risk .
You remember what is said about those who go down to the sea in ships .
They see the wonders of the deep , and in return they incur some little danger .
My house in Eccleston Square might be shaken down by an earthquake , or a gale might blow in the walls , but I 'm not always brooding over the chance of it .
There 's no use your taking it for granted that some misfortune will happen to the _Black Eagle_ . ''
`` Did you read it ? ''
`` I have often wondered how you managed it , '' Girdlestone said curiously .
`` You succeed in picking up a cargo where the steadiest and best men ca n't get as much as a bag of nuts .
How do you work it ? ''
`` Well , good morning , guv'nor , '' Captain Hamilton Miggs said brusquely .
`` When you wants me you can lay your hands on me at the old crib , the _Cock and Cowslip_ , Rotherhithe . ''
As he passed out through the office , Ezra rejoined his father .
`` He does n't seem much the worse for the climate , either . ''
His companion poised himself for a moment , and then , lashing out with his left hand , came home with a heavy thud on the place indicated .
Dimsdale smiled gently and shook his head .
`` It wo n't do , '' he said .
`` It wo n't do .
Suspicion shone in the woman 's eyes .
`` Was it aboot a bill ? ''
I wouldna ' fash aboot that . ''
The third floor , you say .
He did not expect me so early , I shall surprise the dear boy at his work . ''
`` Dear me ! ''
`` Some one is beating carpets .
How can they expect poor Tom to read ? ''
`` You have your tools close at hand , I see , '' he remarked .
`` Yes , dad , all ready . ''
`` Did n't you , sir ? ''
said Garraway , pulling on his coat .
`` I thought I heard a noise . ''
`` Oh yes , sir .
There is the -- All right , Tom , all right !
Excuse me , sir !
He is calling me ; '' and Garraway vanished as precipitately as his friend had done .
The doctor sat alone , puffing at his cigarette , and brooding over his own dullness of hearing .
`` I am all ready , '' cried Dr. Dimsdale , jumping to his feet and buttoning his coat .
There was no need upon that day for Dr. Dimsdale or any other stranger in the town to ask his way to the University , for the whooping and yelling which proceeded from that usually decorous building might have been heard from Prince 's Street to Newington .
In front of the gates was a dense crowd of townspeople peering through into the quadrangle , and deriving much entertainment from the movements of the lively young gentlemen within .
Large numbers of the more peaceable undergraduates stood about under the arches , and these quickly made a way for the newcomers , for both Garraway and Dimsdale as noted athletes commanded a respect among their fellow-students which medallists and honours men might look for in vain .
He glanced from one to the other , and it was so evident from the expression of their faces that he had just hit the mark , that he burst into a great guffaw of laughter , in which , after a moment 's hesitation , his two young companions heartily joined .
`` Oh , how good you both are to me ! ''
cried the girl , in a pretty little gush of gratitude .
`` I am afraid that I am not very useful in a household , '' said the girl .
`` I was too young to look after things for poor papa .
Mr. Girdlestone , of course , has a housekeeper of his own .
I read the _Financial News_ to him after dinner every day , and I know all about stock and Consols and those American railways which are perpetually rising and falling .
One of them went wrong last week , and Ezra swore , and Mr. Girdlestone said that the Lord chastens those whom He loves .
He did not seem to like being chastened a bit though .
But how delightful this is !
It is like living in another world . ''
`` How are you , mam dear ? ''
he cried , stooping over her to kiss her .
`` How are you , dad ?
Good morning , Cousin Kate .
You must come down and wish us luck .
What a blessing that it is pretty warm .
It is miserable for the spectators when there is an east wind .
What do you think of it , dad ? ''
Even matches between prominent local clubs excite much interest in Edinburgh and attract crowds of spectators .
How much more then when the pick of the manhood of Scotland were to try their strength against the very cream of the players from the South of the Tweed .
The roads which converged on the Raeburn Place Grounds , on which the match was to be played , were dark with thousands all wending their way in one direction .
So thick was the moving mass that the carriage of the Dimsdale party had to go at a walk for the latter half of the journey , In spite of the objurgations of the driver , who , as a patriot , felt the responsibility which rested upon him in having one of the team in his charge , and the necessity there was for delivering him up by the appointed time .
Many in the crowd recognized the young fellow and waved their hands to him or called out a few words of encouragement .
Miss Kate Harston and even the doctor began to reflect some of the interest and excitement which showed itself on every face around them .
The youth alone seemed to be unaffected by the general enthusiasm , and spent the time in endeavouring to explain the principles of the game to his fair companion , whose ignorance of it was comprehensive and astounding .
`` Oh yes , I am , '' said Kate .
As a matter of fact the great throng and the novel sights were distracting her so much that she found it hard to attend to her companion 's disquisition .
The play is , as all good judges said it would be , very equal .
For the first forty minutes every advantage gained by either side had been promptly neutralized by a desperate effort on the part of the other .
The mass of struggling players has swayed backwards and forwards , but never more than twenty or thirty yards from the centre of the ground .
Neither goal had been seriously threatened as yet .
The spectators fail to see how the odds laid on England are justified , but the `` fancy '' abide by their choice .
In the second forty it is thought that the superior speed and staying power of the Southerners will tell over the heavier Scots .
There seems little the matter with the latter as yet , as they stand in a group , wiping their grimy faces and discussing the state of the game ; for at the end of forty minutes the goals are changed and there is a slight interval .
By degrees Tom developed other symptoms of the distemper which had come upon him so suddenly .
He had always been remarkable for a certain towsiness of appearance and carelessness of dress which harmonized with his Bohemian habits .
All this he suddenly abjured .
One fine morning he paid successive visits to his tailor , his boot-maker , his hatter , and his hosier , which left all those worthy tradesmen rubbing their hands with satisfaction .
About a week afterwards he emerged from his rooms in a state of gorgeousness which impressed his landlady and amazed his friends .
His old college companions hardly recognized Tom 's honest phiz as it looked out above the most fashionable of coats and under the glossiest of hats .
Kate managed to evade the question , but her bright blush might have opened the old man 's eyes had he observed it .
He hardly realized yet that his son really was a man , and still less did he think of John Harston 's little girl as a woman .
It is generally some comparative stranger who first makes that discovery and brings it home to friends and relatives .
`` I seem to have forgotten the little I ever knew , '' Tom said dolefully , as he trudged up the steps .
As he looked back he saw Kate wave her hand to him cheerily , and it gave him fresh heart .
`` We shall hope to see you at lunch time , '' his father shouted after him .
`` Mind you bring us good news . ''
As he spoke the carriage rattled away down the Bridges , and Tom joined the knot of expectant students who were waiting at the door of the great hall .
The questioner broke into a sickly smile .
`` No , '' he said .
`` It 's an organic explosive chemical compound .
You 're sure to be asked about cacodyl .
Tester 's dead on it .
He asks every one how it is prepared . ''
Tom 's expression after that would have made the fortune of a mute .
`` It is an echinus -- a sea-urchin , '' Tom said triumphantly .
`` By means of long tubes which it projects at pleasure . ''
`` How do the tubes enable the creature to walk ? ''
`` They have suckers on them . ''
`` They are round hollow discs . ''
`` And what makes this pimple contract ? ''
`` Very good , '' said the examiners , and the student breathed again .
The taller one returned to the charge , however , with , `` And this muscle -- is it composed of striped fibres or non-striped ? ''
`` Have you ever rowed in a pond ? ''
`` In that case you may have observed that a large bubble , or a succession of them has risen from the bottom to the surface .
Now , of what gas was that bubble composed ? ''
The unhappy student , with the one idea always fermenting on his brain , felt that the worst had come upon him .
Without a moment 's hesitation or thought he expressed his conviction that the compound was cacodyl .
`` Ca n't you see him yet ? ''
the doctor asked for the twentieth time .
`` Please sir , '' said this apparition , with a bob , `` I 'm Sarah Jane . ''
`` Bad luck to them !
they should have sent a wake ago .
You should do what Jimmy Towler did .
You did n't know Towler , of the Sappers ?
When he and I were souldiering in Canada he was vexed at the allowance which he had from ould Sir Oliver , his uncle , not turning up at the right time .
'Ged , Toby , ' he says to me , 'I 'll warm the old rascal up . '
So he sits down and writes a letter to his uncle , in which he told him his unbusiness-like ways would be the ruin of them , and more to the same effect .
When Sir Oliver got the letter he was in such a divil 's own rage , that while he was dictating a codicil to his will he tumbled off the chair in a fit , and Jimmy came in for a clean siven thousand a year . ''
`` Niver mind , me boy !
What 's in the common purse , I wonder ? ''
He looked up at a little leather bag which hung from a brass nail on the wall .
In flush times they were wont to deposit small sums in this , on which they might fall back in their hours of need .
`` Not much , I fear , '' the other said , shaking his head .
`` Dat may be ; dat may be , '' the German answered stolidly .
`` Vat I know , I know , and vat I say I say . ''
`` And you wo n't tell me where you heard this of the Girdlestones ? ''
`` It vould be no good to you .
It Is enough dat vat I say is certain .
Let it suffice that dere are people vat are bound to tell other people all dat dey know about anything whatever . ''
Many things had contributed towards this state of affairs .
The firm had been involved in a succession of misfortunes , some known to the world , and others known to no one save the elder Girdlestone .
The former had been accepted with such perfect stoicism and cheerfulness that they rather increased than diminished the reputation of the concern ; the latter were the more crushing , and also the more difficult to bear .
For God 's sake do n't let the clerks hear you .
We have not so much as that .
We have very little .
In fact , Ezra , we have next to nothing in the bank .
It is all gone . ''
`` Did your best ! ''
hissed Ezra , hurling the ledger down on the table with a crash .
`` What did you mean by speculating without my knowledge , and telling me at the same time that I knew all that was done ?
Had n't I warned you a thousand times of the danger of it ?
You are not to be trusted with money . ''
`` But it ca n't leak out .
No one suspects it for a moment .
They might imagine that we are suffering from some temporary depression of trade , but no one could possibly know the sad truth .
For Heaven 's sake don't you let it out ! ''
A flush came into Girdlestone 's sallow cheeks , and his eyes sparkled angrily .
The young man shrugged his shoulders , and drummed his heel against the ground impatiently .
`` I have more than one plan in my head , '' the merchant said , `` by which our affairs may be re-established on their old footing .
If we can once get sufficient money to satisfy our present creditors , and so tide over this run of bad luck , the current will set in the other way , and all will go well .
And , first of all , there is one question , my boy , which I should like to ask you .
What do you think of John Harston 's daughter ? ''
`` Of course , '' he said impatiently .
`` Well , go on -- what about her ? ''
`` Not so much as you think , my boy , for there are not any great amount of diamonds in the market at any one time .
The yield of the South African fields regulates the price .
I have had this idea in my head for some time , and have studied the details .
Of course , I should not attempt to buy in all the diamonds that are in the market .
A small portion of them would yield profit enough to float the firm off again . ''
`` But if you have only a part of the supply in your hands , how are you to regulate the market value ?
You must come down to the prices at which other holders are selling . ''
the old merchant said , shaking his head good-humouredly .
`` But you do n't quite see my plan yet .
You have not altogether grasped it .
Allow me to explain it to you . ''
An expression of interest had come over Ezra 's face , and he nodded to show that he was listening .
`` Them , you mean ? ''
`` How about our purchaser at the diamond fields ? ''
`` I am glad , '' said the old merchant , `` that you and I have had this conversation , Ezra .
The fact of my having speculated without your knowledge , and deceived you by a false ledger , has often weighed heavily upon my conscience , I assure you .
It is a relief to me to have told you all . ''
`` Well , what more can I do ? ''
replied the merchant `` They are thoroughly rotten .
I have done nothing for them for years .
Sooner or later they must go .
I can not do any more . ''
`` Good morning , John , '' he said affably .
`` Yes , sir .
Fifteen hundred pounds , sir .
Less legacy duty and incidental expenses , fourteen hundred and twenty-eight six and fourpence .
My wife 's brother Andrew left it , sir , and a very handsome legacy too . ''
`` Banked it , sir , in the United Metropolitan . ''
John Girdlestone took some sheets of blue official paper from a drawer , and his quill pen travelled furiously over them with many a screech and splutter .
`` I was going to Victoria Street to change my book , and then to Ford Street . ''
`` Nor I , '' said Tom earnestly .
`` You remember the day we had at the Pentlands ? ''
Tom was not to be diverted from his subject by any meteorological observations .
`` Perhaps some time your guardian will allow the dad to take you on another little holiday , '' he said hopefully .
`` Oh , he is very pious and good , then , '' Tom remarked , in a doubtful voice .
His shrewd old father had formed his own views as to John Girdlestone 's character , and his son had in due course imbibed them from him .
Tom said dubiously ; and then , with a little pang at his heart , `` Do you like Ezra Girdlestone too ? ''
`` He put up his gun while I was untying it , as if he had half a mind to take a shot at me .
When I met him afterwards he said that he would teach me to mind my own business .
I did n't mind what he said though , as long as I had the cat . ''
`` Do n't be so excitable , Cousin Tom , '' she said , laying her gloved hand upon his arm ; `` there is nothing to be cross about . ''
`` Do n't go for a moment , '' Tom cried , desperately detaining his companion by the sleeve of her jacket .
`` We are alone here and can talk .
Don't you think -- do n't you think you could like me a little bit if you were to try ?
I love you so , Kate , that I can not help hoping that my love is not all lost . ''
`` Do n't mind him , '' said Tom , still detaining her on the little-island .
`` Since I met you in Edinburgh , Kate , I have seemed to be walking in a dream .
Do what I will , go where I will , I still have you before my eyes and hear your sweet voice in my ears .
I do n't believe any girl was ever loved more dearly than I love you , but I find it so hard to put into words the thoughts that I have in my mind .
For Heaven 's sake , give me some little gleam of hope to carry away with me .
You do n't dislike me , Kate , do you ? ''
`` You know that I do n't , Cousin Tom , '' said the young lady , with downcast eyes .
He had cornered her so skilfully against the great lamp that she could move neither to the right nor to the left .
`` It 's only for a time , Tom ; and you may tell them at home by all means .
Now , good-bye , dear ; they will see you from the windows if you come nearer . ''
They shook hands and parted , he hurrying away with the glad tidings to Phillimore Gardens , she tripping back to her captivity with the lightest heart that she had felt for a weary time .
Passers-by glanced back at the bright little face under the bright little bonnet , and Ezra Girdlestone , looking down at her from the drawing-room window , bethought him that if the diamond speculation should fail it would be no hardship to turn to his father 's word .
`` Fetch in a decanter of brandy and some seltzer water , '' said Ezra to the waiter ; `` then shut the door and leave us entirely to ourselves . ''
`` My father , '' continued Ezra , `` wanted to employ one of our own men .
We have numbers who are capable in every way of managing the business .
I interfered , however .
I said that I had a good friend , named Major Tobias Clutterbuck , who was well qualified for the position .
I mentioned that you were of the blood of the old Silesian kings .
Was I not right ? ''
Thus encouraged , Ezra proceeded to unfold the plan upon which the fortunes of the House of Girdlestone depended .
Not a word did he say of ruin or danger , or the reasons which had induced this speculation .
On the contrary , he depicted the affairs of the firm as being in a most nourishing condition , and this venture as simply a small insignificant offshoot from their business , undertaken as much for amusement as for any serious purpose .
Still , he laid stress upon the fact that though the sum in question was a small one to the firm , yet it was a very large one in other men 's eyes .
As to the morality of the scheme , that was a point which Ezra omitted entirely to touch upon .
Any comment upon that would , he felt , be superfluous when dealing with such a man as his companion .
`` Quite so , '' Ezra remarked , rubbing his hands pleasantly .
`` That 's an ugly word , '' Ezra remonstrated .
`` This 'report ' we will say .
A report may be either true or false , you know . ''
`` What right had you to come to me with such a proposal ?
I do n't set up for being a saint , Lord knows , but , be George !
I 've some morals , such as they are , and I mean to stick to them .
One of me rules of life has been niver to know a blackgaird , and so , me young friend , from this day forth you and I go on our own roads .
I 'm not particular , but 'you must draw the line somewhere , ' as me frind , Charlie Monteith , of the Indian Horse , used to say I when he cut his father-in-law .
I draw it at you . ''
Ezra opened the door precipitately .
`` Another thing , '' said the major .
`` You must niver take it for granted that every man you mate is as great a blackgaird as yourself . ''
`` One more lesson , '' he said .
`` Never funk a pistol unless you are sure there 's a carthridge inside .
Drive on , cabby ! ''
With which parting shot the gallant major rattled away down Piccadilly with a fixed determination never again to leave his rooms without a few of Eley 's No 4 central fires in his pocket .
There were rejoicings in Phillimore Gardens over Tom 's engagement , for the two old people were both heartily fond of Kate -- '' our Kate , '' as they were wont proudly to call her .
The physician chafed at first over the idea of keeping the matter a secret from Girdlestone .
A little reflection served to show him , however , that there was nothing to be gained by informing him , while Kate 's life , during the time that she was forced to remain under his roof , would be more tolerable as long as he was kept in ignorance of it .
In the meanwhile the lovers saw little of each other , and Tom was only consoled by the thought that every day which passed brought him nearer to the time when he could claim his prize without concealment or fear .
He went about as happy and as light-hearted a man as any in all London .
His mother was delighted at his high spirits , but his bluff old father was not so well satisfied .
`` Confound the lad ! ''
he said to himself .
`` He is settling down to a life of idleness .
It suits him too well .
We must get him to choose one way or the other . ''
`` You must do something to keep you from mischief , my boy , '' he said at last brusquely .
`` First of all , what do you think of this ? ''
the doctor asked abruptly , handing a letter over to his son , who opened it and read as follows : --
`` I hardly know , '' said Tom ; `` I should like a little time to think it over . ''
Hence in a couple of days there was a stir in the legal house of Jones , Morgan , & Co. , with much rustling of parchment , and signing of names , and drinking of inferior sherry .
The result of all which was that the firm of Girdlestone & Co. were seven thousand pounds the richer , and Thomas Dimsdale found himself a recognized member of a great commercial house with all the rights and privileges appertaining thereto .
`` We have your money ready , too .
I can rely upon rather over thirty thousand pounds .
Our credit was good for that , but I did not wish to push it too far for fear of setting tongues wagging . ''
`` Except your friend Clutterbuck . ''
`` But if you think that there is no mistake , if your opponent is undoubtedly about to proceed to extremities , shoot him down at once , my dear lad , before he has time to draw .
I have heard those who have been out there say that in such cases everything depends upon getting the first shot .
I am anxious about you , and shall not be easy until I see you again . ''
`` My dear boy , '' said the father , with a mild look of surprise upon his face , `` you seem to be under a misapprehension in this matter .
You appear to consider that we are embarking upon some unjustifiable undertaking .
This is not so .
What we are doing is simply a small commercial ruse -- a finesse .
It is a recognized maxim of trade to endeavour to depreciate the price of whatever you want to buy , and to raise it again when the time comes for selling . ''
`` I shall not expend an unnecessary penny . ''
He wrote again about a fortnight afterwards , and his letter , as it crossed the Atlantic , passed the outward mail , which bore the news of the wonderful diamond find made by an English geologist among the Ural Mountains .
`` 'You deal , do n't you , Mr .
`` 'Well , ' he said , 'you may go far before you see a finer stone than this .
What will you bid for it ? '
`` 'Why , if it is yellow it makes it all the more valuable , ' said a big fellow with a black beard and corduroy trousers .
'A yellow stone 's as good as a white . '
`` I will , sir . ''
`` And bring me ledger No .
`` Yes , your son .
He 's a smart lad -- very smart indeed -- about as quick as they make 'em .
He may be a trifle coarse at times , but that 's the spirit of the age , me dear sir .
Me friend Tuffleton , of the Blues , says that delicacy went out of fashion with hair powder and beauty patches .
he 's a demned satirical fellow is Tuffleton .
Do n't know him , eh ? ''
The merchant still sat perfectly still , tapping the table with his black ebony ruler .
`` Yes , '' he went on , I saw Langworthy off to Russia .
Then I saw your son start for Africa .
He 's an interprising lad , and sure to do well there .
_coelum non animam mutant_ , as we used to say at Clongowes .
He 'll always come to the front , wherever he is , as long as he avoids little slips like this one we 're spaking of .
About the same time I heard that Girdlestone & Co , had raised riddy money to the extint of five and thirty thousand pounds .
That 's gone to Africa , too , I presume .
It 's a lot o ' money to invist in such a game , and it might be safe if you were the only people that knew about it , but whin there are others -- ''
`` Look here , Major Clutterbuck , '' cried the merchant , in a voice which quivered with suppressed passion , `` you have come into possession of an important commercial secret .
Why beat about the bush any longer ?
What is the object of your visit to-day ?
What is it that you want ? ''
`` Ged , I 've been wanting it all me life .
The difference is that I'm going to git it now . ''
A slight sneer played over Girdlestone 's pale face , but he made no remark .
`` We are in your power , '' he said , and have no resource but to submit to your terms .
You said five hundred pounds ? ''
`` A thousand , '' the major answered cheerfully .
`` Well , you shall have it .
I will communicate with you . ''
Girdlestone rose as if to terminate the interview .
The cashier counted and handed over a thick packet of crisp rustling paper and a little pile of shining sovereigns .
The major stowed away the first in the pocket-book and the latter in his trouser pockets .
Then he swaggered out with a great increase of pomposity and importance , and ordered his cabman to drive to Kennedy Place .
When the old soldier had sufficiently enjoyed the lively emotion which showed itself on every feature of the German 's countenance , he picked up the notes and locked them in his desk together with half the gold .
The other fifty pounds he returned into his pocket .
`` Come on ! ''
he said to his companion abruptly .
Within a week or ten days of the receipt of these telegrams in London there came letters from the Russian correspondents of the various journals giving fuller details upon a subject of so much general interest .
The _Times_ directed attention to the matter in a leader .
`` Misther Fugger , '' he cried , `` you 're shust the man I want to see .
My Gott , vot is to become of us all ?
Vot is to become of de diamond trade ven one can pick them up like cockles on the sea shore ? ''
`` Ah , that 's a bad job .
You must make up your mind to lose on them . ''
`` Certainly , '' replied the diamond dealer .
Girdlestone was a very well-known man upon 'Change , and one who was universally respected and looked up to .
`` As much as that ! ''
said the merchant , with an excellent affectation of surprise .
`` I am anxious about it , for my boy is out there .
It was a hobby of his , and I let him go .
I trust he will not be bitten . ''
`` Poor lad ! ''
`` He is young , and has had little experience as yet .
I hope all is well with him ! ''
He shook his head despondently , and walked slowly homewards , but his heart beat triumphantly within him , for he was assured now that the report would influence prices as he had foreseen , and the African firm reap the benefit of their daring speculation .
One sunny day he had returned from a long ride , and , having dined , strolled out into the streets , Panama hat upon head and cigar in mouth .
It was the 23rd of October , and he had been nearly ten weeks in the colony .
Since his arrival he had taken to growing a beard .
Otherwise , he was much as we have seen him in London , save that a ruddier glow of health shone upon his sunburned face .
The life of the diggings appeared to agree with him .
`` Who said there was news ? ''
`` Look here , boss , '' said a rough-looking fellow in the front of the crowd , `` you keep your hair on , and do n't get slinging words about too freely , or it may be the worse for you and for your office too .
We heard as there was big news , an ' we come down to hear it , but as to gettin ' it without paying , that ai n't our sort .
I suppose we can call it square if we each hands in sixpence , which is the price o ' your paper , and then you can tell us what 's on . ''
`` Well , we wo n't stick at that , '' said the miner .
`` What say you , boys ? ''
`` Well , what 's the news ? ''
cried the impatient crowd .
`` Sure I have n't opened the bag yet , but I soon will .
Whativer it is it 's bound to be there .
Hey there , Billy , ye divil 's brat , where 's the mail bag ? ''
EXTRAORDINARY DISCOVERY BY AN ENGLISHMAN .
THREATENED EXTINCTION OF THE CAPE INDUSTRY .
GREAT FALL IN PRICES .
OPINIONS OF THE LONDON PRESS .
`` What will you sell it for ? ''
The instant the young man alighted from his horse he was surrounded by a knot of eager questioners .
`` You 've just come from Kimberley , '' they cried .
`` What is the truth of it , Mr. Girdlestone ?
Let us know the truth of it . ''
`` It 's a bad business , my friends , '' he answered , looking around at the ring of inquiring faces .
`` I have been reading a full account of it in the _Cape Argus_ .
They have made a great find in Russia .
There seems to be no doubt at all about the matter . ''
`` I reckon we 're all hit pretty hard if this is true , '' remarked another .
`` He 's a bad plucked 'un to knock under like that , '' Ezra 's companion remarked .
`` Yes , '' said the croupier of the saloon gambling table .
`` If he 'd waited for another deal he might have held every trump .
He was always a soft chap , was Jim , and he was saying last night as how this spoiled the last chance he was ever like to have of seeing his wife and childer in England .
He 's blowed a fine clean hole in himself .
Would you like to see it , Mr .
The fellow was about to remove the blood-stained handkerchief which covered the dead man 's face , but Ezra recoiled in horror .
`` Mr. Girdlestone looks faint like , '' some one observed .
The crisis at the African fields was even more acute than had been anticipated by the conspirators .
Nothing approaching to it had ever been known in South Africa before .
Diamonds went steadily down in value until they were selling at a price which no dealer would have believed possible , and the sale of claims reached such a climax that men were glad to get rid of them for the mere price of the plant and machinery erected at them .
The offices of the various dealers at Kimberley were besieged night and day by an importunate crowd of miners , who were willing to sell at any price in order to save something from the general ruin which they imagined was about to come upon the industry .
Some , more long-headed or more desperate than their neighbours , continued to work their claims and to keep the stones which they found until prices might be better .
As fresh mails came from the Cape , however , each confirming and amplifying the ominous news , these independent workers grew fewer and more faint-hearted , for their boys had to be paid each week , and where was the money to come from with which to pay them ?
The dealers , too , began to take the alarm , and the most tempting offers would hardly induce them to give hard cash in exchange for stones which might prove to be a drug in the market .
Everywhere there was misery and stagnation .
`` You can get one or two fellows to help you , '' said Ezra .
`` I 'll pay for their licences .
I ca n't expect you to work all the camps yourself .
Of course , if you offer more for a stone than I care to give , that's your look out , but if you do your work well you shall not be the loser .
You shall have a percentage on business done and a weekly salary as well . ''
`` We 'll make it go as far as we can , '' he said .
`` Of course you may buy claims as well as stones . ''
These broodings and cogitations culminated in a meeting , which was held by him with his two sub-agents in the private parlour of the Digger's Retreat .
It was a low-roofed , smoke-stained room , with a profusion of spittoons scattered over it , which , to judge by the condition of the floor , the patrons of the establishment had taken some pains to avoid .
Round a solid , old-fashioned table in the centre of this apartment sat Ezra 's staff of assistants , the parson thoughtful but self-satisfied , the others sullen and inquisitive .
Farintosh had convened the meeting , and his comrades had an idea that there was something in the wind .
They applied themselves steadily , therefore , to the bottle of Hollands upon the table , and waited for him to speak .
`` Could we get an impression ? ''
`` What would knock him senseless ? ''
Farintosh asked Burt , with a knowing look .
Burt laughed again in his bushy , red beard .
`` You can leave that to me , mate , '' he said .
So , having arranged all the details of their little plan , these three gentlemen departed in different directions -- Farintosh to the _Central Hotel_ , to give Ezra his evening report , and the others to the mining-camps , which were the scene of their labours .
He was busily engaged in this employment upon the Wednesday evening when there was a tap at the door and Farintosh walked in , accompanied by Burt and Williams .
Girdlestone glanced up at them , and greeted them briefly .
He was not surprised at their visit , for they had come together several times before to report progress or make arrangements .
Farintosh bowed as he entered the room , Burt nodded , and Williams rubbed his hands together and looked amiably bilious .
`` We looked in , Mr. Girdlestone , '' Farintosh began , `` to learn if you had any commands for us . ''
`` Let us hope so , '' the merchant answered .
`` It does n't look like it . ''
`` Well then , guv'nor , you surely ai n't going away without leaving us nothing to remembrance you with , seeing that we 've stood by you and never gone back on you . ''
`` You have been paid every week for what you have done , '' the young man said .
`` You wo n't get another penny out of me , so you set your mind at rest about that . ''
There was a buzz of excitement among the crowd when Ezra appeared on the steps of the hotel , looking as white as a sheet , with a handkerchief bound round his head and his collar all crusted with blood .
As he mounted his horse one of his emissaries rushed to him .
For the first few miles the party galloped in silence .
The moon was still shining brilliantly , and they could see the white line of the road stretching out in front of them and winding away over the undulating veldt .
To right and left spread a broad expanse of wiry grass stretching to the horizon , with low bushes and scrub scattered over it in patches .
Here and there were groups of long-legged , unhealthy-looking sheep , who crashed through the bushes in wild terror as the riders swept by them .
Their plaintive calls were the only sounds which broke the silence of the night , save the occasional dismal hooting of the veldt owl .
`` They ca n't get off the high road , can they ? ''
`` As long as they are on the road , we must catch them , '' quoth Ezra ; `` for if it ran straight from here to hell I would follow them there . ''
As he spoke they were galloping round a long curve in the road , at the further end of which there was a feeble yellow glimmer .
As they came abreast of it they saw that the light came through an open door , in the centre of which a burly Afrikaner was standing with his hands in his breeches pockets and his pipe in his mouth .
`` Good evening , '' said the sergeant , as his men pulled up their reeking horses .
`` Has any one passed this way before us ? ''
`` Have they gone on ? ''
`` Come on ! ''
Ezra interrupted furiously ; and the horses stretched their stiff limbs into a feeble lumbering gallop .
Ezra and the sergeant shot to the front , and the others followed as best they might .
Suddenly in the stillness they heard far away a dull rattling sound like the clatter of distant castanets .
`` It 's their horses ' hoofs ! ''
cried Ezra ; and the troopers behind raised a cheer to show that they too understood the significance of the sound .
`` Oh , please , Mr. Girdlestone , '' he cried , clutching at Ezra 's boots with his long thin fingers , `` it was n't me that hit you .
It was Mr. Burt .
I had nothing to do with robbing you either .
That was Mr. Farintosh .
I would n't have gone with him , only I knew that he was a clergyman , so I expected no harm .
I am surprised at you , Mr. Farintosh , I really am .
I 'm very glad that Mr. Girdlestone has shot you . ''
A vague feeling of impending misfortune stole over Ezra .
He shook his head .
`` His news was , '' said Farintosh , leaning up upon his hand , `` that fresh diamond fields _have_ been discovered at Jagersfontein , in the Orange Free State .
So Russia , or no Russia , stones will not rise .
Look at his face !
It 's whiter than mine .
With the laugh upon his lips , a great flow of blood stopped the clergyman 's utterance , and he rolled slowly over upon his side , a dead man .
`` The police rode back to Jacobsdal with Williams , and I promised to come after them ; but when I came to think it over it did n't seem good enough .
The fact of my having so many diamonds would set every tongue wagging , and , again , the sergeant had heard what Farintosh said to me , so it was very possible that I might have the whole district about my ears .
As it was , I had the stones and all my money in the bag .
I wrote back to the hotel , therefore , telling the landlord to send on my traps to Cape Town by mail , and promising to settle my bill with him when I received them .
I then bought a horse and came straight south .
I shall take the first steamer and be with you within a few days of your receiving this .
`` It will last for some years , any way , '' Ezra answered .
`` The Jagersfontein gravel is very rich , and there seems to be plenty of it . ''
`` But Girdlestone becomes a sleeping partner , '' said Ezra .
`` It 's for my own sake I do it and not for yours , '' with which frank remark he drew his hat down over his brows and set off for Eccleston Square .
Eccleston Square was by no means in a direct line between Kensington and the City , yet morning and evening , as sure as the clock pointed to half-past nine and to quarter to six , Tom would stride through the old-fashioned square and past the grim house , whose grimness was softened to his eyes through its association with the bright dream of his life .
It was but the momentary glance of a sweet face at the upper window and a single wave of a white hand , but it sent him on with a fresh heart and courage , and it broke the dull monotony of her dreary life .
Occasionally , as we have seen , he even managed to find his way into the interior of this ogre 's castle , in which his fair princess was immured .
John Girdlestone put an end to this by ordering that business messages should never under any circumstances be conveyed to his private residence .
Nothing daunted , however , the lovers soon devised another means of surmounting the barrier which divided them .
It chanced that one morning the interview between the lovers had lasted rather longer than usual , and had been concluded by Kate 's returning to the house , while Tom remained sitting upon the garden seat lost in such a reverie as affects men in his position .
While thus pleasantly employed , his thoughts were suddenly recalled to earth by the appearance of a dark shadow on the gravel in front of him , and looking up he saw the senior partner standing a short distance away and regarding him with anything but an amiable expression upon his face .
He had himself been having a morning stroll in the garden , and had overseen the whole of the recent interview without the preoccupied lovers being aware of his presence .
Tom rose and followed him out of the gardens without a word .
He knew from the other 's expression that all was known to him , and in his heart he was not sorry .
His only fear was that the old man 's anger might fall upon his ward and this he determined to prevent .
They walked side by side as far as the station in complete silence , but on reaching Fenchurch Street Girdlestone asked his young partner to step into his private sanctum .
`` It will depend upon yourselves .
If you prove yourself to be a man of honour in this matter , I may be inclined to sanction your addresses .
In the mean time you must give me your word to let it rest , and neither to attempt to speak to Miss Harston , nor to see her , nor to allow your parents to communicate with her .
The last condition may seem to you to be hard , but , in my eyes , it is a very important one .
Unless you can bring yourself to promise all this , my duty will compel me to remove my ward entirely out of your reach , a course which would be painful to her and inconvenient to myself . ''
`` It would be cruel not to allow you to do that , '' Girdlestone answered .
`` You may send her _one_ letter , but remember there shall be no reply to it . ''
`` All right , sir , and thank you for your kindness , '' said Tom , bowing himself out .
He hardly knew whether to be pleased or grieved over the result of his interview ; but , on the whole , satisfaction prevailed , since at the worst it was but to wait for a year or so , while there seemed to be some hopes of gaining the guardian 's consent before that .
On the other hand , he had pledged himself to separate from Kate ; but that would , he reflected , only make their re-union the sweeter .
`` I can not understand how you ever came to let the matter go so far , '' his son answered sullenly .
`` What does the young puppy want to come poaching upon our preserves for ?
The girl belongs to us .
She was given to you to look after , and a nice job you seem to have made of it ! ''
Kate could not help smiling at this last remark , as she thought how very successfully the young man had concealed his taste during the years that she had known him .
`` Is n't that Mr. Dimsdale down there ? ''
she said to her companion .
`` Oh , indeed , '' said Kate , and turned with some common-place remark to Mrs. Wilkinson .
Her heart was sore nevertheless , and she derived little pleasure from the remainder of the performance .
As to Ezra , in spite of his great love for music , he dozed peacefully in a corner of the box during the whole of the last act .
None of them were sorry when Faust was duly consigned to the nether regions and Marguerite was apotheosed upon a couple of wooden clouds .
Ezra narrated the incident of the recognition in the stalls to his father on his return , and the old gentleman rubbed his hands over it .
`` You need not be afraid on that score , '' Kate said bitterly .
`` I think I can gauge Mr. Dimsdale 's specious manner at its proper value . ''
With this valiant speech she marched off , head in air , to her room , and there wept as though her very heart would break .
`` There are women and women , '' his son remarked .
`` A girl like this takes as much managing as a skittish horse . ''
`` Once get her into harness , and I warrant you 'll keep her there quiet enough . ''
`` So she might , but she thinks of him none the less .
If I could once make her thoroughly realize that he had thrown her over I might catch her on the hop .
She 'd marry for spite if she would n't for love . ''
`` I think it touched her pride .
People should not have pride .
We are warned against it .
Now , that same pride of hers will forbid her ever thinking of that young man again . ''
The very next morning the merchant spoke to Dimsdale on the matter , for he had observed signs of impatience in the young man , and feared that some sudden impulse might lead him to break his promise and so upset everything .
`` Of course I kept my promise , '' said Tom bluntly .
`` I trust , however , that you will soon see your way to withdrawing your prohibition .
It has been a hard trial to me . ''
`` I have insisted upon it because it seemed to me to be my duty .
Every one takes his own view upon such points , and it has always been my custom throughout life to take what some might think a stringent one .
It appears to me that I owe it to my deceased friend to prevent his daughter , whom he has confided to me , from making any mistake .
As I said before , if you continue to show that you are worthy of her , I may think more favourably of it .
Exemplary as your conduct has been since you joined us , I believe that I am not wrong in stating that you were a little wild when you were at Edinburgh . ''
`` Certainly not , '' cried Tom hotly .
`` I was no milksop or psalm singer , but there is nothing that I ever did there of which I should be ashamed of my father knowing . ''
It would be a mistake to suppose that Ezra felt himself in any degree in love at this time .
He recognized his companion 's sweetness and gentleness , but these were not qualities which appealed to his admiration .
Kate 's amiable , quiet ways seemed insipid to a man who was used to female society of a very different order .
`` She has no go or snap about her , '' he would complain to his father .
`` She 's not like Polly Lucas at the Pavilion , or Minnie Walker . ''
`` Do n't forget yourself , my boy , do n't forget yourself ! ''
`` A single false step might ruin every thing . ''
`` You must go about a little more , and have more fresh air , '' he said to her one day , when they were alone after breakfast .
`` You will lose your roses if you do n't . ''
`` For goodness ' sake ! ''
cried Kate earnestly , `` persuade him to think of some one else .
It will only be painful both to him and to me if he keeps on this way .
It can not possibly lead to anything . ''
`` And this is how you repay me !
You are going to break my son 's heart , and through his mine .
He is my only boy , and if anything went wrong with him I tell you that it would bring my grey hairs in sorrow to the grave .
You have it in your power to do this , or , on the other hand , you may make my old age a happy one by the knowledge that the lad is mated with a good woman , and has attained the object on which his whole mind and heart are set . ''
`` Think it over , '' the old man said .
`` Look at it from every point of view .
Remember that the love of an honest man is not to be lightly spurned .
I am naturally anxious about it , for my future happiness , as well as his , depends upon your decision . ''
`` And better for her too , '' remarked John Girdlestone grimly .
Next day the soldier was on the look-out at the same hour , and was rewarded by the appearance of two eyes , very mischievous and dangerous ones too , which were set in a buxom and by no means unprepossessing face .
The lady who owned these charms looked very deliberately up the street , and very deliberately down the street , after which she bethought herself to look across the street , and started to perceive a stout , middle-aged gentleman , with a fiery face , who was looking at her with an expression of intense admiration .
So much alarmed was she that she vanished behind the curtains and the major feared that he would see her no more .
Fortunately , however , it became evident that the lady 's alarm was not very overpowering , for within five minutes she was back at the window , where her eyes again fell upon the beaming face and jaunty figure of the major , who had posed himself in a striking attitude , which was somewhat marred by the fact that he was still enveloped in his purple dressing-gown .
This time her eyes lingered a little longer than before and the suspicion of a smile appeared upon her features .
On this the major smiled and bowed , and she smiled also , showing a pretty little line of white teeth as she did so .
What the veteran 's next move might have been no one can tell , for the lady solved the problem by disappearing , and this time permanently .
He was very well satisfied , however , and chuckled much to himself while arraying himself in his long frock coat and immaculate collar before setting out for the club .
He had been a sly old dog in his day , and had followed Venus almost as much as he had Mars during his chequered career .
`` Is it a widow you mane ?
What d 'ye know about her ?
What 's her name , and where does she come from ? ''
`` My name is Scully , sir , '' said the lady , whose dark eyes had allured the major to this feat of daring .
`` Ah , quite so .
'I have a nephew in England , ' he said , 'who is very dear to me .
He is married to a charming woman .
Search out the young couple , Toby .
Those were his last words , madam .
Next moment his sowl had fled .
When I heard your name casually mintioned I could not feel satisfied in me mind until I had come across and ascertained if you were the lady in question . ''
`` I shall look forward to the day , '' said the major gallantly , rising and taking up his hat .
He was very well satisfied with his little ruse and his success in breaking the ice .
The major paused , and the pair smoked meditatively , for Baumser had returned from the City , and the twilight was falling and everything conduced to tobacco and reverie .
`` See that necklace of cowrie shells hanging beside it , '' continued the veteran , waving his cigarette in that direction ; `` that came from the neck of a Hottentot woman -- a black Vanus , be Jove !
We were trekking up country before the second Kaffir war .
Made an appintment -- could not go -- orderly duty -- so sent a trusty man to tell her .
He was found next day with twenty assegais in his body .
She was a decoy duck , bedad , and the whole thing a plant . ''
`` Mein Gott ! ''
`` What a life you have led !
I have lived with you now many months and heard you tell many tales , but ever there are fresh ones . ''
`` Bad discipline , very bad , '' Baumser remarked .
`` To break the ranks and run mit knives would make my old Unter-offizier Kritzer very mad indeed . ''
The German had served his time in the Prussian Army , and was still mindful of his training .
`` Will you go ? ''
`` It fits you beautiful , '' he said , alluding to the coat .
`` Let me inthroduce me friend , Herr von Baumser , '' he added .
There was no want of spirit or of variety in the dancing at Morrison 's .
From Mr. Snodder , the exciseman , who danced the original old-fashioned trois-temps , to young Bucklebury , of the Bank , who stationed himself immediately underneath the central chandelier , and spun rapidly round with his partner upon his own axis , like a couple of beetles impaled upon a single pin , every possible variation of the art of waltzing was to be observed .
There was Mr. Smith , of the Medical College , rotating round with Miss Clara Timms , their faces wearing that pained and anxious expression which the British countenance naturally assumes when dancing , giving the impression that the legs have suddenly burst forth in a festive mood , and have dragged the rest of the body into it very much against its will .
There was the major too , who had succeeded in obtaining Mrs. Scully as a partner , and was dancing as old soldiers can dance , threading his way through the crowded room with the ease begotten by the experience of a lifetime .
Meanwhile Von Baumser , at the other end , was floundering about with a broad smile upon his face and an elderly lady tucked under his right arm , while he held her disengaged hand straight out at right angles , as if she had been a banjo .
In short , the fun was fast and furious , and waltz followed polka and mazurka followed waltz with a rapidity which weeded out the weaker vessels among the dancers and tested the stamina of the musicians .
The major extracted one from his flat silver case .
His companion rolled a spill and lit it at the gas .
`` Every penny that I had in the world was in it . ''
This was facer number two for the campaigner .
He recovered himself more quickly from this one , however , and inflated his chest with even more than his usual pomposity .
`` It does n't matter .
No billiards and no cards , and no racing and no betting .
Toby must be very good and behave as a distinguished soldier should do . ''
`` We 'll manage , dear , '' she said , looking roguishly up into his face .
`` I told you that my money was all in the Agra Bank that broke . ''
`` But I did n't tell you that I had drawn it all out before it broke , Toby dear .
It was too bad to put you to such a trial , was n't it ?
but really I could n't resist the temptation .
Toby shall have money enough without betting , and he shall settle down and tell his stories , and do what he likes without anything to bother him . ''
From this coign of vantage a long reach of the river was visible , and Tom sitting there would watch the fleets of passing vessels , and let his imagination wander away to the broad oceans which they had traversed , and the fair lands under bluer skies and warmer suns from which they had sailed .
Here is a tiny steam-tug panting and toiling in front of a majestic three-master with her great black hulk towering out of the water and her masts shooting up until the topmast rigging looks like the delicate web of some Titanic spider .
She is from Canton , with tea , and coffee , and spices , and all good things from the land of small feet and almond eyes .
Here , too , is a Messagerie boat , the French ensign drooping daintily over her stern , and her steam whistle screeching a warning to some obstinate lighters , crawling with their burden of coal to a grimy collier whose steam-winch is whizzing away like a corncrake of the deep .
That floating palace is an Orient boat from Australia .
See how , as the darkness falls , a long row of yellow eyes glimmer out from her sides as the light streams through her countless portholes .
And there is the Rotterdam packet-boat coming slowly up , very glad to get back into safe waters again , for she has had a wildish time in the North Sea .
A coasting brig has evidently had a wilder time still , for her main-topmast is cracked across , and her rigging is full of the little human mites who crawl about , and reef , and splice , and mend .
All day Tom stood at the hatchway of the _Black Eagle_ , checking the cargo as it was hoisted out of her , while McPherson and his motley assistants , dock labourers , seamen , and black Kroomen from the coast , worked and toiled in the depths below .
The engine rattled and snorted , and the great chain clanked as it was lowered into the hold .
`` I 've been performing my ablutions , '' he said , rolling out the last word with great emphasis and pomposity , for , like many Scotchmen , he had the greatest possible reverence for a sonorous polysyllable .
Indeed , in McPherson , this national foible was pushed to excess , for , however inappropriate the word , he never hesitated to drag it into his conversation if he thought it would aid in the general effect .
The Scotchman looked at his companion with a great accession of respect .
`` My certie ! ''
`` That 's the best I 've heard since a word that Jimmy M'Gee , of the _Corisco_ , said the voyage afore last .
Would you kindly arteeculate it again . ''
`` Hypo-chon-driacal , '' the mate repeated slowly .
`` I should n't think Jimmy M'Gee kens that , or he 'd ha ' communicated it to me .
I shall certainly utilize it , and am obleeged to you for namin ' it . ''
Why , he 's never anything else , sir .
And yet he 's a good seaman too , and however fu ' he may be , he keeps some form o ' reckoning , and never vera far oot either .
He 's an ambeequosity to me , sir , for if I took a tithe o ' the amount I 'd be clean daft . ''
`` We 'll no argue aboot that , '' said the canny Scot .
`` Muster Girdlestone kens on which side his bread is buttered .
He may wish 'em to sink or he may wish 'em to swim .
That 's no for us to judge .
You 'll hear him speak o't to-night as like as not , for he 's aye on it when he 's half over .
Here we are , sir .
The corner edifice wi ' the red blinds in the window . ''
`` There ai n't no use makin ' a secret of it among friends , '' said Miggs .
`` That 's just how the land lies with us .
A voyage or two back I spoke to Mr. Girdlestone , and I says to him , says I , 'Give the ship an overhauling , ' says I .
'Well and good , ' says he , 'but it will mean so much off your wage , ' says he , 'and the mate 's wage as well . '
I put it to him straight and strong , but he stuck at that .
So Sandy and me , we put our heads together , and we 'greed It was better to take fifteen pound and the risk , than come down to twelve pound and safety . ''
`` It is scandalous ! ''
cried Tom Dimsdale hotly .
`` I could not have believed it . ''
Tom 's mind was filled with consternation at what he had heard .
If the African merchant were capable of this , what might he not be capable of ?
Was his word to be depended on under any circumstances ?
And what sort of firm must this be , which turned so fair a side to the world and in which he had embarked his fortune ?
All these thoughts flashed through his mind as he listened to the gossip of the garrulous old sea dogs .
A greater shock still , however , was in store for him .
`` He 's a vera tumultuous young man , '' the mate remarked .
`` He was off like a clipper in a hurricane . ''
One morning after breakfast the elder Girdlestone called his son aside into the library .
`` I 've had a notice , '' he said , `` as to paying up dividends .
Our time is short , Ezra .
You must bring matters to a head .
If you do n't it will be too late . ''
`` You can try if it is ripe , though .
If not , you can try again .
I think that your chance is a good one .
She is alone in the breakfast-room , and the table has been cleared .
You can not have a better opening .
Go , my son , and may Heaven prosper you ! ''
Do you wait in here , and I shall let you know how things go . ''
`` And why not ? ''
asked Ezra , still leaning over the chair , with an angry light beginning to sparkle in his dark eyes .
`` Why can you never be my wife ? ''
That suspicion of a smile upon her face was the one thing needed to set Ezra 's temper in a blaze .
`` You wo n't have me , '' he cried savagely .
`` I have n't got the airs and graces of that fellow , I suppose .
You have n't got him out of your head , though he is off with another girl . ''
`` It 's the truth , and you know it , '' returned Ezra , with a sneer .
`` Are n't you too proud to be hanging on to a man who does n't want you -- a man that is a smooth-tongued sneak , with the heart of a rabbit ? ''
`` The brute ! ''
Kate cried , as she fondled the injured animal and poured indignant tears over it .
Her gentle soul was so stirred by the cowardly deed that she felt that she could have flown at her late suitor were he still in the room .
`` Poor little Flo !
That kick was meant for me in reality , my little pet .
Never mind , dear , there are bright days coming , and he has not forgotten me , Flo .
I know it ! ''
The little dog whined sympathetically , and licked its mistress 's hand as though it were looking into its canine future , and could also discern better days ahead .
His appearance was far from reassuring .
His hands were clasped behind his back , his head bent forward , and he surveyed her with a most malignant expression upon his face .
`` Well done ! ''
he said , with a bitter smile .
This is a good morning 's work , Miss Harston .
You have repaid your father 's friend for the care he has bestowed upon you . ''
`` You have told lies in order to turn me away from the only man who ever loved me .
You and your odious son have conspired to ruin my happiness and break my heart .
What have you told him that keeps him away ?
I shall see him and learn the truth . ''
Kate 's face was unnaturally calm and rigid as she faced her guardian 's angry gaze .
Poor Kate , left to herself , was much concerned by this fresh misfortune .
She knew that her guardian had power to carry out his plan , and that there was no appeal from his decision .
What could she do ?
She had not a friend in the wide world to whom she could turn for advice or assistance .
It occurred to her to fly to the Dimsdales at Kensington , and throw herself upon their compassion .
It was only the thought of Tom which prevented her .
In her heart she had fully exonerated him , yet there was much to be explained before they could be to each other as of old .
She might write to Mrs. Dimsdale , but then her guardian had not told her what part of Hampshire they were going to .
She finally came to the conclusion that it would be better to wait , and to write when she had reached her destination .
In the meantime , she went drearily to her room and began packing , aided by the ruddy-cheeked maid , Rebecca .
`` They are not coming back . ''
Rebecca , the fresh-complexioned waiting-maid , was still standing behind the ponderous hall door , listening , with a smile upon her face , to young Dimsdale 's retreating footsteps , when another and a brisker tread caught her ear coming from the opposite direction .
The smile died away as she heard it , and her features assumed a peculiar expression , in which it would be hard to say whether fear or pleasure predominated .
She passed her hands up over her face and smoothed her hair with a quick nervous gesture , glancing down at the same time at her snowy apron and the bright ribbons which set it off .
Whatever her intentions may have been , she had no time to improve upon her toilet before a key turned in the door and Ezra Girdlestone stepped into the hall .
As he saw her shadowy figure , for the gas was low , he uttered a hoarse cry of surprise and fear , and staggered backwards against the door-post .
`` There , that 's enough ! ''
`` Where are the others ? ''
`` Yes ; they need some one who is smart and handy to keep house for them .
There is some old woman already , I believe , but she is old and useless .
I 'll warrant you would n't take long getting things shipshape .
My father intends to stay down there some little time with Miss Harston . ''
`` Never mind , my girl , '' said Ezra in a soothing voice ; `` that 's all over and done with .
See what I 've brought you . ''
He rummaged in his pocket and produced a little parcel of tissue paper , which he handed to her .
`` I want you to be Miss Harston 's companion .
She 'll be lonely , and will need some other woman in the house to look after her . ''
`` Rebecca , '' said Ezra slowly , `` do you hate Kate Harston ? ''
`` Well , if you hate her , I tell you that I hate her a thousand times more .
You thought that I was fond of her .
All that is over now , and you may set your mind at ease . ''
`` I want some one who feels towards her as I do to be by her side .
If she were never to come back from Bedsworth it would be nothing to me . ''
You will understand many things in time which seem strange to you now .
At present if you will do what I ask you will oblige me greatly .
Will you go ? ''
While this dialogue had been going on in the library of Eccleston Square , Tom Dimsdale was still wending his way homewards with a feeling of weight in his mind and a presentiment of misfortune which overshadowed his whole soul .
In vain he assured himself that this disappearance of Kate 's was but temporary , and that the rumour of an engagement between her and Ezra was too ridiculous to be believed for a moment .
Argue it as he would , the same dread , horrible feeling of impending trouble weighed upon him .
Impossible as it was to imagine that Kate was false to him , it was strange that on the very day that this rumour reached his ears she should disappear from London .
How bitterly he regretted now that he had allowed himself to be persuaded by John Girdlestone into ceasing to communicate with her .
He began to realize that he had been duped , and that all these specious promises as to a future consent to their union had been so many baits to amuse him while the valuable present was slipping away .
What could he do now to repair the past ?
His only course was to wait for the morrow and see whether the senior partner would appear at the offices .
If he did so , the young man was determined that he should have an understanding with him .
`` I am sorry to be late , mother , '' the lad said , kissing the old lady .
`` I have been down at the docks all day and have been busy and worried . ''
`` No doubt that old scoundrel Girdlestone thought that your patience would soon come to an end , so he got the start of you by carrying the girl off into the country . ''
`` Yes , there is always that hope , '' exclaimed Tom , in a more cheerful voice .
`` To-morrow I may learn something at the office . ''
`` Do n't make the mistake of quarrelling with the Girdlestones .
After all , they are within their rights in doing what they appear to have done . ''
`` They may be within their legal rights , '' Tom cried indignantly ; `` but the old man made a deliberate compact with me , which he has broken . ''
THE JOURNEY TO THE PRIORY .
`` I telegraphed for a trap , '' said he to the guard .
`` Is there not one waiting ? ''
The driver cracked his whip , and the horse started at a brisk trot down the dark country road .
`` Yes , that 's the sea , '' the driver said , `` and them lights down yonder is at Lea Claxton , where the fisher-folk live ; and over there , '' pointing with his whip to a long dark shadow on the waters , `` is the Oilywoite . ''
The merchant was not in the best of tempers , for he had had an altercation with the driver about the fare , and was cold into the bargain .
`` At it again ? ''
he said roughly , as he entered .
`` It is I who ought to weep , I think , who have been put to all this trouble and inconvenience by your disobedience and weakness of mind . ''
The vast room looked even more comfortless and bleak than on the preceding evening .
On the table was a plate of ham and eggs .
John Girdlestone served out a portion , and pushed it in her direction .
She sat down on one of the rough wooden chairs and ate listlessly , wondering how all this was going to end .
`` And why not ? ''
the old man asked angrily .
`` Are you so bitter against the lad as to grudge him the society of his own father ? ''
`` Mister Girdlestone thought as you would be after that , '' she said .
`` There ai n't no paper here , nor pens neither , nor ink neither . ''
`` Then I shall walk down to Bedsworth myself , '' said Kate angrily .
`` I have no doubt that the people in the post office will let me sit there and write it . ''
She spent the morning in her own little room .
She had been provided with a ponderous brown Bible , out of which the fly leaves had been carefully cut , and this she read , though her thoughts often wandered away from the sacred pages .
About one o'clock she heard the clatter of hoofs and the sound of wheels on the drive .
Going down , she found that it was a cart which had come from Bedsworth with furniture .
There were carpets , a chest of drawers , tables , and several other articles , which the driver proceeded to carry upstairs , helped by John Girdlestone .
The old woman was in the upper room .
It seemed to Kate that she might never again have such an opportunity of carrying out the resolve which she had formed .
She put on her bonnet , and began to stroll listlessly about in front of the door , picking a few straggling leaves from the neglected lawn .
Gradually she sauntered away in this manner to the head of the avenue , and then , taking one swift timid glance around , she slipped in among the trees , and made the best of her way , half walking , half running , down the dark winding drive .
`` You have no right to detain me , '' Kate cried angrily .
`` I have good friends in London who will make you suffer for this . ''
`` She _has_ flared up , '' said the one-eyed man , removing his pipe from his lips .
`` Blow me asunder if she bea n't a rustler ! ''
He brought his camp-stool from the side of the pillar and , planting it right in the centre of the gateway , sat down upon it again .
`` You see , missy , '' he remarked , `` it 's no manner o ' use .
If you did get out it would only be to be put in a reg'lar 'sylum . ''
There was one link in the chain which was ever hidden from her .
It had never occurred to the girl that her fortune could be of moment to the firm .
She had been so accustomed to hear Ezra and his father talk glibly of millions , that she depreciated her own little capital and failed to realize how important it might be in a commercial crisis .
Indeed , the possibility of such a crisis never entered her head , for one of her earliest impressions was hearing her father talk of the great resources of the firm and of its stability .
That this firm was now in the direst straits , and that her money was absolutely essential to its existence , were things which never for one instant entered her thoughts .
The old man started at the word his son had used , and rubbed his hands together as though a sudden chill had struck through him .
`` Yes , '' returned his son .
`` It is best to talk of such things in the open air , though .
How has all gone since you have been down here ? ''
`` What steps have you taken ? ''
asked Ezra , striking a fusee and lighting a cigar .
`` A fellow who can hit a good downright blow , as I can testify to my cost .
His name is Burt .
He is the man who cut my head open in Africa .
I met him in London the other day , and spotted him at once .
He is a half-starved , poor devil , and as desperate as a man could be .
He is just in the key for any business of the sort .
I 've got the whip-hand of him now , and he knows it , so that I could put him up to anything .
I believe that such a job would be a positive pleasure to him , for the fellow is more like a wild beast than a man . ''
`` Surely you can do without me ? ''
`` There is a brave , good lad , '' cried his father .
`` It would not do to draw back now . ''
`` Remember , my boy , '' the merchant said , as they turned from the door , `` this is the last of our trials .
If we succeed in this , all is well for the future . ''
`` We have tried diamonds , and we have tried marriage .
The third time is the charm , '' said Ezra , as he threw away his cigar and followed his father .
Her guardian knocked at her door before dinner time .
`` I trust , '' he said , `` that you have read over the service .
It is as well to do so when you can not go to church . ''
She rose and looked out of the window again .
The tide was out now , and the moon glittered upon the distant ocean .
A mist was creeping up , however , and even as she looked it drew its veil over the water .
It was bitterly cold .
She shivered and her teeth began to chatter .
Stretching herself upon the bed once more , she wrapped the blankets round her , and , worn out with anxiety and fatigue , dropped into a troubled sleep .
`` Let us hope for the best , let us hope for the best , '' the doctor would say soothingly .
Yet it must be confessed that he was considerably staggered by the turn which things had taken .
He had seen so much of the world in his professional capacity that he had become a very reliable judge of character .
All his instincts told him that Kate Harston was a true-hearted and well-principled girl .
It was not in her nature to leave London and never to send a single line to her friends to tell them where or why she had gone .
There must , he was sure , be some good reason for her silence , and this reason resolved itself into one or two things -- either she was ill and unable to hold a pen , or she had lost her freedom and was restrained from writing to them .
The last supposition seemed to the doctor to be the more serious of the two .
`` They 'll get away !
I know they will ! ''
Tom cried in despair , for both Ezra and his companion , who was none other than Burt , of African notoriety , had disappeared from his sight .
His fears proved to be only too well founded , for when at last he succeeded in wresting himself from the constable 's clutches he could find no trace of his enemies .
A dozen bystanders gave a dozen different accounts of their movements .
He rushed from one platform to another over all the great station .
He could have torn his hair at the thought of the way in which he had allowed them to slip through his fingers .
It was fully an hour before he finally abandoned the search , and acknowledged to himself that he had been hoodwinked for the third time , and that a long week would elapse before he could have another chance of solving the mystery .
He turned at last sadly and reluctantly away from the station , and walked across to Waterloo Bridge , brooding over all that had occurred , and cursing himself for his stupidity in allowing himself to be drawn into a vulgar brawl , when he might have attained his end so much better by quiet observation .
It was some consolation , however , that he had had one fair crack at Ezra Girdlestone .
He glanced down at his knuckles , which were raw and bleeding , with a mixture of satisfaction and disgust .
With half a smile he put his injured hand in his pocket , and looking up once more became aware that a red-faced gentleman was approaching him in a highly excited manner .
`` I have seen -- oh , Rebecca , it is too dreadful to talk of .
I have seen that poor monk who was killed in the cellars .
It was not fancy .
I saw him as plainly as I see you now , with his tall thin figure , and long loose gown , and the brown cowl drawn over his face . ''
`` God preserve us ! ''
cried Rebecca nervously , glancing over her shoulder .
`` It is enough to give one the creeps . ''
The mask had fairly dropped from Girdlestone .
No gaunt old wolf could have glared down with fiercer eyes or a more cruel mouth .
`` You fool ! ''
`` Thank ye , guv'nor . ''
`` Quite so ! ''
said Stevens , winking his one eye .
`` I knows the feeling myself , cuss me , but I do !
'Thine for once and thine for never , ' as the song says . ''
Kate Harston fled as quickly as she could through the wood , stumbling over the brambles and crashing through the briars , regardless of pain or scratches or anything else which could stand between her and the possibility of safety .
She soon gained the shed and managed to mount on to the top of it by the aid of the barrel .
Craning her neck , she could see the long dusty lane , with the bare withered hedges upon either side , and the dreary line of the railway embankment beyond .
There was no pony-carriage in sight .
`` She gave a holler as if some one was a-hurtin ' of her , '' said John with decision .
`` We must act promptly , '' she said , `` for we do n't know what they may be about , or what their plans are for the future .
Who did you say your friends were ? ''
`` Dr. Dimsdale , of Phillimore Gardens , Kensington . ''
`` Has n't he got a grown-up son ? ''
`` You know Tom ? ''
Kate cried in astonishment .
`` God bless you ! ''
It was Mrs. Scully 's turn to blush now .
`` Never mind that , '' she said .
`` I can trust the major , and I know he will be down here at a word from me .
I shall let him have the facts , and he can tell the Dimsdales if he thinks it best .
Good-bye , dear ; do n't be unhappy any more , but remember that you have friends outside who will very quickly set all right .
and waving her hand in encouragement , the good widow woke up the pony , which had fallen fast asleep , and rattled away down the lane in the direction from which she had come .
At four o'clock Mr. Girdlestone stepped into the Bedsworth telegraph office and wired his short message .
It ran thus : `` Case hopeless .
Come on to-morrow with a doctor . ''
On receipt of this he knew by their agreement that his son would come down , bringing with him the man of violence whom he had spoken of at their last interview .
There was nothing for it now but that his ward should die .
If he delayed longer , the crash might come before her money was available , and then how vain all regrets would be .
It seemed to him that there was very little risk in the matter .
The girl had had no communication with any one .
Even of those around her , Mrs. Jorrocks was in her dotage , Rebecca Taylforth was staunch and true , and Stevens knew nothing .
Every one on the country side had heard of the invalid young lady at the Priory .
Who would be surprised to hear that she had passed away ?
He dare not call in any local medical man , but his inventive brain had overcome the difficulty , and had hit upon a device by which he might defy both doctors and coroner .
If all went as he had planned it , it was difficult to see any chance of detection .
In the case of a poorer man the fact that the girl 's money reverted to him might arouse suspicion , but he rightly argued that with his great reputation no one would ever dream that such a consideration could have weight with him .
Having sent the telegram off , and so taken a final step , John Girdlestone felt more at his ease .
He was proud of his own energy and decision .
As he walked very pompously and gravely down the village street , his heart glowed within him at the thought of the long struggle which he had maintained against misfortune .
He passed over in his mind all the successive borrowings and speculations and makeshifts and ruses which the firm had resorted to .
Yet , in spite of every danger and difficulty , it still held up its head with the best , and would weather the storm at last .
He reflected proudly that there was no other man in the City who would have had the dogged tenacity and the grim resolution which he had displayed during the last twelve months .
`` If ever any one should put it all in a book , '' he said to himself , `` there are few who would believe it possible .
It is not by my own strength that I have done it . ''
When he was half-way to the Priory he met a small pony-carriage , which was rattling towards Bedsworth at a great pace , driven by a good-looking middle-aged lady with a small page by her side .
The merchant encountered this equipage in a narrow country lane without a footpath , and as it approached him he could not help observing that the lady wore an indignant and gloomy look upon her features which was out of keeping with their general contour .
Her forehead was contracted into a very decided frown , and her lips were gathered into what might be described as a negative smile .
Girdlestone stood aside to let her pass , but the lady , by a sudden twitch of her right-hand rein , brought the wheels across in so sudden a manner that they were within an ace of going over his toes .
He only saved himself by springing back into a gap of the hedge .
As it was , he found on looking down that his pearl grey trousers were covered with flakes of wet mud .
What made the incident more perplexing was that both the middle-aged lady and the page laughed very heartily as they rattled away to the village .
The merchant proceeded on his way marvelling in his heart at the uncharitableness and innate wickedness of unregenerated human nature .
Mrs. Scully was well known at the post office , and they quickly accommodated her with the requisites for correspondence .
Within a quarter of an hour she had written , sealed , stamped , and posted the following epistle : --
`` I should have telegraphed about it , but I could not explain myself sufficiently .
I assure you that the poor girl is in a very bad way , and we ca n't be too energetic in what we do .
It was very sad to hear the positive manner in which she declared that her guardian would murder her , though she did not attempt to give any reason why he should commit such a terrible crime .
We saw a horrid one-eyed man at the gate , who appeared to be on guard to prevent any one from coming out or in .
On our way to Bedsworth we met no less a person than the great Mr. Girdlestone himself , and we actually drove so clumsily that we splashed him all over with mud .
Was n't that a very sad and unaccountable thing ?
I fancy I see Toby smiling over that .
`` I hope dere is nothing wrong mit my good vriend , Madame Scully ? ''
he remarked at last .
`` No , nothing wrong with her .
There is with some one else , though ; '' and with that he read to his companion all that part of his letter which referred to Miss Harston .
`` Dat is no joke at all , '' the German remarked ; and the two sat for some little time lost in thought , the major with the letter still lying open upon his knee .
`` I must find young Dimsdale at once .
He has a right to know . ''
The major was ready to start , so Von Baumser threw on his coat and hat , and picked out a thick stick from a rack in the corner .
`` We may need something of de sort , '' he said .
Mrs. Jorrocks and Rebecca observed the change which had come over her and marvelled at it .
Kate attempted to aid the former in her household work , but the old crone refused her assistance and repulsed her harshly .
Her maid too answered her curtly when she addressed her , and eyed her in anything but a friendly manner .
Girdlestone relapsed into silence , but his face showed that he was puzzled by what he had heard .
`` You should study botany while you are down here , '' he said blandly .
`` Depend upon it , one can not learn too many things in one 's youth .
Besides , a knowledge of natural science teaches us the marvellous harmony which prevails throughout the universe , and so enlarges our minds . ''
`` Yes ; I received a call when I was very young .
I became one of the elect at an early age . ''
`` The members of the Community of the Primitive Trinitarians -- or , at least those of them who frequent Purbrook Street Chapel .
I hold that the ministers in the other chapels that I have attended do not preach the unadulterated Word , and have therefore missed the narrow path . ''
`` Then , '' said Kate , `` you think that no one will be saved except those who frequent the Purbrook Street Chapel ? ''
`` And not all of them -- no , nor one in ten , '' the merchant said confidently , and with some approach to satisfaction .
`` Heaven must be a very small place , '' Kate remarked , as she rose from the table .
Kate looked at his savage face and burly figure , and thought what a very courageous woman his wife must be .
`` Indeed , you 've hit it about the missus , '' said the youth , in a hoarse whisper , nodding his head to emphasize his remarks .
`` She 's got a heart as is big enough for three . ''
John looked at her suspiciously .
`` If he has n't , it 's all right , '' he said ; `` but I think as you 're one of them as do n't complain if you can 'elp it . ''
He opened his hand and showed a great jagged flint which he carried .
`` I 'd ha ' knocked his other peeper out with this , '' he said , `` blowed if I would n't ! ''
`` All right , miss .
Good-bye to ye ! ''
She went slowly back to her room , wondering what friend this could be whom Ezra had brought with him .
She had noticed that he was roughly clad , presenting a contrast to the young merchant , who was vulgarly spruce in his attire .
Evidently he intended to pass the night at the Priory , since they had let the trap go back to the village .
She was glad that he had come , for his presence would act as a restraint upon the Girdlestones .
In spite of her guardian 's amiability at breakfast , she could not forget the words which he had used the morning before or the incident of the poison bottle .
She was as convinced as ever that he meant mischief to her , but she had ceased to fear him .
It never for one moment occurred to her that her guardian 's machinations might come to a head before her rescuers could arrive .
In the course of her work she chanced to look up at the Priory .
The refectory faced the lawn , and at the window of it there stood the three men looking out at her .
The Girdlestones were nodding their heads , as though they were pointing her out to the third man , who stood between them .
He was looking at her with an expression of interest .
Kate thought as she returned his gaze that she had never seen a more savage and brutal face .
He was flushed and laughing , while Ezra beside him appeared to be pale and anxious .
They all , when they saw that she noticed them , stepped precipitately back from the window .
She had only a momentary glance at them , and yet the three faces -- the strange fierce red one , and the two hard familiar pale ones which flanked it -- remained vividly impressed upon her memory .
`` Talk it over afterwards , '' said Ezra shortly .
`` Burt and I have had no luncheon yet . ''
`` It will precious soon come to that .
It was the devil of a fight to keep things straight last week . ''
`` What 's the matter with your lip ?
It seems to be swollen . ''
`` Yes , yes , of course .
What is that in the bottle over there ?
How will that do ? ''
Burt nodded his shaggy head .
`` But there is bound to be an inquiry .
How about a medical certificate ? ''
Burt and Ezra leaned forward to listen , while the old man sank his voice to a whisper .
`` They think that she is insane , '' he said .
`` Suppose that door to be left open , would it be an impossible thing for a crazy woman to slip out through it , and to be run over by the ten o'clock express ? ''
`` I see your meaning , '' said his son thoughtfully .
`` You would settle her , and then put her there . ''
`` Certainly not ! ''
`` It is not necessary .
Mr. Burt can do his part of the business out of doors .
We can entice her out upon some excuse .
There is no reason why any one should have a suspicion of the truth . ''
They all went over to the window , and looked out .
It was then that Kate , glancing up , saw the three cruel faces surveying her .
`` But we can rely upon you ? ''
Girdlestone asked , looking at him with puckered eyes .
`` Have n't you got one word for me ? ''
she said sadly , looking up into his face .
`` It 's but once a week , and then never a word of greeting . ''
`` And what brings _you_ down here ? ''
she asked , with the same searching look .
`` You do n't come down into this hole without some good reason .
I did think at first that you might come down in order to see me , but you soon showed me that it was n't that .
There was a time when you was fond of me . ''
`` So I am now , lass . ''
`` Much you cared for him in London , '' she cried , with a shrill laugh .
`` If he was under the sod you would not be the sadder .
It 's my belief as you come down after that doll-faced missy upstairs . ''
`` Dry up , now ! ''
`` I 've had enough of your confounded nonsense . ''
The reaction had already come upon her , however , and tears were running down her cheeks .
`` You 'll never leave me entirely ? ''
she cried , clasping his arm .
`` I could bear to share your love with another , but I wouldn't have you turn altogether against me . ''
`` Here 's a note for you , '' she said .
`` It was given Mrs. Jorrocks to give you , but I am better at climbing stairs than she is , so I brought it up . ''
She handed Kate a little slip of paper as she spoke .
A note for her !
Could it be that her friends had arrived and had managed to send a message to her ?
It must be so .
She took it from the maid .
As she did so she noticed that the other 's hands were shaking as though she had the ague .
`` You are not well , Rebecca , '' said Kate kindly .
`` Oh yes , I am .
You read your note and do n't mind me , '' the girl answered , in her usual surly fashion .
Instead of leaving the room , she was bustling about the bed as though putting things in order .
`` Come on , then ! ''
said the navvy , buttoning up his coat and rolling a ragged cravat round his throat .
`` Who is a-comin ' with me ? ''
`` You 're not half sharp enough , '' said Ezra .
`` If the door was left like that it might suggest a trap to her .
Better close the dining-room door and then leave the hall door just a little ajar .
That would look more natural .
She would conclude that Burt and you were in there . ''
Burt walked round the great trunk and made as careful an examination of the ground as he could in the dark .
`` No , It 's all serene .
I think I know how to fix it now .
You two can get behind those trees , or where you like , as long as you 're not in the way .
I do n't want no 'sistance .
When Jem Burt takes a job in hand he carries it through in a workmanlike manner .
I do n't want nobody else foolin ' around . ''
`` Ten minutes to , '' said the other , peering at his great golden chronometer through the darkness .
`` What if she fails to come ? ''
`` I had no idea that you were so faint-hearted , my son , '' the merchant remarked .
`` However , I know the way to the gate well enough to go there blindfold .
What a comfort it is to know that there is no blood about !
That 's the advantage of a stick over a knife . ''
`` You 're correct there , guv'nor , '' Burt said approvingly .
Ezra Girdlestone had four hours ' start of them .
That was the thought which rankled in Tom 's heart and outweighed every other consideration .
He knew Kate 's nature so well that he was convinced that she would never have expressed such fears to Mrs. Scully unless she had very assured reasons for them .
In fact , apart from her own words , what could this secrecy and seclusion mean except foul play .
After what he had learned about the insurance of the ships and the manner in which the elder Girdlestone had induced him to cease corresponding with Kate , he could believe anything of his partners .
He knew , also , that in case of Kate's death the money reverted to her guardian .
There was not a single link missing in the chain of evidence which showed that a crime was in contemplation .
Then , who was that butcher-like man whom Ezra was taking down with him ?
Tom could have torn his hair as he thought of his present impotence and of his folly in losing sight of young Girdlestone .
`` Drive as hard as you can go to the Proiory , me man , '' said the major .
They passed the stone pillars with the weather-beaten heraldic devices , and drove along by the high park wall .
When they had gone a hundred yards or so the major ordered the driver to pull up , and they all got down .
The increased fare was paid without remonstrance , and the ostler rattled away homewards , with the intention of pulling up at the county police-station and lodging information as to the suspicious visitors whom he had brought down .
`` Wait a bit .
A few minutes can make no difference one way or the other .
Ould Sir Colin used to say that there were more battles lost by over-haste than by slowness .
What 's the high bank running along on the right here ? ''
`` Dat 's a railway bankment , '' said Von Baumser .
`` See de posts and de little red lights over yonder . ''
`` He has right , '' said Von Baumser .
`` We shall await here until we hear from you .
Help him , my vriends -- shove him up ! ''
`` We must have the light , '' said a voice .
`` The wrong woman ! ''
Girdlestone muttered with the same vacant look upon his face .
`` All for nothing , then -- for nothing ! ''
`` We want a minute 's talk with you , Mr. Sampson , '' said Ezra .
`` Look here , '' said Ezra , bending forward and emphasizing his words with his uplifted hand , `` we 've set our minds on going , and we do n't mind paying for the fancy .
The sooner we start the better pleased we shall be .
If you wo n't take us , there are many in Claxton that will . ''
The old seaman scratched his head as though uncertain whether to take this blessing which the gods had sent or to hold out for more .
`` That 's our look-out , '' answered Ezra .
`` Let us get off . ''
`` Now , Jarge , with three reefs in her we might give her the mains'le . ''
`` It ai n't much of a cabin , '' Sampson said apologetically .
`` Such as it is , you 'll find it down there . ''
`` Ay , the police have not taken long , '' his son answered .
John Girdlestone was silent for some time .
Then he suddenly dropped his face upon his hands , and sobbed hoarsely for the first and last time in his career .
`` Wire to every station along the line to be on the look-out .
Send a description to the chief constable of Portsmouth , and have a watch kept on the shipping .
That should catch them ! ''
`` Dere 'll be some queer company among de elect if he is dere ! ''
The _Black Eagle_ had dropped down the Thames on the very Saturday which was so fruitful of eventful episodes .
Miggs would lie at Gravesend , and intended afterwards to beat round to the Downs , there to await the final instructions of the firm .
If they could catch him before he left , there was very little chance that he would know anything of what had occurred .
It was a fortunate chance that the next day was Sunday , and there would be no morning paper to enlighten him as to the doings in Hampshire .
They had only to invent some plausible excuse for their wish to accompany him , and get him to drop them upon the Spanish coast .
Once out of sight of England and on the broad ocean , what detective could follow their track ?
Ezra pointed up once at the moon , on whose face two storm wreaths had marked a rectangular device .
About two in the morning they saw a line of lights , which the fisherman informed them was from the town of Worthing .
Again before daybreak they scudded past another and far brighter and larger area of twinkling points , which marked the position of Brighton .
They were nearly half-way upon their journey already .
As the dawn approached the dark storm-clouds gathered away to the northern horizon and lay in a great shadow over the coast .
On all other points the sky was clear , save that here and there a single puff of white vapour sailed along like the feather of some gigantic bird floating in the ocean of air .
These isolated clouds , which had been pearly grey in the dim light of early day , gradually took a lilac tint , which deepened into pink , and then blushed suddenly to a fiery scarlet as the red rim of the sun rose majestically over the horizon .
All the heaven was filled with colour from the palest , lightest blue at the zenith to the most brilliant crimson in the east , as though it were nature 's palette on which she had dashed every tint that she possessed .
The sea reflected the rich glow , and the tossing waves were gashed with scarlet streaks .
`` It looks like a sea of blood , '' the merchant remarked with a shudder , as he gazed at the wonderful spectacle .
`` There 's a fine view ! ''
Sampson observed , pointing towards the land , just as his two passengers had finished their toilet .
By ten o'clock they were abreast of the long stone terraces of Hastings ; at half-past eleven they saw the masts of the fishing-smacks of Winchelsea .
By one they were rounding the sharp bold promontory of Dungeness .
They kept further to sea after that , so that the long white wall and the spires of Folkestone and of Dover lay far on the horizon .
On the other side a dim haze upon the blue water marked the position of the French coast .
It was nearly five , and the sun was beginning to sink down again in the west , when the fisherman , after gazing steadily ahead for some time , with his horny hand shading his eyes , touched Ezra on the sleeve .
`` See them breakers over there , '' he said , pointing over the starboard bow .
Far away Ezra could see a long roll of foam breaking the monotony of the broad stretch of ocean .
`` Them 's the Goodwins , '' he went on ; `` and them craft ahead is at anchor in the Downs . ''
As he spoke they saw first one great square of canvas appear above the vessel , and then another , until she had spread her white wings to their fullest extent .
`` If we were running , we could rig up a spinnaker , '' the fisherman answered ; `` but the wind has come round three points .
We can do no more . ''
`` With our necks for a prize , '' Ezra muttered to himself .
`` Where 's something white ? ''
He dived into the cabin and reappeared with a dirty table-cloth .
`` Stand up here , father !
Now keep on waving it !
They may see you . ''
`` We 're doing that , '' his father answered .
`` The question is , will we get near enough to stop 'em afore they gets off on the next tack ? ''
`` Do you hear that ? ''
Ezra cried to his father ; and they both shouted with new energy and waved their signals .
A VOYAGE IN A COFFIN SHIP .
The wind fell away on the day that they cleared the Channel , and the whole surface of the sea was like a great expanse of quicksilver , which shimmered in the rays of the wintry sun .
There was still a considerable swell after the recent gale , and the _Black Eagle_ lay rolling about as though she had learned habits of inebriation from her skipper .
The sky was very clear above , but all round the horizon a low haze lay upon the water .
So silent was it that the creaking of the boats as they swung at the davits , and the straining of the shrouds as the ship rolled , sounded loud and clear , as did the raucous cries of a couple of gulls which hovered round the poop .
Every now and then a rumbling noise ending in a thud down below showed that the swing of the ship had caused something to come down with a run .
Underlying all other sounds , however , was a muffled clank , clank , which might almost make one forget that this was a sailing ship , it sounded so like the chipping of a propeller .
I thought they were only used when a ship was in danger ? ''
`` This ship is in danger , '' Miggs remarked calmly .
`` In danger ! ''
cried Ezra , looking round the clear sky and placid sea .
`` Where is the danger ?
I did not think you were such an old woman , Miggs . ''
`` Do you mean to tell me this ship has no bottom ? ''
`` I mean to tell you that there are places where you could put your fingers through her seams .
It 's only the pumpin ' that keeps her afloat . ''
`` There 's the wind , '' Miggs said confidently .
`` I 'd furl the top-gallant sails and get her stay-sails down , Mr .
Whenever he gave an order he was careful to give the mate his full title , though at other times he called him indiscriminately Sandy or Mac .
`` Ay , ay , sir . ''
`` This may be the same gale as was on some days ago , '' Miggs remarked .
`` They travel in circles very often , and come back to where they start from . ''
It was blowing now in short frequent puffs , which ruffled the surface of the water , and caused the _Black Eagle_ to surge slowly forward over the rollers .
A few drops of rain came pattering down upon the deck .
The great bank of cloud was above the ship , still hurrying wildly across the heavens .
It was a dreary night for all on board .
As long as there was light they could at least see what danger was to be faced , but now the barque was plunging and tossing through an inky obscurity .
With a wild scooping motion she was hurled up on the summit of a great wave , and thence she shot down into the black gulf beyond with such force that when checked by meeting the next billow her whole fabric jarred from truck to keelson .
There were two seamen at the wheel and two at the relieving tackles , yet it was all that they could do among the wild commotion to keep her steady .
`` She 's near water-logged , I 'm thinkin ' , '' the mate responded gravely .
The carpenter came aft at this moment , balancing himself as best he could , for the deck was only a few degrees off the perpendicular .
`` We 'd best run towards it , '' the mate said .
`` We 've na chance o ' saving the ship , but we might run her ashore . ''
`` The ship will go down before you reach it , '' the carpenter remarked gloomily .
`` Buckle to again , boys ! ''
`` These two will help you and the carpenter and mate . ''
`` Na , na .
If I am to dee , I 'll dee sober . ''
`` He 's not fit to command , '' said Ezra to the mate .
`` What would you advise ? ''
It was only when they emerged from under the shelter of the vessel that they felt the full power of the sea .
If it had appeared stupendous when they trod the deck of the barque , how much more so now , when , by leaning the arm over the side , they could touch the surface .
The great glassy green billows hurled them up and down , and tossed them and buffeted them as though the two boats were their playthings , and they were trying what antics they could perform with them without destroying them .
Girdlestone sat very grim and pale , with Ezra at his side .
The young fellow 's expression was that of a daring man who realizes his danger , but is determined to throw no chance of safety away .
His mouth was set firm and hard , and his dark eyebrows were drawn down over his keen eyes , which glanced swiftly to right and left , like a rat in a trap .
Miggs held the tiller , and laughed from time to time in a drunken fashion , while the four seamen , quiet and subdued , steadied the boat as long as they could with their oars , and looked occasionally over their shoulders at the breakers behind them .
The sun was shining on the rugged precipices , showing out the green turf upon their summit and a little dark group of peasants , who were watching the scene from above , but making no effort to assist the castaways .
There was no alternative but to row straight in for the nearest point of land , for the boats were filling , and might go down at any moment .
`` There 's no room here , '' the young man said brutally .
The breakfast was at Phillimore Gardens , and a very glorious breakfast it was .
Those who were present still talk of the manner in which the health of the brides was proposed by Dr. Dimsdale and of the enthusiasm with which the toast was received by the company .
Also of the flowery address in which the major returned thanks for the said toast , and the manly demeanour of the younger man as he followed suit .
They speak too of many other pleasant things said and done upon that occasion .
How Von Baumser proposed the health of the little incumbent , and the little incumbent that of Dr. Dimsdale , and the doctor drank to the unpronounceable Russian , who , being unable to reply , sang a revolutionary song which no one could understand .
Very happy and very hearty was every one by the time that the hour came at which the carriages were ordered , when , amid a patter ing of rice and a chorus of heartfelt good wishes , the happy couples drove off upon their travels .
And now I must bid adieu to the shadowy company with whom I have walked so long .
I see them going on down the vista of the future , gathering wisdom and happiness as they go .
There is the major , as stubby-toed and pigeon-breasted as ever , broken from many of his Bohemian ways , but still full of anecdote and of kindliness .
There is his henchman , Von Baumser , too , who is a constant diner at his hospitable board , and who conveys so many sweets to a young Clutterbuck who has made his appearance , that one might suspect him of receiving a commission from the family doctor .
Mrs. Clutterbuck , as buxom and pleasant as ever , makes noble efforts at stopping these contraband supplies , but the wily Teuton still manages to smuggle them through in the face of every obstacle .
I see Kate and her husband , chastened by their many troubles , and making the road to the grave pleasant to the good old couple who are so proud of their son .
All these I watch as they pass away into the dim coming time , and I know as I shut the book that , whatever may be in store for us there , they , at least , can never in the eternal justice of things come to aught but good .
`` One thing comes back to my memory which may have a bearing upon the business that you two gentlemen are investigating .
I thought nothing of it at the time .
Near the end of dinner a note was handed in by the servant .
I noticed that after my host had read it he seemed even more distrait and strange than before .
He gave up all pretence at conversation and sat , smoking endless cigarettes , lost in his own thoughts , but he made no remark as to the contents .
About eleven I was glad to go to bed .
Some time later Garcia looked in at my door -- the room was dark at the time -- and asked me if I had rung .
I said that I had not .
He apologized for having disturbed me so late , saying that it was nearly one o'clock .
I dropped off after this and slept soundly all night .
`` Your experience is , so far as I know , perfectly unique , '' said he .
`` May I ask , sir , what you did then ? ''
`` You must have examined the house very carefully to find a single pellet of paper . ''
`` I did , Mr. Holmes .
It 's my way .
Shall I read it , Mr .
`` Our own colours , green and white .
Green open , white shut .
Main stair , first corridor , seventh right , green baize .
`` It is a woman 's writing , done with a sharp-pointed pen , but the address is either done with another pen or by someone else .
It is thicker and bolder , as you see . ''
`` I am glad you found the note , since it corroborates my story , '' said he .
`` But I beg to point out that I have not yet heard what has happened to Mr. Garcia , nor what has become of his household . ''
The detective looked at my friend in a singular way .
`` There were , '' said he , `` one or two _very_ remarkable things .
Perhaps when I have finished at the police-station you would care to come out and give me your opinion of them . ''
`` But the crime ? ''
`` Then why did they fly ? ''
`` I have not all my facts yet , but I do not think there are any insuperable difficulties .
Still , it is an error to argue in front of your data .
You find yourself insensibly twisting them round to fit your theories . ''
`` The man was a Spaniard .
I suggest that 'D ' stands for Dolores , a common female name in Spain . ''
`` Good , Watson , very good -- but quite inadmissable .
A Spaniard would write to a Spaniard in Spanish .
The writer of this note is certainly English .
Well , we can only possess our soul in patience until this excellent inspector come back for us .
Meanwhile we can thank our lucky fate which has rescued us for a few short hours from the insufferable fatigues of idleness . ''
`` We are moving in exalted circles , '' said he .
The man mopped his forehead with his handkerchief and gave a long sigh of relief .
`` I know , sir , I know ; but it shook me , sir , and there 's no use to deny it .
It was n't black , sir , nor was it white , nor any colour that I know but a kind of queer shade like clay with a splash of milk in it .
Then there was the size of it -- it was twice yours , sir .
And the look of it -- the great staring goggle eyes , and the line of white teeth like a hungry beast .
I tell you , sir , I could n't move a finger , nor get my breath , till it whisked away and was gone .
Out I ran and through the shrubbery , but thank God there was no one there . ''
`` What became of him ? ''
`` Look at this , '' said Baynes .
`` What do you make of it ? ''
But Mr. Baynes had kept his most sinister exhibit to the last .
From under the sink he drew a zinc pail which contained a quantity of blood .
Then from the table he took a platter heaped with small pieces of charred bone .
Inspector Baynes 's small eyes twinkled with pleasure .
`` You 're right , Mr. Holmes .
We stagnate in the provinces .
A case of this sort gives a man a chance , and I hope that I shall take it .
What do you make of these bones ? ''
`` Yes , sir , there must have been some very strange people with some very strange ways in this house .
One of them is dead .
Did his companions follow him and kill him ?
If they did we should have them , for every port is watched .
But my own views are different .
Yes , sir , my own views are very different . ''
I could tell by numerous subtle signs , which might have been lost upon anyone but myself , that Holmes was on a hot scent .
As impassive as ever to the casual observer , there were none the less a subdued eagerness and suggestion of tension in his brightened eyes and brisker manner which assured me that the game was afoot .
After his habit he said nothing , and after mine I asked no questions .
Sufficient for me to share the sport and lend my humble help to the capture without distracting that intent brain with needless interruption .
All would come round to me in due time .
`` I 'm sure , Watson , a week in the country will be invaluable to you , '' he remarked .
`` It is very pleasant to see the first green shoots upon the hedges and the catkins on the hazels once again .
With a spud , a tin box , and an elementary book on botany , there are instructive days to be spent . ''
He prowled about with this equipment himself , but it was a poor show of plants which he would bring back of an evening .
Occasionally in our rambles we came across Inspector Baynes .
His fat , red face wreathed itself in smiles and his small eyes glittered as he greeted my companion .
He said little about the case , but from that little we gathered that he also was not dissatisfied at the course of events .
I must admit , however , that I was somewhat surprised when , some five days after the crime , I opened my morning paper to find in large letters :
`` Yes , Baynes , I 've seen it .
Pray do n't think it a liberty if I give you a word of friendly warning . ''
`` We agreed to work on our own lines , Mr. Holmes .
That 's what I am doing . ''
`` No , sir ; I believe you mean well by me .
But we all have our own systems , Mr. Holmes .
You have yours , and maybe I have mine . ''
`` You 're welcome always to my news .
This fellow is a perfect savage , as strong as a cart-horse and as fierce as the devil .
He chewed Downing's thumb nearly off before they could master him .
He hardly speaks a word of English , and we can get nothing out of him but grunts . ''
`` We can now see a reason for the disappearance of Garcia 's household .
They were _all_ confederates in the same unknown crime .
If it came off when Garcia returned , any possible suspicion would be warded off by the Englishman 's evidence , and all would be well .
But the attempt was a dangerous one , and if Garcia did _not_ return by a certain hour it was probable that his own life had been sacrificed .
It had been arranged , therefore , that in such a case his two subordinates were to make for some prearranged spot where they could escape investigation and be in a position afterwards to renew their attempt .
That would fully explain the facts , would it not ? ''
`` But why should one servant return ? ''
`` We can imagine that in the confusion of flight something precious , something which he could not bear to part with , had been left behind .
That would explain his persistence , would it not ? ''
`` Well , what is the next step ? ''
`` The next step is the note received by Garcia at the dinner .
It indicates a confederate at the other end .
Now , where was the other end ?
I have already shown you that it could only lie in some large house , and that the number of large houses is limited .
My first days in this village were devoted to a series of walks in which in the intervals of my botanical researches I made a reconnaissance of all the large houses and an examination of the family history of the occupants .
One house , and only one , riveted my attention .
It is the famous old Jacobean grange of High Gable , one mile on the farther side of Oxshott , and less than half a mile from the scene of the tragedy .
The other mansions belonged to prosaic and respectable people who live far aloof from romance .
But Mr. Henderson , of High Gable , was by all accounts a curious man to whom curious adventures might befall .
I concentrated my attention , therefore , upon him and his household .
`` Excellent , Warner ! ''
cried Holmes , springing to his feet .
`` Watson , the gaps are closing rapidly . ''
`` Then why did you arrest the mulatto ? ''
`` You will rise high in your profession .
You have instinct and intuition , '' said he .
`` I 've had a plain-clothes man waiting at the station all the week .
Wherever the High Gable folk go he will keep them in sight .
But he must have been hard put to it when Miss Burnet broke away .
However , your man picked her up , and it all ends well .
We ca n't arrest without her evidence , that is clear , so the sooner we get a statement the better . ''
`` But how come you into this matter , Miss Burnet ? ''
`` How can an English lady join in such a murderous affair ? ''
`` But everything went wrong with us .
In some way I had excited the suspicion of Lopez , the secretary .
He crept up behind me and sprang upon me just as I had finished the note .
He and his master dragged me to my room and held judgment upon me as a convicted traitress .
Then and there they would have plunged their knives into me could they have seen how to escape the consequences of the deed .
Finally , after much debate , they concluded that my murder was too dangerous .
But they determined to get rid forever of Garcia .
They had gagged me , and Murillo twisted my arm round until I gave him the address .
I swear that he might have twisted it off had I understood what it would mean to Garcia .
Lopez addressed the note which I had written , sealed it with his sleeve-link , and sent it by the hand of the servant , Jose .
How they murdered him I do not know , save that it was Murillo 's hand who struck him down , for Lopez had remained to guard me .
I believe he must have waited among the gorse bushes through which the path winds and struck him down as he passed .
At first they were of a mind to let him enter the house and to kill him as a detected burglar ; but they argued that if they were mixed up in an inquiry their own identity would at once be publicly disclosed and they would be open to further attacks .
With the death of Garcia , the pursuit might cease , since such a death might frighten others from the task .
We had all listened intently to this remarkable statement .
It was Holmes who broke the silence .
`` Exactly , '' said I .
`` A plausible lawyer could make it out as an act of self-defence .
There may be a hundred crimes in the background , but it is only on this one that they can be tried . ''
Holmes smiled as he turned up an entry in his note-book .
`` I spent a morning in the British Museum reading up on that and other points .
Here is a quotation from Eckermann 's Voodooism and the Negroid Religions :
THE GREAT KEINPLATZ EXPERIMENT And Other Tales of Twilight and the Unseen by A. CONAN DOYLE New [ Illustration ] York George H. Doran Company Copyright , 1905 , 1908 , 1909 , 1910 , 1911 , 1913 , 1914 , 1918 , 1919 , by A. Conan Doyle Copyright , 1910 , by Charles Scribner 's Sons Copyright , 1911 , by Associated Sunday Magazines , Inc .
Copyright , 1908 , by the McClure Company Copyright , 1900 , 1902 , by the S. S. McClure Company Copyright , 1894 , D. Appleton & Company [ Illustration ] THE GREAT KEINPLATZ EXPERIMENT AND OTHER TALES OF THE UNSEEN -- -- Q -- -- Printed in the United States of America CONTENTS PAGE I THE BROWN HAND 9 II THE USHER OF LEA HOUSE SCHOOL 30 III B .
24 51 IV THE GREAT KEINPLATZ EXPERIMENT 72 V CYPRIAN OVERBECK WELLS 95 VI PLAYING WITH FIRE 120 VII THE RING OF THOTH 139 VIII THE LOS AMIGOS FIASCO 163 IX HOW IT HAPPENED 174 X LOT NO .
249 179 XI `` DE PROFUNDIS '' 225 XII THE LIFT 239 THE GREAT KEINPLATZ EXPERIMENT _and Other Tales of Twilight and the Unseen_ I THE BROWN HAND Every one knows that Sir Dominick Holden , the famous Indian surgeon , made me his heir , and that his death changed me in an hour from a hard-working and impecunious medical man to a well-to-do landed proprietor .
Many know also that there were at least five people between the inheritance and me , and that Sir Dominick 's selection appeared to be altogether arbitrary and whimsical .
I can assure them , however , that they are quite mistaken , and that , although I only knew Sir Dominick in the closing years of his life , there were none the less very real reasons why he should show his goodwill towards me .
As a matter of fact , though I say it myself , no man ever did more for another than I did for my Indian uncle .
I can not expect the story to be believed , but it is so singular that I should feel that it was a breach of duty if I did not put it upon record -- so here it is , and your belief or incredulity is your own affair .
Sir Dominick Holden , C.B.
, and I do n't know what besides , was the most distinguished Indian surgeon of his day .
In the Army originally , he afterwards settled down into civil practice in Bombay , and visited as a consultant every part of India .
His name is best remembered in connection with the Oriental Hospital , which he founded and supported .
The time came , however , when his iron constitution began to show signs of the long strain to which he had subjected it , and his brother practitioners ( who were not , perhaps , entirely disinterested upon the point ) were unanimous in recommending him to return to England .
He held on so long as he could , but at last he developed nervous symptoms of a very pronounced character , and so came back , a broken man , to his native county of Wiltshire .
He bought a considerable estate with an ancient manor-house upon the edge of Salisbury Plain , and devoted his old age to the study of Comparative Pathology , which had been his learned hobby all his life , and in which he was a foremost authority .
We of the family were , as may be imagined , much excited by the news of the return of this rich and childless uncle to England .
On his part , although by no means exuberant in his hospitality , he showed some sense of his duty to his relations , and each of us in turn had an invitation to visit him .
From the accounts of my cousins it appeared to be a melancholy business , and it was with mixed feelings that I at last received my own summons to appear at Rodenhurst .
My wife was so carefully excluded in the invitation that my first impulse was to refuse it , but the interests of the children had to be considered , and so , with her consent , I set out one October afternoon upon my visit to Wiltshire , with little thought of what that visit was to entail .
My uncle 's estate was situated where the arable land of the plains begins to swell upwards into the rounded chalk hills which are characteristic of the county .
As I drove from Dinton Station in the waning light of that autumn day , I was impressed by the weird nature of the scenery .
The few scattered cottages of the peasants were so dwarfed by the huge evidences of prehistoric life , that the present appeared to be a dream and the past to be the obtrusive and masterful reality .
The road wound through the valleys , formed by a succession of grassy hills , and the summit of each was cut and carved into the most elaborate fortifications , some circular , and some square , but all on a scale which has defied the winds and the rains of many centuries .
Some call them Roman and some British , but their true origin and the reasons for this particular tract of country being so interlaced with entrenchments have never been finally made clear .
Here and there on the long , smooth , olive-coloured slopes there rose small rounded barrows or tumuli .
Beneath them lie the cremated ashes of the race which cut so deeply into the hills , but their graves tell us nothing save that a jar full of dust represents the man who once laboured under the sun .
It was through this weird country that I approached my uncle 's residence of Rodenhurst , and the house was , as I found , in due keeping with its surroundings .
Two broken and weather-stained pillars , each surmounted by a mutilated heraldic emblem , flanked the entrance to a neglected drive .
A cold wind whistled through the elms which lined it , and the air was full of the drifting leaves .
At the far end , under the gloomy arch of trees , a single yellow lamp burned steadily .
In the dim half-light of the coming night I saw a long , low building stretching out two irregular wings , with deep eaves , a sloping gambrel roof , and walls which were criss-crossed with timber balks in the fashion of the Tudors .
The cheery light of a fire flickered in the broad , latticed window to the left of the low-porched door , and this , as it proved , marked the study of my uncle , for it was thither that I was led by his butler in order to make my host 's acquaintance .
He was cowering over his fire , for the moist chill of an English autumn had set him shivering .
His lamp was unlit , and I only saw the red glow of the embers beating upon a huge , craggy face , with a Red Indian nose and cheek , and deep furrows and seams from eye to chin , the sinister marks of hidden volcanic fires .
He sprang up at my entrance with something of an old-world courtesy and welcomed me warmly to Rodenhurst .
At the same time I was conscious , as the lamp was carried in , that it was a very critical pair of light-blue eyes which looked out at me from under shaggy eyebrows , like scouts beneath a bush , and that this outlandish uncle of mine was carefully reading off my character with all the ease of a practised observer and an experienced man of the world .
For my part I looked at him , and looked again , for I had never seen a man whose appearance was more fitted to hold one 's attention .
His figure was the framework of a giant , but he had fallen away until his coat dangled straight down in a shocking fashion from a pair of broad and bony shoulders .
All his limbs were huge and yet emaciated , and I could not take my gaze from his knobby wrists , and long , gnarled hands .
But his eyes -- those peering light-blue eyes -- they were the most arrestive of any of his peculiarities .
It was not their colour alone , nor was it the ambush of hair in which they lurked ; but it was the expression which I read in them .
For the appearance and bearing of the man were masterful , and one expected a certain corresponding arrogance in his eyes , but instead of that I read the look which tells of a spirit cowed and crushed , the furtive , expectant look of the dog whose master has taken the whip from the rack .
I formed my own medical diagnosis upon one glance at those critical and yet appealing eyes .
I believed that he was stricken with some mortal ailment , that he knew himself to be exposed to sudden death , and that he lived in terror of it .
Such was my judgment -- a false one , as the event showed ; but I mention it that it may help you to realise the look which I read in his eyes .
We were sitting over our first glass of wine , and the servants had left the room , when the conversation took a turn which produced a remarkable effect upon my host and hostess .
I can not recall what it was which started the topic of the supernatural , but it ended in my showing them that the abnormal in psychical experiences was a subject to which I had , like many neurologists , devoted a great deal of attention .
I concluded by narrating my experiences when , as a member of the Psychical Research Society , I had formed one of a committee of three who spent the night in a haunted house .
Our adventures were neither exciting nor convincing , but , such as it was , the story appeared to interest my auditors in a remarkable degree .
They listened with an eager silence , and I caught a look of intelligence between them which I could not understand .
Lady Holden immediately afterwards rose and left the room .
I waited patiently until he should see fit to go farther in his confidence .
His preamble had , I need not say , filled me with interest and expectation .
`` You see that I still dabble in some of my old studies , '' said Sir Dominick .
`` These jars are the remains of what was once a most excellent collection , but unfortunately I lost the greater part of them when my house was burned down in Bombay in '92 .
It was a most unfortunate affair for me -- in more ways than one .
I had examples of many rare conditions , and my splenic collection was probably unique .
These are the survivors . ''
It was not an ideal atmosphere for a bedroom .
The air was heavy with many chemical odours , that of methylated spirit predominating .
Nor were the decorations of my chamber very sedative .
The odious line of glass jars with their relics of disease and suffering stretched in front of my very eyes .
There was no blind to the window , and a three-quarter moon streamed its white light into the room , tracing a silver square with filigree lattices upon the opposite wall .
When I had extinguished my candle this one bright patch in the midst of the general gloom had certainly an eerie and discomposing aspect .
A rigid and absolute silence reigned throughout the old house , so that the low swish of the branches in the garden came softly and smoothly to my ears .
It may have been the hypnotic lullaby of this gentle susurrus , or it may have been the result of my tiring day , but after many dozings and many efforts to regain my clearness of perception , I fell at last into a deep and dreamless sleep .
`` Yes , it came about in this way .
I was summoned to Peshawur for a consultation some ten years ago , and while there I was asked to look at the hand of a native who was passing through with an Afghan caravan .
The fellow came from some mountain tribe living away at the back of beyond somewhere on the other side of Kaffiristan .
He talked a bastard Pushtoo , and it was all I could do to understand him .
He was suffering from a soft sarcomatous swelling of one of the metacarpal joints , and I made him realise that it was only by losing his hand that he could hope to save his life .
After much persuasion he consented to the operation , and he asked me , when it was over , what fee I demanded .
The poor fellow was almost a beggar , so that the idea of a fee was absurd , but I answered in jest that my fee should be his hand , and that I proposed to add it to my pathological collection .
`` Well , there you have it all , Dr. Hardacre .
Every night at the same hour for four years this performance has been repeated .
It is a simple thing in itself , but it has worn me out like water dropping on a stone .
It has brought a vile insomnia with it , for I can not sleep now for the expectation of his coming .
It has poisoned my old age and that of my wife , who has been the sharer in this great trouble .
But there is the breakfast gong , and she will be waiting impatiently to know how it fared with you last night .
We are both much indebted to you for your gallantry , for it takes something from the weight of our misfortune when we share it , even for a single night , with a friend , and it reassures us as to our sanity , which we are sometimes driven to question . ''
`` In the case of earth-bound spirits , '' said my authority , `` some one dominant idea obsessing them at the hour of death is sufficient to hold them in this material world .
They are the amphibia of this life and of the next , capable of passing from one to the other as the turtle passes from land to water .
The causes which may bind a soul so strongly to a life which its body has abandoned are any violent emotion .
Avarice , revenge , anxiety , love , and pity have all been known to have this effect .
As a rule it springs from some unfulfilled wish , and when the wish has been fulfilled the material bond relaxes .
There are many cases upon record which show the singular persistence of these visitors , and also their disappearance when their wishes have been fulfilled , or in some cases when a reasonable compromise has been effected . ''
`` _A reasonable compromise effected_ '' -- those were the words which I had brooded over all the morning , and which I now verified in the original .
No actual atonement could be made here -- but a reasonable compromise !
I made my way as fast as a train could take me to the Shadwell Seamen's Hospital , where my old friend Jack Hewett was house-surgeon .
Without explaining the situation I made him understand what it was that I wanted .
`` A brown man 's hand ! ''
said he , in amazement .
`` What in the world do you want that for ? ''
I 'll tell you some day .
I know that your wards are full of Indians . ''
`` They are in the _post-mortem_ room , sir . ''
`` Just pack one of them in antiseptics and give it to Dr .
And so I found myself back at Rodenhurst before dinner with this curious outcome of my day in town .
I still said nothing to Sir Dominick , but I slept that night in the laboratory , and I placed the Lascar 's hand in one of the glass jars at the end of my couch .
But Sir Dominick Holden would not hear of my occupying the laboratory again .
To all my entreaties he turned a deaf ear .
It offended his sense of hospitality , and he could no longer permit it .
I left the hand , therefore , as I had done its fellow the night before , and I occupied a comfortable bedroom in another portion of the house , some distance from the scene of my adventures .
Mr. Lumsden , the senior partner of Lumsden and Westmacott , the well-known scholastic and clerical agents , was a small , dapper man , with a sharp , abrupt manner , a critical eye , and an incisive way of speaking .
He paused on account of a knock at the door .
It was a clerk with a note .
Mr. Lumsden broke the seal and read it .
`` Yes , sir , but it is only fair to you to warn you that there may be some especially trying circumstances in this particular situation .
Dr. Phelps McCarthy does not make such a condition without some very good and pressing reason . ''
`` I am sure that we shall be very happy to have your assistance , Mr. Weld , '' said he , after a few professional questions .
`` Mr. Percival Manners left me yesterday , and I should be glad if you could take over his duties to-morrow . ''
oh , he 's all right .
There 's no vice in him .
Have you seen Theophilus St .
My friend looked at me significantly through his cigarette smoke , and shrugged his shoulders .
It was with no very pleasant feelings after this preparation that I found myself face to face with the very man of whom I had received so evil an account .
Dr. McCarthy introduced us to each other in his study on the evening of that same day immediately after my arrival at the school .
`` Little beasts ! ''
`` I hate the sight of them !
If I could put them and their blessed copybooks and lexicons and slates into one bonfire I 'd do it to-night . ''
As to my own relations with Theophilus St. James , I made up my mind from the beginning that I should keep my temper with him , and to that resolution I steadfastly adhered .
If Dr. McCarthy chose to permit this disrespect , and to condone these outrages , it was his affair and not mine .
It was evident that his one wish was that there should be peace between us , and I felt that I could help him best by respecting this desire .
My easiest way to do so was to avoid my colleague , and this I did to the best of my ability .
When we were thrown together I was quiet , polite , and reserved .
He , on his part , showed me no ill-will , but met me rather with a coarse joviality , and a rough familiarity which he meant to be ingratiating .
He was insistent in his attempts to get me into his room at night , for the purpose of playing euchre and of drinking .
During that week -- for it was only a week before the crisis came -- I was in the habit of going down each evening , after the work of the day was done , to inquire about my new arrangements .
One night , it was a cold and windy evening in March , I had just stepped out from the hall door when a strange sight met my eyes .
A man was crouching before one of the windows of the house .
His knees were bent and his eyes were fixed upon the small line of light between the curtain and the sash .
The window threw a square of brightness in front of it , and in the middle of this the dark shadow of this ominous visitor showed clear and hard .
It was but for an instant that I saw him , for he glanced up and was off in a moment through the shrubbery .
I could hear the patter of his feet as he ran down the road , until it died away in the distance .
`` Done for me !
What have you ever done for me except what you couldn't help doing ?
It was for your good name , not for my safety , that you cared .
I must get on my way before morning .
Will you open your safe or will you not ? ''
The Doctor sank his face between his hands .
`` Alas , yes .
What sin have I ever committed that I should have such a punishment ?
He has made my whole life a misery from the first years of his boyhood .
Violent , headstrong , selfish , unprincipled , he has always been the same .
At eighteen he was a criminal .
At twenty , in a paroxysm of passion , he took the life of a boon companion and was tried for murder .
He only just escaped the gallows , and he was condemned to penal servitude .
Three years ago he succeeded in escaping , and managed , in face of a thousand obstacles , to reach my house in London .
My wife's heart had been broken by his condemnation , and as he had succeeded in getting a suit of ordinary clothes , there was no one here to recognise him .
For months he lay concealed in the attics until the first search of the police should be over .
Then I gave him employment here , as you have seen , though by his rough and overbearing manners he made my own life miserable , and that of his fellow-masters unbearable .
You have been with us for four months , Mr. Weld , but no other master endured him so long .
I apologise now for all you have had to submit to , but I ask you what else could I do ?
For his dead mother 's sake I could not let harm come to him as long as it was in my power to fend it off .
Only under my roof could he find a refuge -- the only spot in all the world -- and how could I keep him here without it exciting remark unless I gave him some occupation ?
I made him English master therefore , and in that capacity I have protected him here for three years .
You have no doubt observed that he never during the daytime went beyond the college grounds .
You now understand the reason .
But when to-night you came to me with your report of a man who was looking through his window , I understood that his retreat was at last discovered .
I besought him to fly at once , but he had been drinking , the unhappy fellow , and my words fell upon deaf ears .
When at last he made up his mind to go he wished to take from me in his flight every shilling which I possessed .
It was your entrance which saved me from him , while the police in turn arrived only just in time to rescue you .
I have made myself amenable to the law by harbouring an escaped prisoner , and remain here in the custody of the inspector , but a prison has no terrors for me after what I have endured in this house during the last three years . ''
`` Exactly , '' said he -- and I am giving all our talk so that you may know that I am telling you the truth and hiding nothing .
`` The long white house with the pillars , '' said he .
`` At the side of the Blandford Road . ''
I 've had some starts in my life , but never one to come up to that one .
There , in the opening of the shutters , within reach of my arm , was standing a woman with a small coil of wax taper burning in her hand .
She was tall and straight and slender , with a beautiful white face that might have been cut out of clear marble , but her hair and eyes were as black as night .
She was dressed in some sort of white dressing-gown which flowed down to her feet , and what with this robe and what with her face , it seemed as if a spirit from above was standing in front of me .
My knees knocked together , and I held on to the shutter with one hand to give me support .
I should have turned and run away if I had had the strength , but I could only just stand and stare at her .
`` What 's the meaning of this , ma'am ?
Do n't get trying any little games upon me , '' said I , in my roughest way -- and I can put it on rough when I like .
`` It 'll be the worse for you if you play me any trick , '' I added , showing her my knife .
`` Yes , your Ladyship . ''
`` No , your Ladyship . ''
`` Shut the shutter behind you .
Then no one can see the light .
You are quite safe .
The servants all sleep in the other wing .
I can show you where all the most valuable things are .
You can not carry them all , so we must pick the best . ''
`` Wait a moment , '' said she , laying her hand upon my arm .
`` You might do better than this . ''
`` You can do better , '' she repeated .
`` Would not golden sovereigns be worth more to you than these things ? ''
`` Why , yes , '' said I .
`` That 's best of all . ''
Far away in the silence of the house we heard a low , dragging , shuffling sound , and the distant tread of feet .
She closed and fastened the case in an instant .
`` It 's my husband ! ''
Do n't be alarmed .
Quick , behind the tapestry ! ''
`` I could not sleep , '' she answered .
She spoke languidly and wearily .
If she was an actress once , she had not forgotten her calling .
`` Might I suggest , '' said he , in the same mocking kind of voice , `` that a good conscience is an excellent aid to sleep ? ''
`` Looking at the medals .
What else should I be doing ? ''
`` Yes , '' said she , in her quiet way , `` I 've done it now . ''
`` Never fear about me .
I have nothing to live for , and it does not matter .
Give me a hand to set him straight in the chair .
It is horrible to see him like this ! ''
`` Now , '' said she , `` you may as well have the medals as any one else .
Take them and go . ''
`` I do n't want them .
I only want to get away .
I was never mixed up with a business like this before . ''
I held the bag still in my hand .
She opened the case , and between us we threw a hundred or so of the medals into it .
They were all from the one case , but I could not bring myself to wait for any more .
Then I made for the window , for the very air of this house seemed to poison me after what I had seen and heard .
As I looked back , I saw her standing there , tall and graceful , with the light in her hand just as I had seen her first .
She waved good-bye , and I waved back at her and sprang out into the gravel drive .
I thank God that I can lay my hand upon my heart and say that I have never done a murder , but perhaps it would be different if I had been able to read that woman 's mind and thoughts .
There might have been two bodies in the room instead of one if I could have seen behind that last smile of hers .
But I thought of nothing but of getting safely away , and it never entered my head how she might be fixing the rope round my neck .
I had not taken five steps out from the window skirting down the shadow of the house in the way that I had come , when I heard a scream that might have raised the parish , and then another and another .
and her voice rang out in the quiet of the night-time and sounded over the whole country-side .
It went through my head , that dreadful cry .
In an instant lights began to move and windows to fly up , not only in the house behind me , but at the lodge and in the stables in front .
Like a frightened rabbit I bolted down the drive , but I heard the clang of the gate being shut before I could reach it .
Then I hid my bag of medals under some dry fagots , and I tried to get away across the park , but some one saw me in the moonlight , and presently I had half a dozen of them with dogs upon my heels .
I crouched down among the brambles , but those dogs were too many for me , and I was glad enough when the men came up and prevented me from being torn into pieces .
They seized me , and dragged me back to the room from which I had come .
`` Do not hurt him , '' said she .
`` I think that his punishment may safely be left to the law . ''
`` Yes , yes , I saw it with my own eyes .
We heard the noise and we came down .
My poor husband was in front .
The man had one of the cases open , and was filling a black leather bag which he held in his hand .
He rushed past us , and my husband seized him .
There was a struggle , and he stabbed him twice .
There you can see the blood upon his hands .
If I am not mistaken , his knife is still in Lord Mannering's body . ''
`` And have you considered , my dear sir , that you may have some difficulty in finding some one on whom to try this ?
Suppose that the soul went out and would not come back .
That would be a bad business .
Who is to take the risk ? ''
`` Consider the fiddlesticks ! ''
the student cried angrily .
`` Am I to be paid always thus ?
Did I not stand two hours upon a glass insulator while you poured electricity into my body ?
Have you not stimulated my phrenic nerves , besides ruining my digestion with a galvanic current round my stomach ?
Four-and-thirty times you have mesmerised me , and what have I got from all this ?
And now you wish to take my soul out , as you would take the works from a watch .
It is more than flesh and blood can stand . ''
`` And what would my daughter say to this ? ''
the Professor exclaimed , after a pause of astonishment .
`` Then she shall be yours , '' the physiologist said with decision , `` for you are a good-hearted young man , and one of the best neurotic subjects that I have ever known -- that is when you are not under the influence of alcohol .
My experiment is to be performed upon the fourth of next month .
You will attend at the physiological laboratory at twelve o'clock .
It will be a great occasion , Fritz .
Von Gruben is coming from Jena , and Hinterstein from Basle .
The chief men of science of all South Germany will be there . ''
Five minutes passed , and then ten , and then fifteen , and then fifteen more , while the Professor and his pupil sat stiff and stark upon the platform .
During that time not a sound was heard from the assembled savants , but every eye was bent upon the two pale faces , in search of the first signs of returning consciousness .
Nearly an hour had elapsed before the patient watchers were rewarded .
A faint flush came back to the cheeks of Professor von Baumgarten .
The soul was coming back once more to its earthly tenement .
Suddenly he stretched out his long thin arms , as one awaking from sleep , and rubbing his eyes , stood up from his chair and gazed about him as though he hardly realised where he was .
`` Tausend Teufel ! ''
he exclaimed , rapping out a tremendous South German oath , to the great astonishment of his audience and to the disgust of the Swedenborgian .
`` Where the Henker am I then , and what in thunder has occurred ?
Oh yes , I remember now .
One of these nonsensical mesmeric experiments .
There is no result this time , for I remember nothing at all since I became unconscious ; so you have had all your long journeys for nothing , my learned friends , and a very good joke too '' ; at which the Regius Professor of Physiology burst into a roar of laughter and slapped his thigh in a highly indecorous fashion .
The audience were so enraged at this unseemly behaviour on the part of their host , that there might have been a considerable disturbance , had it not been for the judicious interference of young Fritz von Hartmann , who had now recovered from his lethargy .
Stepping to the front of the platform , the young man apologised for the conduct of his companion .
`` I am sorry to say , '' he said , `` that he is a harum-scarum sort of fellow , although he appeared so grave at the commencement of this experiment .
He is still suffering from mesmeric reaction , and is hardly accountable for his words .
As to the experiment itself , I do not consider it to be a failure .
It is very possible that our spirits may have been communing in space during this hour ; but , unfortunately , our gross bodily memory is distinct from our spirit , and we can not recall what has occurred .
My energies shall now be devoted to devising some means by which spirits may be able to recollect what occurs to them in their free state , and I trust that when I have worked this out , I may have the pleasure of meeting you all once again in this hall , and demonstrating to you the result . ''
This address , coming from so young a student , caused considerable astonishment among the audience , and some were inclined to be offended , thinking that he assumed rather too much importance .
The majority , however , looked upon him as a young man of great promise , and many comparisons were made as they left the hall between his dignified conduct and the levity of his professor , who during the above remarks was laughing heartily in a corner , by no means abashed at the failure of the experiment .
Had the green man who is depicted upon the signpost of that well-known inn suddenly marched into the room and called for a bottle of wine , the students could not have been more amazed than they were by this unexpected entry of their revered professor .
They were so astonished that for a minute or two they glared at him in utter bewilderment without being able to make any reply to his hearty invitation .
`` Donner und Blitzen ! ''
shouted the Professor angrily .
`` What the deuce is the matter with you , then ?
You sit there like a set of stuck pigs staring at me .
What is it then ? ''
`` Why , Madame von Baumgarten , of course . ''
This last address , delivered with a perfect shriek of rage , had the effect of sending good Madame von Baumgarten flying along the passage and through the kitchen , where she locked herself up in the scullery and went into violent hysterics .
In the meantime Von Hartmann strode into the room and threw himself down upon the sofa in the worst of tempers .
`` Well , sonny , '' said the drunken man , surveying Von Hartmann and swaying about in front of him , `` where the Henker have I seen you before ?
I know you as well as I know myself .
Who the deuce are you ? ''
`` It matters little , '' the other said moodily .
`` Such as we are so must we stay .
My theory is triumphantly proved , but the cost is terrible . ''
`` From England , Captain , you must steer a Course directly to Madeira , Land the casks of salted beef , Then away to Teneriffe .
Pray be careful , cool , and wary With the merchants of Canary .
When you leave them make the most Of the trade winds to the coast .
Down it you shall sail as far As the land of Calabar , And from there you 'll onward go To Bonny and Fernando Po '' -- --
I was looking round for some weeks .
At the end of that time I found that I had by constant nibbling devoured a large number of the quills , and had spread the ink out to such advantage , what with blots , spills , and abortive commencements , that there appeared to be some everywhere except in the bottle .
As to the story itself , however , the facility of my youth had deserted me completely , and my mind remained a complete blank ; nor could I , do what I would , excite my sterile imagination to conjure up a single incident or character .
It was , then , about twenty minutes to ten on the night of the fourth of June , eighteen hundred and eighty-six , that , after disposing of a pint of beer and a Welsh rarebit for my supper , I seated myself in my arm-chair , cocked my feet upon a stool , and lit my pipe , as was my custom .
Both my pulse and my temperature were , as far as I know , normal at the time .
I would give the state of the barometer , but that unlucky instrument had experienced an unprecedented fall of forty-two inches -- from a nail to the ground -- and was not in a reliable condition .
We live in a scientific age , and I flatter myself that I move with the times .
`` Right , Tobias , right ! ''
cried another man , seated at my very elbow .
`` By my troth , I lost more flesh over poor Robin on his island , than had I the sweating sickness twice told .
The tale was well-nigh done when in swaggers my Lord of Rochester -- a merry gallant , and one whose word in matters literary might make or mar .
'How now , Defoe , ' quoth he , 'hast a tale on hand ? '
'Even so , your lordship , ' I returned .
'A right merry one , I trust , ' quoth he .
'Discourse unto me concerning thy heroine , a comely lass , Dan , or I mistake . '
'Nay , ' I replied , 'there is no heroine in the matter . '
'Split not your phrases , ' quoth he ; 'thou weighest every word like a scald attorney .
Speak to me of thy principal female character , be she heroine or no . '
'My lord , ' I answered , 'there is no female character . '
'Then out upon thyself and thy book too ! '
'Thou hadst best burn it ! '
-- and so out in great dudgeon , whilst I fell to mourning over my poor romance , which was thus , as it were , sentenced to death before its birth .
Yet there are a thousand now who have heard of Robin and his man Friday , to one who has heard of my Lord of Rochester . ''
The Johnstones were one of the Redesdale families , second cousins of the Armstrongs , and connected by marriage to -- -- ''
`` Our hero , being anxious to continue his journey , and learning that it would be some time before any conveyance would be ready , determined to push on alone mounted on his gallant grey steed .
Travelling was particularly dangerous at that time , for besides the usual perils which beset wayfarers , the southern parts of England were in a lawless and disturbed state which bordered on insurrection .
The young man , however , having loosened his sword in his sheath , so as to be ready for every eventuality , galloped cheerily upon his way , guiding himself to the best of his ability by the light of the rising moon .
`` He had not gone far before he realised that the cautions which had been impressed upon him by the landlord , and which he had been inclined to look upon as self-interested advice , were only too well justified .
At a spot where the road was particularly rough , and ran across some marsh land , he perceived a short distance from him a dark shadow , which his practised eye detected at once as a body of crouching men .
Reining up his horse within a few yards of the ambuscade , he wrapped his cloak round his bridle-arm and summoned the party to stand forth .
`` 'Blades and targets , comrades ! '
exclaimed a tall powerful man , springing into the centre of the road with several companions , and standing in front of the frightened horse .
'Who is this swashbuckler who summons his Majesty 's lieges from their repose ?
A very soldado , o' truth .
Hark ye , sir , or my lord , or thy grace , or whatsoever title your honour 's honour may be pleased to approve , thou must curb thy tongue play , or by the seven witches of Gambleside thou may find thyself in but a sorry plight . '
`` 'I prythee , then , that thou wilt expound to me who and what ye are , ' quoth our hero , 'and whether your purpose be such as an honest man may approve of .
As to your threats , they turn from my mind as your caitiffly weapons would shiver upon my hauberk from Milan . '
`` 'Spoken like a man ! '
cried he whom they addressed as Allen .
'Jack Cade will be right glad of such a recruit .
but thou hast the thews of a young ox ; and I swear , by the haft of my sword , that it might have gone ill with some of us hadst thou not listened to reason ! '
`` 'It is but just , ' said our hero .
`` 'Ay , but they give us such justice as the falcon gives the leveret ! '
'Down with them , I say -- down with every man of them !
Noble and judge , priest and king , down with them all ! '
`` You try your hand , James , '' cried several voices , and the author in question had got so far as to make an allusion to a solitary horseman who was approaching , when he was interrupted by a tall gentleman a little farther down with a slight stutter and a very nervous manner .
`` Our unfortunate hero had hardly stretched himself upon the straw with which his dungeon was littered , when a secret door opened in the wall and a venerable old man swept majestically into the apartment .
The prisoner gazed upon him with astonishment not unmixed with awe , for on his broad brow was printed the seal of much knowledge -- such knowledge as it is not granted to a son of man to know .
He was clad in a long white robe , crossed and chequered with mystic devices in the Arabic character , while a high scarlet tiara marked with the square and circle enhanced his venerable appearance .
'My son , ' he said , turning his piercing and yet dreamy gaze upon Sir Overbeck , 'all things lead to nothing , and nothing is the foundation of all things .
Why then should we exist ? '
`` Astounded at this weighty query , and at the philosophic demeanour of his visitor , our hero made shift to bid him welcome and to demand his name and quality .
As the old man answered him his voice rose and fell in musical cadences , like the sighing of the east wind , while an ethereal and aromatic vapour pervaded the apartment .
`` And very pretty , too , '' quoth Lawrence Sterne , with a malignant grin .
`` Pray sir , what language do you call it ? ''
Lytton was so enraged at these remarks , and at the favour with which they appeared to be received , that he endeavoured to stutter out some reply , and then , losing control of himself completely , picked up all his loose papers and strode out of the room , dropping pamphlets and speeches at every step .
This incident amused the company so much that they laughed for several minutes without cessation .
Gradually the sound of their laughter sounded more and more harshly in my ears , the lights on the table grew dim and the company more misty , until they and their symposium vanished away altogether .
I was sitting before the embers of what had been a roaring fire , but was now little more than a heap of grey ashes , and the merry laughter of the august company had changed to the recriminations of my wife , who was shaking me violently by the shoulder and exhorting me to choose some more seasonable spot for my slumbers .
So ended the wondrous adventures of Master Cyprian Overbeck Wells , but I still live in the hopes that in some future dream the great masters may themselves finish that which they have begun .
`` With a white horse in front ! ''
`` Ca n't you see the horn in front ?
It 's a unicorn .
I told you they were heraldic beasts .
Ca n't you recognise one ? ''
`` Well , hardly that , '' said Mrs. Delamere .
`` But I am always conscious of extreme sleepiness . ''
`` What a fun ! ''
Who has been thinking so hard upon a subject so bizarre ? ''
And then suddenly a sound came out of the darkness -- a low , sibilant sound , the quick , thin breathing of a woman .
Quicker and thinner yet it came , as between clenched teeth , to end in a loud gasp with a dull rustle of cloth .
`` What a fun ! ''
`` It is splendid ! ''
`` We can not reckon time as you do .
Our conditions are different . ''
`` We could not be happy if we were not busy . ''
`` Then to do good is your object ? ''
`` You see , Markham , that should answer your scruples . ''
It did , for my doubts had passed and only interest remained .
`` Do you meet the friends whom you have known on earth ? ''
`` You say they are dangerous .
Dangerous to body or mind ? ''
`` Any questions you would like to ask , Moir ? ''
`` You have no certain knowledge ? ''
The luminous fog drifted slowly off the table , and wavered and flickered across the room .
There in the farther and darkest corner it gathered and glowed , hardening down into a shining core -- a strange , shifty , luminous , and yet non-illuminating patch of radiance , bright itself , but throwing no rays into the darkness .
It had changed from a greenish-yellow to a dusky sullen red .
Then round this centre there coiled a dark , smoky substance , thickening , hardening , growing denser and blacker .
And then the light went out , smothered in that which had grown round it .
It was Harvey Deacon 's voice , and then came the sound of a blow upon some hard object .
And then ... And then ... how can I tell you what happened then ?
`` It is beyond me .
Oh , _mon Dieu_ , I can not stop it .
Where is the door ? ''
My hand , by good luck , lit upon the handle as I groped about in the darkness .
The hard-breathing , snorting , rushing creature tore past me and butted with a fearful crash against the oaken partition .
The instant that it had passed I turned the handle , and next moment we were all outside , and the door shut behind us .
From within came a horrible crashing and rending and stamping .
`` Run , run for your lives ! ''
We had taken refuge in the dining-room , and shut the heavy oak door .
We laid the senseless woman upon the sofa , and as we did so , Moir , the hard man of business , drooped and fainted across the hearth-rug .
Harvey Deacon was as white as a corpse , jerking and twitching like an epileptic .
With a crash we heard the studio door fly to pieces , and the snorting and stamping were in the passage , up and down , shaking the house with their fury .
The Frenchman had sunk his face on his hands , and sobbed like a frightened child .
`` It 's my wife !
Here , I 'm going out .
If it 's the Evil One himself I am going out ! ''
Mr. John Vansittart Smith , F.R.S.
, of 147-A Gower Street , was a man whose energy of purpose and clearness of thought might have placed him in the very first rank of scientific observers .
He was the victim , however , of a universal ambition which prompted him to aim at distinction in many subjects rather than pre-eminence in one .
In his early days he had shown an aptitude for zoology and for botany which caused his friends to look upon him as a second Darwin , but when a professorship was almost within his reach he had suddenly discontinued his studies and turned his whole attention to chemistry .
Here his researches upon the spectra of the metals had won him his fellowship in the Royal Society ; but again he played the coquette with his subject , and after a year 's absence from the laboratory he joined the Oriental Society , and delivered a paper on the Hieroglyphic and Demotic inscriptions of El Kab , thus giving a crowning example both of the versatility and of the inconstancy of his talents .
The warmest admirers of John Vansittart Smith could hardly claim for him that he was a handsome man .
His high-beaked nose and prominent chin had something of the same acute and incisive character which distinguished his intellect .
He held his head in a birdlike fashion , and birdlike , too , was the pecking motion with which , in conversation , he threw out his objections and retorts .
As he stood , with the high collar of his greatcoat raised to his ears , he might have seen from the reflection in the glass-case before him that his appearance was a singular one .
Yet it came upon him as a sudden jar when an English voice behind him exclaimed in very audible tones , `` What a queer-looking mortal ! ''
The student had a large amount of petty vanity in his composition which manifested itself by an ostentatious and overdone disregard of all personal considerations .
He straightened his lips and looked rigidly at the roll of papyrus , while his heart filled with bitterness against the whole race of travelling Britons .
The student sat down again in his quiet corner , and continued to work at his notes .
He had gained the information which he required from the papyri , and it only remained to write it down while it was still fresh in his memory .
For a time his pencil travelled rapidly over the paper , but soon the lines became less level , the words more blurred , and finally the pencil tinkled down upon the floor , and the head of the student dropped heavily forward upon his chest .
Tired out by his journey , he slept so soundly in his lonely post behind the door that neither the clanking civil guard , nor the footsteps of sightseers , nor even the loud hoarse bell which gives the signal for closing , were sufficient to arouse him .
The student was a man of veracity .
`` I confess , '' said he , `` that I have noticed your movements , and that they have aroused my curiosity and interest in the highest degree . ''
`` These are wild words , '' said Vansittart Smith .
He was becoming more and more convinced that he had to do with a madman .
`` There is no need to tell you of our wooing .
She came to love me even as I loved her .
I learned that Parmes had seen her before I did , and had shown her that he too loved her , but I could smile at his passion , for I knew that her heart was mine .
The white plague had come upon the city and many were stricken , but I laid my hands upon the sick and nursed them without fear or scathe .
She marvelled at my daring .
Then I told her my secret , and begged her that she would let me use my art upon her .
`` Why should I speak of that terrible time ?
For months I was mad , fevered , delirious , and yet I could not die .
Never did an Arab thirst after the sweet wells as I longed after death .
Could poison or steel have shortened the thread of my existence , I should soon have rejoined my love in the land with the narrow portal .
I tried , but it was of no avail .
The accursed influence was too strong upon me .
One night as I lay upon my couch , weak and weary , Parmes , the priest of Thoth , came to my chamber .
He stood in the circle of the lamplight , and he looked down upon me with eyes which were bright with a mad joy .
`` 'Why did you let the maiden die ? '
he asked ; 'why did you not strengthen her as you strengthened me ? '
`` 'Do you know whither I go ? '
So we three settled it , and had already risen to break up the meeting , when our silent companion opened his mouth for the first time .
`` We know it by analogy , '' said the chairman pompously .
`` All drugs increase their effect when they increase their dose ; for example -- for example -- -- ''
We three practical men burst out laughing .
We had known that our colleague was queer , but we never had thought that he would be as queer as this .
It was monstrous and incredible , but there it was .
There was no getting round it .
The man was there talking when he ought to have been dead .
We all sat staring in amazement , but United States Marshal Carpenter was not a man to be euchred so easily .
He motioned the others to one side , so that the prisoner was left standing alone .
`` Duncan Warner , '' said he slowly , `` you are here to play your part , and I am here to play mine .
Your game is to live if you can , and my game is to carry out the sentence of the law .
You 've beat us on electricity , I'll give you one there .
And you 've beat us on hanging , for you seem to thrive on it .
But it 's my turn to beat you now , for my duty has to be done . ''
`` Yes , it will take the wear of hundreds of years to exhaust the enormous nervous energy with which you have drenched him .
Electricity is life , and you have charged him with it to the utmost .
Perhaps in fifty years you might execute him , but I am not sanguine about it . ''
It was rather a fiasco , and for years we did n't talk more about it than we could help , but it 's no secret now , and I thought you might like to jot down the facts in your case-book .
`` I 'll keep her steady , '' said he , `` if you care to jump and chance it .
We can never get round that curve .
Better jump , sir . ''
If it had been the old car I should have jammed the gear-lever into the reverse , and seen what would happen .
I expect she would have stripped her gears or smashed up somehow , but it would have been a chance .
As it was , I was helpless .
Perkins tried to climb across , but you could n't do it going at that pace .
The wheels were whirring like a high wind and the big body creaking and groaning with the strain .
But the lights were brilliant , and one could steer to an inch .
I remember thinking what an awful and yet majestic sight we should appear to any one who met us .
It was a narrow road , and we were just a great , roaring , golden death to any one who came in our path .
When I became aware of my own existence once more I was among some brushwood in the shadow of the oaks upon the lodge side of the drive .
A man was standing beside me .
I imagined at first that it was Perkins , but when I looked again I saw that it was Stanley , a man whom I had known at college some years before , and for whom I had a really genuine affection .
There was always something peculiarly sympathetic to me in Stanley 's personality ; and I was proud to think that I had some similar influence upon him .
At the present moment I was surprised to see him , but I was like a man in a dream , giddy and shaken and quite prepared to take things as I found them without questioning them .
Stanley laid his hand upon my shoulder , and his touch was inexpressibly soothing .
I felt light and happy , in spite of all .
He looked at me with the same old gentle , wistful smile .
`` So are you , '' he answered .
It was ten o'clock on a bright spring night , and Abercrombie Smith lay back in his armchair , his feet upon the fender , and his briar-root pipe between his lips .
In a similar chair , and equally at his ease , there lounged on the other side of the fireplace his old school friend Jephro Hastie .
Both men were in flannels , for they had spent their evening upon the river , but apart from their dress no one could look at their hard-cut , alert faces without seeing that they were open-air men -- men whose minds and tastes turned naturally to all that was manly and robust .
Hastie , indeed , was stroke of his college boat , and Smith was an even better oar , but a coming examination had already cast its shadow over him and held him to his work , save for the few hours a week which health demanded .
A litter of medical books upon the table , with scattered bones , models , and anatomical plates , pointed to the extent as well as the nature of his studies , while a couple of single-sticks and a set of boxing-gloves above the mantelpiece hinted at the means by which , with Hastie 's help , he might take his exercise in its most compressed and least distant form .
They knew each other very well -- so well that they could sit now in that soothing silence which is the very highest development of companionship .
`` I 'm reading hard .
I think it best to leave it alone . ''
`` Just a nod when we pass .
`` Well , I 've known her ever since she was as long as that cherry-wood pipe , and I do n't like to see her taking risks .
And it is a risk .
And he has a beastly temper , a venomous temper .
You remember his row with Long Norton ? ''
`` Not I. I 'm supposed to be in training .
Here I 've been sitting gossiping when I ought to have been safely tucked up .
I 'll borrow your skull , if you can share it .
Williams has had mine for a month .
I 'll take the little bones of your ear , too , if you are sure you wo n't need them .
Never mind a bag , I can carry them very well under my arm .
Good-night , my son , and take my tip as to your neighbour . ''
When Hastie , bearing his anatomical plunder , had clattered off down the winding stair , Abercrombie Smith hurled his pipe into the wastepaper basket , and drawing his chair nearer to the lamp , plunged into a formidable green-covered volume , adorned with great coloured maps of that strange internal kingdom of which we are the hapless and helpless monarchs .
Though a freshman at Oxford , the student was not so in medicine , for he had worked for four years at Glasgow and at Berlin , and this coming examination would place him finally as a member of his profession .
With his firm mouth , broad forehead , and clear-cut , somewhat hard-featured face , he was a man who , if he had no brilliant talent , was yet so dogged , so patient , and so strong that he might in the end overtop a more showy genius .
A man who can hold his own among Scotchmen and North Germans is not a man to be easily set back .
Smith had left a name at Glasgow and at Berlin , and he was bent now upon doing as much at Oxford , if hard work and devotion could accomplish it .
`` Only a faint , I think , '' said the medical student .
`` Just give me a hand with him .
You take his feet .
Now on to the sofa .
Can you kick all those little wooden devils off ?
What a litter it is !
Now he will be all right if we undo his collar and give him some water .
What has he been up to at all ? ''
It was indeed a strange and most repellent face , for colour and outline were equally unnatural .
It was white , not with the ordinary pallor of fear , but with an absolutely bloodless white , like the under side of a sole .
He was very fat , but gave the impression of having at some time been considerably fatter , for his skin hung loosely in creases and folds , and was shot with a meshwork of wrinkles .
Short , stubbly brown hair bristled up from his scalp , with a pair of thick , wrinkled ears protruding at the sides .
His light grey eyes were still open , the pupils dilated and the balls projecting in a fixed and horrid stare .
It seemed to Smith as he looked down upon him that he had never seen Nature's danger signals flying so plainly upon a man 's countenance , and his thoughts turned more seriously to the warning which Hastie had given him an hour before .
`` What the deuce can have frightened him so ? ''
`` What does he want with the mummy , then ? ''
`` Oh , he 's a crank , you know .
It 's his hobby .
He knows more about these things than any man in England .
But I wish he would n't !
Ah , he's beginning to come to . ''
cried Smith , shaking him roughly by the shoulder .
`` Then I 'll come down with you and have a shakedown on your sofa .
I am so sorry to have disturbed you with my foolishness . ''
`` It is a wonderful thing , '' he cried , `` to feel that one can command powers of good and of evil -- a ministering angel or a demon of vengeance . ''
And again , of Monkhouse Lee , he said , -- '' Lee is a good fellow , an honest fellow , but he is without strength or ambition .
He would not make a fit partner for a man with a great enterprise .
He would not make a fit partner for me . ''
`` Well , I do n't know , sir .
His habits has changed of late .
He 's not the same man he used to be , though I make free to say that he was never quite one of my gentlemen , like Mr. Hastie or yourself , sir .
He 's took to talkin ' to himself something awful .
I wonder it do n't disturb you .
I do n't know what to make of him , sir . ''
`` Maybe so , sir ; but I heard it more'n once with my own ears . ''
`` Yes , I have n't had him long .
I must get rid of him .
He 's a great nuisance . ''
He picked up his cap and hurried from the room .
In spite of his appointment , Smith heard him re-enter his own chamber and lock his door upon the inside .
`` Nothing , '' Smith answered curtly .
For ten days the medical student confined himself so closely to his studies that he neither saw nor heard anything of either of the men beneath him .
At the hours when Bellingham had been accustomed to visit him , he took care to sport his oak , and though he more than once heard a knocking at his outer door , he resolutely refused to answer it .
One afternoon , however , he was descending the stairs when , just as he was passing it , Bellingham 's door flew open , and young Monkhouse Lee came out with his eyes sparkling and a dark flush of anger upon his olive cheeks .
Close at his heels followed Bellingham , his fat , unhealthy face all quivering with malignant passion .
`` You fool ! ''
`` You 'll be sorry . ''
`` So he is of mine .
Has n't he a beautiful style ?
Mullins was n't in it .
But come into the cottage .
It 's a little den of a place , but it is pleasant to work in during the summer months . ''
`` I saw that you had fallen out . ''
`` If there is real reason for warning , no promise can bind you .
If I see a rascal about to blow a place up with dynamite no pledge will stand in my way of preventing him . ''
`` But that is childish .
Why should I fear him , or any man ? ''
`` I ca n't tell you .
I can only entreat you to change your rooms .
You are in danger where you are .
I do n't even say that Bellingham would wish to injure you .
But it might happen , for he is a dangerous neighbour just now . ''
`` You know , then ? ''
`` My lips are sealed , '' he said .
`` I must not speak . ''
On the day which followed his interview with Monkhouse Lee , Smith shut up his books at a quarter past eight , the hour when he usually started for his friend 's house .
As he was leaving his room , however , his eyes chanced to fall upon one of the books which Bellingham had lent him , and his conscience pricked him for not having returned it .
However repellent the man might be , he should not be treated with discourtesy .
Taking the book , he walked downstairs and knocked at his neighbour 's door .
There was no answer ; but on turning the handle he found that it was unlocked .
Pleased at the thought of avoiding an interview , he stepped inside , and placed the book with his card upon the table .
The lamp was turned half down , but Smith could see the details of the room plainly enough .
It was all much as he had seen it before -- the frieze , the animal-headed gods , the hanging crocodile , and the table littered over with papers and dried leaves .
The mummy case stood upright against the wall , but the mummy itself was missing .
There was no sign of any second occupant of the room , and he felt as he withdrew that he had probably done Bellingham an injustice .
Had he a guilty secret to preserve , he would hardly leave his door open so that all the world might enter .
For ten minutes they worked in silence , inflating and depressing the chest of the unconscious man .
At the end of that time a shiver ran through his body , his lips trembled , and he opened his eyes .
The three students burst out into an irrepressible cheer .
`` He 's all right now , '' said his companion Harrington .
`` Heavens , what a fright I got !
I was reading here , and had gone out for a stroll as far as the river , when I heard a scream and a splash .
Out I ran , and by the time I could find him and fish him out , all life seemed to have gone .
Then Simpson could n't get a doctor , for he has a game-leg , and I had to run , and I do n't know what I 'd have done without you fellows .
That's right , old chap .
Monkhouse Lee had raised himself on his hands , and looked wildly about him .
`` How did you fall in ? ''
But it was little chat that they had upon their homeward path .
Smith's mind was too full of the incidents of the evening , the absence of the mummy from his neighbour 's rooms , the step that passed him on the stair , the reappearance -- the extraordinary , inexplicable reappearance of the grisly thing -- and then this attack upon Lee , corresponding so closely to the previous outrage upon another man against whom Bellingham bore a grudge .
All this settled in his thoughts , together with the many little incidents which had previously turned him against his neighbour , and the singular circumstances under which he was first called in to him .
What had been a dim suspicion , a vague , fantastic conjecture , had suddenly taken form , and stood out in his mind as a grim fact , a thing not to be denied .
And yet , how monstrous it was !
how entirely beyond all bounds of human experience .
An impartial judge , or even the friend who walked by his side , would simply tell him that his eyes had deceived him , that the mummy had been there all the time , that young Lee had tumbled into the river as any other man tumbles into a river , and that blue pill was the best thing for a disordered liver .
He felt that he would have said as much if the positions had been reversed .
And yet he could swear that Bellingham was a murderer at heart , and that he wielded a weapon such as no man had ever used in all the grim history of crime .
Bellingham 's door was shut as he passed , but glancing back when he was some distance from the turret , he saw his neighbour 's head at the window outlined against the lamp-light , his face pressed apparently against the glass as he gazed out into the darkness .
It was a blessing to be away from all contact with him , if but for a few hours , and Smith stepped out briskly , and breathed the soft spring air into his lungs .
The half-moon lay in the west between two Gothic pinnacles , and threw upon the silvered street a dark tracery from the stone-work above .
There was a brisk breeze , and light , fleecy clouds drifted swiftly across the sky .
Old 's was on the very border of the town , and in five minutes Smith found himself beyond the houses and between the hedges of a May-scented Oxfordshire lane .
It moved in the shadow of the hedge , silently and furtively , a dark , crouching figure , dimly visible against the black background .
Even as he gazed back at it , it had lessened its distance by twenty paces , and was fast closing upon him .
Out of the darkness he had a glimpse of a scraggy neck , and of two eyes that will ever haunt him in his dreams .
He turned , and with a cry of terror he ran for his life up the avenue .
There were the red lights , the signals of safety , almost within a stone's-throw of him .
He was a famous runner , but never had he run as he ran that night .
`` Well , really , Smith , '' remarked Peterson , `` it is well that I know you to be an abstemious man .
What in the world can have frightened you ? ''
`` I never heard of such a thing in my life , never ! ''
he said at last .
`` You have told me the facts .
Now tell me your inferences . ''
`` You can draw your own . ''
`` But I should like to hear yours .
You have thought over the matter , and I have not . ''
`` No , no ; it is out of the question . ''
`` And then Lee may have fallen into the river , and Norton been garrotted .
It is certainly a formidable indictment that you have against Bellingham ; but if you were to place it before a police magistrate , he would simply laugh in your face . ''
`` Yes ; I feel that a public duty rests upon me , and , besides , I must do it for my own safety , unless I choose to allow myself to be hunted by this beast out of the college , and that would be a little too feeble .
I have quite made up my mind what I shall do .
And first of all , may I use your paper and pens for an hour ? ''
`` Kindly sign this as a witness , '' he said .
What 's up ? ''
`` Have some coffee ? ''
`` And bring a heavy stick with you . ''
`` Here 's a hunting crop that would fell an ox . ''
`` There you are .
You seem to be fairly on the war trail .
`` You would murder me ? ''
`` You should lie down , '' I said , with some severity .
`` I 'll do it with pleasure , '' said I .
`` In fact , I would rather go by rail , for we shall have enough and to spare of the sea before we reach Colombo .
I believe too that you badly need a change .
Now , I should go and turn in , if I were you . ''
`` I give you my word , Atkinson , that I have not had a drain for two days .
It 's not drink .
I do n't know what it is .
I suppose you think this is drink . ''
He took up my hand in his burning grasp , and passed it over his own forehead .
His skin felt like a thin sheet of velvet beneath which lies a close-packed layer of small shot .
It was smooth to the touch at any one place , but to a finger passed along it , rough as a nutmeg-grater .
`` Did the gentleman seem ill ? ''
You said there was a third chance . ''
`` Doubtless he died at this hour , '' she whispered .
`` In hospital at Madeira .
I have read of such things .
His thoughts were with me .
His vision came to me .
Oh , my John , my dear , dear , lost John ! ''
She broke out suddenly into a storm of weeping , and I led her down into her cabin , where I left her with her sorrow .
That night a brisk breeze blew up from the east , and in the evening of the next day we passed the two islets of Los Desertos , and dropped anchor at sundown in the Bay of Funchal .
The _Eastern Star_ lay no great distance from us , with the quarantine flag flying from her main , and her Jack half-way up her peak .
That night we received permission from the authorities to move on board the _Eastern Star_ .
The captain , Hines , was waiting upon deck with confusion and grief contending upon his bluff face as he sought for words with which to break this heavy tidings , but she took the story from his lips .
`` I know that my husband is dead , '' she said .
`` He died yesterday night , about ten o'clock , in hospital at Madeira , did he not ? ''
`` It is nothing definite , then ? ''
`` But I love to share even the smallest trouble . ''
`` I have an absurd faculty , '' said he ; `` I do n't know that I have ever mentioned it to any one before .
But when imminent danger is threatening me I get these strange forebodings .
Of course it is absurd to-day in these peaceful surroundings .
It only shows how queerly these things work .
But it is the first time that it has deceived me . ''
`` When had you it before ? ''
`` What about the Tower ? ''
she asked , glancing upwards .
`` Surely that glorious air and the view from the top would drive the last wisps of cloud out of your mind . ''
`` It 's about time we did , '' said the commercial traveller , who was a red-faced , choleric person .
`` It 's a disgrace the way they hold us up .
I 'll write to the company . ''
`` We have a fine view , anyhow , '' said the Commander .
`` I say , hold on to the slack of my coat , Dolly .
I 'm going to look over and chance it .
Oh , Lord , it makes me sick and giddy !
There 's a horse down under , and it ai n't bigger than a mouse .
I do n't see any one lookin ' after us .
Where 's old Isaiah the prophet who came up with us ? ''
`` A real pot o ' ginger , I tell you .
It 's called 'On the Road to Ascot . '
I 've got a hat four foot across to sing it in . ''
`` Not the least .
But it 's awkward to be stuck here all the same .
I think I could jump across on to that girder .
Then perhaps I could see what is wrong . ''
`` No , no , Tom ; for goodness ' sake , do n't leave us ! ''
`` Some people have a nerve , '' said Billy .
`` Fancy jumping across a five-hundred-foot drop ! ''
`` It 's all right , '' he said , and a general sigh of relief broke from his strange comrades at his words .
`` There is some one above us setting things right . ''
`` All right , he 's coming , '' said Stangate to his startled companions .
`` It 's all right , Mary .
Do n't be frightened , any of you .
It 's absurd to suppose he would really weaken the cord that holds us . ''
The workman stirred suddenly into sinister life .
His dark face broke into writhing lines of passion , and his fierce eyes glowed like embers , while he shook one long arm in the air .
`` By George , the hawser is going ! ''
I 'm coming over to see to it . ''
`` The voice of the devil , '' said Stangate .
`` What is the sin of this lady , or of these others , that you should seek their lives ? ''
`` It 's not two feet from the side girder , '' cried the officer .
I 'll hold this devil off ! ''
He had seized a stout stick from the commercial traveller and faced the madman , daring him to spring across .
`` Well , '' I remonstrated , `` if you choose to break laws and assault people , you ca n't expect it to be looked over on account of former services . ''
You 've read of Bluemansdyke ( he began , with some pride in his tone ) .
We made it hot while it lasted ; but they ran us to earth at last , and a trap called Braxton , with a damned Yankee , took the lot of us .
That was in New Zealand , of course , and they took us down to Dunedin , and there they were convicted and hanged .
One and all they put up their hands in the dock , and cursed me till your blood would have run cold to hear them -- which was scurvy treatment , seeing that we had all been pals together ; but they were a blackguard lot , and thought only of themselves .
I think it is as well that they were hung .
He gave a sort of a smile .
`` Should you like very much to get out ? ''
`` D 'ye call this a civilized land , '' I cried , `` and let a man be murdered in cold blood in open daylight ? ''
I packed up the few things I had , and was smuggled out by a back door , just before daybreak .
I hurried down , took my ticket under the name of Isaac Smith , and got safely aboard the Melbourne boat .
I remember hearing her screw grinding into the water as the warps were cast loose , and looking back at the lights of Dunedin as I leaned upon the bulwarks , with the pleasant thought that I was leaving them behind me forever .
It seemed to me that a new world was before me , and that all my troubles had been cast off .
I went down below and had some coffee , and came up again feeling better than I had done since the morning that I woke to find that cursed Irishman that took me standing over me with a six-shooter .
Day had dawned by that time , and we were steaming along by the coast , well out of sight of Dunedin .
I loafed about for a couple of hours , and when the sun got well up some of the other passengers came on deck and joined me .
One of them , a little perky sort of fellow , took a good long look at me , and then came over and began talking .
`` Pretty fair , '' says I .
`` That was a bad job , '' I says .
`` What 's that ? ''
says I , carelessly .
`` Who is it ? ''
asked the steward and half a dozen others in a breath .
I changed my opinion before we got to the land .
I had reckoned on the shore being deserted , and that I might make my way inland ; but the ship had stopped too near the Heads , and a dozen beach-combers and such like had come down to the water 's edge and were staring at us , wondering what the boat was after .
When we got to the edge of the surf the cockswain hailed them , and after singing out who I was , he and his men threw me into the water .
You may well look surprised -- neck and crop into ten feet of water , with sharks as thick as green parrots in the bush , and I heard them laughing as I floundered to the shore .
`` Well , mate , '' says the man with the hat , `` we 've been looking out for you some time in these parts . ''
`` Ranger be damned ! ''
`` We 're going to hang you for peaching against your pals ; and that 's an end of the palaver . ''
The governor was n't to be done , though .
He was determined to get rid of me , and I was equally anxious to see the last of him .
He waited a week or so until the excitement had begun to die away , and then he smuggled me aboard a three-masted schooner bound to Sydney with tallow and hides .
It was not long before my suspicions were confirmed .
A boat darted out from the side of the river , and a tall cove with a long black beard came aboard .
I heard him ask the mate whether they did n't need a mud-pilot to take them up in the reaches , but it seemed to me that he was a man who would know a deal more about handcuffs than he did about steering , so I kept away from him .
He came across the deck , however , and made some remark to me , taking a good look at me the while .
I do n't like inquisitive people at any time , but an inquisitive stranger with glue about the roots of his beard is the worst of all to stand , especially under the circumstances .
I began to feel that it was time for me to go .
There were a couple of other chaps in the carriage , innocent-looking young beggars , both of them .
They began speaking about this and that , while I sat quiet in the corner and listened .
Then they started on England and foreign countries , and such like .
Look ye now , doctor , this is a fact .
One of them begins jawing about the justice of England's laws .
`` It 's all fair and above-board , '' says he ; `` there ai n't any secret police , nor spying , like they have abroad , '' and a lot more of the same sort of wash. Rather rough on me , was n't it , listening to the damned young fool , with the police following me about like my shadow ?
`` How long are you going to keep it up ? ''
He seemed a bit flustered for a moment , but then he saw there was no use beating about the bush , so he answered straight :
He grinned all over his ugly face when I said this .
`` I 've my order to stick fast to you until you do , '' he answered .
He agreed to this , and we went over to Southampton the very next day , where he saw me safely off once more .
I took a passage round to Adelaide , where no one was likely to know me ; and there I settled , right under the nose of the police .
I 'd been there ever since , leading a quiet life , but for little difficulties like the one I 'm in for now , and for that devil , Tattooed Tom , of Hawkesbury .
I do n't know what made me tell you all this , doctor , unless it is that being lonely makes a man inclined to jaw when he gets a chance .
Just you take warning from me , though .
Never put yourself out to serve your country ; for your country will do precious little for you .
Just you let them look after their own affairs ; and if they find difficulty in hanging a set of scoundrels , never mind chipping in , but let them alone to do as best they can .
Maybe they 'll remember how they treated me after I 'm dead , and be sorry for neglecting me , I was rude to you when you came in , and swore a trifle promiscuous : but do n't you mind me , it 's only my way .
You 'll allow , though , that I have cause to be a bit touchy now and again when I think of all that 's passed .
You 're not going , are you ?
Well , if you must , you must ; but I hope you will look me up at odd times when you are going your rounds .
Oh , I say , you 've left the balance of that cake of tobacco behind you , have n't you ?
No ; it 's in your pocket -- that 's all right .
Thank ye , doctor , you 're a good sort , and as quick at a hint as any man I 've met .
Maloney gave a wild cry of triumph , which brought the blood welling out from between his lips .
`` Here , boys , '' he gasped to the little group around him .
`` There 's money in my inside pocket .
There 's nothing mean about me .
I 'd drink with you , but I 'm going .
Give the doc my share , for he 's as good -- '' Here his head fell back with a thud , his eye glazed , and the soul of Wolf Tone Maloney , forger , convict , ranger , murderer , and government peach , drifted away into the Great Unknown .
UNCLE BERNAC A MEMORY OF THE EMPIRE CONTENTS Chapter I .
THE COAST OF FRANCE II .
THE RUINED COTTAGE IV .
MEN OF THE NIGHT V. THE LAW VI .
THE SECRET PASSAGE VII .
THE OWNER OF GROSBOIS VIII .
THE CAMP OF BOULOGNE X .
THE MAN OF ACTION XIII .
THE MAN OF DREAMS XIV .
THE RECEPTION OF THE EMPRESS XVI .
THE LIBRARY OF GROSBOIS XVII .
THE END CHAPTER I THE COAST OF FRANCE I dare say that I had already read my uncle 's letter a hundred times , and I am sure that I knew it by heart .
None the less I took it out of my pocket , and , sitting on the side of the lugger , I went over it again with as much attention as if it were for the first time .
It was written in a prim , angular hand , such as one might expect from a man who had begun life as a village attorney , and it was addressed to Louis de Laval , to the care of William Hargreaves , of the Green Man in Ashford , Kent .
The landlord had many a hogshead of untaxed French brandy from the Normandy coast , and the letter had found its way by the same hands .
'My dear nephew Louis , ' said the letter , 'now that your father is dead , and that you are alone in the world , I am sure that you will not wish to carry on the feud which has existed between the two halves of the family .
At the time of the troubles your father was drawn towards the side of the King , and I towards that of the people , and it ended , as you know , by his having to fly from the country , and by my becoming the possessor of the estates of Grosbois .
No doubt it is very hard that you should find yourself in a different position to your ancestors , but I am sure that you would rather that the land should be held by a Bernac than by a stranger .
From the brother of your mother you will at least always meet with sympathy and consideration .
'And now I have some advice for you .
You know that I have always been a Republican , but it has become evident to me that there is no use in fighting against fate , and that Napoleon 's power is far too great to be shaken .
This being so , I have tried to serve him , for it is well to howl when you are among wolves .
I have been able to do so much for him that he has become my very good friend , so that I may ask him what I like in return .
He is now , as you are probably aware , with the army at Boulogne , within a few miles of Grosbois .
If you will come over at once he will certainly forget the hostility of your father in consideration of the services of your uncle .
It is true that your name is still proscribed , but my influence with the Emperor will set that matter right .
Come to me , then , come at once , and come with confidence .
'Your uncle , 'C .
So much for the letter , but it was the outside which had puzzled me most .
A seal of red wax had been affixed at either end , and my uncle had apparently used his thumb as a signet .
One could see the little rippling edges of a coarse skin imprinted upon the wax .
And then above one of the seals there was written in English the two words , 'Don't come . '
It was hastily scrawled , and whether by a man or a woman it was impossible to say ; but there it stared me in the face , that sinister addition to an invitation .
'Do n't come ! '
Had it been added by this unknown uncle of mine on account of some sudden change in his plans ?
Surely that was inconceivable , for why in that case should he send the invitation at all ?
Or was it placed there by some one else who wished to warn me from accepting this offer of hospitality ?
The letter was in French .
The warning was in English .
Could it have been added in England ?
But the seals were unbroken , and how could any one in England know what were the contents of the letter ?
And then , as I sat there with the big sail humming like a shell above my head and the green water hissing beside me , I thought over all that I had heard of this uncle of mine .
My father , the descendant of one of the proudest and oldest families in France , had chosen beauty and virtue rather than rank in his wife .
Never for an hour had she given him cause to regret it ; but this lawyer brother of hers had , as I understood , offended my father by his slavish obsequiousness in days of prosperity and his venomous enmity in the days of trouble .
He had hounded on the peasants until my family had been compelled to fly from the country , and had afterwards aided Robespierre in his worst excesses , receiving as a reward the castle and estate of Grosbois , which was our own .
At the fall of Robespierre he had succeeded in conciliating Barras , and through every successive change he still managed to gain a fresh tenure of the property .
Now it appeared from his letter that the new Emperor of France had also taken his part , though why he should befriend a man with such a history , and what service my Republican uncle could possibly render to him , were matters upon which I could form no opinion .
And now you will ask me , no doubt , why I should accept the invitation of such a man -- a man whom my father had always stigmatised as a usurper and a traitor .
It is easier to speak of it now than then , but the fact was that we of the new generation felt it very irksome and difficult to carry on the bitter quarrels of the last .
To the older _emigres_ the clock of time seemed to have stopped in the year 1792 , and they remained for ever with the loves and the hatreds of that era fixed indelibly upon their souls .
They had been burned into them by the fiery furnace through which they had passed .
But we , who had grown up upon a strange soil , understood that the world had moved , and that new issues had arisen .
We were inclined to forget these feuds of the last generation .
France to us was no longer the murderous land of the _sans-culotte_ and the guillotine basket ; it was rather the glorious queen of war , attacked by all and conquering all , but still so hard pressed that her scattered sons could hear her call to arms for ever sounding in their ears .
It was that call more than my uncle 's letter which was taking me over the waters of the Channel .
For long my heart had been with my country in her struggle , and yet while my father lived I had never dared to say so ; for to him , who had served under Conde and fought at Quiberon , it would have seemed the blackest treason .
But after his death there was no reason why I should not return to the land of my birth , and my desire was the stronger because Eugenie -- the same Eugenie who has been thirty years my wife -- was of the same way of thinking as myself .
Her parents were a branch of the de Choiseuls , and their prejudices were even stronger than those of my father .
Little did they think what was passing in the minds of their children .
Many a time when they were mourning a French victory in the parlour we were both capering with joy in the garden .
There was a little window , all choked round with laurel bushes , in the corner of the bare brick house , and there we used to meet at night , the dearer to each other from our difference with all who surrounded us .
I would tell her my ambitions ; she would strengthen them by her enthusiasm .
And so all was ready when the time came .
But there was another reason besides the death of my father and the receipt of this letter from my uncle .
Ashford was becoming too hot to hold me .
I will say this for the English , that they were very generous hosts to the French emigrants .
There was not one of us who did not carry away a kindly remembrance of the land and its people .
But in every country there are overbearing , swaggering folk , and even in quiet , sleepy Ashford we were plagued by them .
There was one young Kentish squire , Farley was his name , who had earned a reputation in the town as a bully and a roisterer .
He could not meet one of us without uttering insults not merely against the present French Government , which might have been excusable in an English patriot , but against France itself and all Frenchmen .
Often we were forced to be deaf in his presence , but at last his conduct became so intolerable that I determined to teach him a lesson .
There were several of us in the coffee-room at the Green Man one evening , and he , full of wine and malice , was heaping insults upon the French , his eyes creeping round to me every moment to see how I was taking it .
'Now , Monsieur de Laval , ' he cried , putting his rude hand upon my shoulder , 'here is a toast for you to drink .
This is to the arm of Nelson which strikes down the French . '
He stood leering at me to see if I would drink it .
'Well , sir , ' said I , 'I will drink your toast if you will drink mine in return . '
'Come on , then ! '
'Now , monsieur , let us have your toast , ' said he .
'Fill your glass , then , ' said I .
'It is full now . '
'Well , then , here 's to the cannon-ball which carried off that arm ! '
In an instant I had a glass of port wine running down my face , and within an hour a meeting had been arranged .
I shot him through the shoulder , and that night , when I came to the little window , Eugenie plucked off some of the laurel leaves and stuck them in my hair .
There were no legal proceedings about the duel , but it made my position a little difficult in the town , and it will explain , with other things , why I had no hesitation in accepting my unknown uncle 's invitation , in spite of the singular addition which I found upon the cover .
If he had indeed sufficient influence with the Emperor to remove the proscription which was attached to our name , then the only barrier which shut me off from my country would be demolished .
You must picture me all this time as sitting upon the side of the lugger and turning my prospects and my position over in my head .
My reverie was interrupted by the heavy hand of the English skipper dropping abruptly upon my arm .
I do not inherit the politics of the aristocrats , but I have never lost their sense of personal dignity .
I gently pushed away his polluting hand , and I remarked that we were still a long way from the shore .
'Well , 't is no business of mine , sir , ' he answered .
'There are some trades that had best not even be spoken about . '
'You think that I am a conspirator ? '
'Well , master , since you have put a name to it .
Lor ' love you , sir , we 're used to it . '
'An escaped prisoner , then ? '
'There 's Boney himself , ' said he .
You who live in a quieter age can not conceive the thrill which these simple words sent through me .
It was but ten years since we had first heard of this man with the curious Italian name -- think of it , ten years , the time that it takes for a private to become a non-commissioned officer , or a clerk to win a fifty-pound advance in his salary .
He had sprung in an instant out of nothing into everything .
One month people were asking who he was , the next he had broken out in the north of Italy like the plague ; Venice and Genoa withered at the touch of this swarthy ill-nourished boy .
He cowed the soldiers in the field , and he outwitted the statesmen in the council chamber .
With a frenzy of energy he rushed to the east , and then , while men were still marvelling at the way in which he had converted Egypt into a French department , he was back again in Italy and had beaten Austria for the second time to the earth .
He travelled as quickly as the rumour of his coming ; and where he came there were new victories , new combinations , the crackling of old systems and the blurring of ancient lines of frontier .
Holland , Savoy , Switzerland -- they were become mere names upon the map .
France was eating into Europe in every direction .
They had made him Emperor , this beardless artillery officer , and without an effort he had crushed down those Republicans before whom the oldest king and the proudest nobility of Europe had been helpless .
So it came about that we , who watched him dart from place to place like the shuttle of destiny , and who heard his name always in connection with some new achievement and some new success , had come at last to look upon him as something more than human , something monstrous , overshadowing France and menacing Europe .
His giant presence loomed over the continent , and so deep was the impression which his fame had made in my mind that , when the English sailor pointed confidently over the darkening waters , and cried 'There 's Boney ! '
I looked up for the instant with a foolish expectation of seeing some gigantic figure , some elemental creature , dark , inchoate , and threatening , brooding over the waters of the Channel .
Even now , after the long gap of years and the knowledge of his downfall , that great man casts his spell upon you , but all that you read and all that you hear can not give you an idea of what his name meant in the days when he was at the summit of his career .
But the boat swerved at the sight of us , like a shying horse , and was off in another direction as fast as eight frantic oars could drive her .
The seamen stared after her and wiped their brows .
'Her conscience do n't seem much easier than our own , ' said one of them .
'I made sure it was the preventives . '
'You will find little here to tempt you to stay , ' said he at last .
I took a few steps back , and he then opened the door sufficiently to allow his head to come through .
He said nothing , but he looked at me for a long time in a very searching manner .
'What is your name ? '
'You can not come in here , ' said he .
He stepped a pace or two from the door in order to point the way for me , and then turned upon his heel .
I had already taken a stride or two away from him and his inhospitable hut , when he suddenly called after me .
I contented myself by answering that I was not , by which reticence I could see that I only excited his curiosity the more .
As to his account of himself , I read a lie in those tell-tale eyes all the time that he was talking .
As I looked at him now in the full light of the lamp and the fire , I could see that he was even more good-looking than I had at first thought , but with a type of beauty which has never been to my taste .
His features were so refined as to be almost effeminate , and so regular that they would have been perfect if it had not been for that ill-fitting , slabbing mouth .
It was a clever , and yet it was a weak face , full of a sort of fickle enthusiasm and feeble impulsiveness .
I felt that the more I knew him the less reason I should probably find either to like him or to fear him , and in my first conclusion I was right , although I had occasion to change my views upon the second .
It was on my lips to return the remark , but I refrained .
I asked , wavering between my distrust and my curiosity .
'Well , ' said he , snatching up his black broad-brimmed hat and running very briskly to the door , 'I am sure that you will not refuse me my request , and I must delay no longer or I shall never get my business finished . '
He closed the door hurriedly behind him , and I heard the splashing of his foot-steps until they were lost in the howling of the gale .
It was a very broad , old-fashioned cottage chimney , so that standing on one side I was not inconvenienced either by the heat or by the smoke , and the bright glare from below showed me in an instant that for which I sought .
There was a recess at the back , caused by the fall or removal of one of the stones , and in this was lying a small bundle .
There could not be the least doubt that it was this which the fellow had striven so frantically to conceal upon the first alarm of the approach of a stranger .
I took it down and held it to the light .
It was a small square of yellow glazed cloth tied round with white tape .
Upon my opening it a number of letters appeared , and a single large paper folded up .
The addresses upon the letters took my breath away .
The first that I glanced at was to Citizen Talleyrand .
The others were in the Republican style addressed to Citizen Fouche , to Citizen Soult , to Citizen MacDonald , to Citizen Berthier , and so on through the whole list of famous names in war and in diplomacy who were the pillars of the new Empire .
What in the world could this pretended merchant of coffee have to write to all these great notables about ?
The other paper would explain , no doubt .
I laid the letters upon the shelf and I unfolded the paper which had been enclosed with them .
It did not take more than the opening sentence to convince me that the salt-marsh outside might prove to be a very much safer place than this accursed cottage .
'Quarter of an inch does it and no mark , ' said the thunderous voice .
'You can trust my old turn . '
My neck was so twisted that I could not see any of these people who were discussing my fate .
I could only lie and listen .
'We owe it to ourselves to put it out of his power to harm us .
Let him sit up , Toussac , for there is no possibility of his escaping . '
'The devil take our own safety ! '
'What has that to do with the matter ?
We imperil the success of our plans -- that is of more importance . '
'No , no , Toussac , stop ! '
cried the thin man , his voice rising from its soft tones to a perfect scream as the giant 's hairy hand gripped me by the chin once more .
'I appeal to you , Lucien , upon practical as well as upon moral grounds , not to let this deed be done .
Consider that if things should go against us this will cut us off from all hopes of mercy .
'Who are you , to set your wills up against mine ?
Let him go , Toussac !
Take your thumb from his chin !
I wo n't have it done , I tell you ! '
Then , as he saw by the inflexible faces of his companions that blustering would not help him , he turned suddenly to tones of entreaty .
I 'll make you a promise ! '
'Listen to me , Lucien !
Let me examine him !
If he is a police spy he shall die !
You may have him then , Toussac .
But if he is only a harmless traveller , who has blundered in here by an evil chance , and who has been led by a foolish curiosity to inquire into our business , then you will leave him to me . '
I remembered that boat , which had been the first thing which I had seen upon the coast of France .
How little I had thought what it would mean to me !
'Very good , ' said my champion .
'There 's an excellent little cupboard here which makes as fine a prison as one could wish for .
Let us put him in here , and pass on to business .
We can deal with him when we have finished . '
'And have him overhear all that we say , ' said Lesage .
'I heard nothing , ' said Toussac .
Lesage cowered up against the table , with his agonised eyes fixed upon the blue-black square of the door .
The man who had befriended me still swayed his body about with a singular half-smile upon his face .
His skinny hand was twitching at the frill of his shirt , and I conjectured that he held some weapon concealed there .
Toussac stood between them and the open door , and , much as I feared and loathed him , I could not take my eyes from his gallant figure .
As to myself , I was so much occupied by the singular drama before me , and by the impending fate of those three men of the cottage , that all thought of my own fortunes had passed completely out of my mind .
On this mean stage a terrible all-absorbing drama was being played , and I , crouching in a squalid recess , was to be the sole spectator of it .
I could but hold my breath and wait and watch .
And suddenly I became conscious that they could all three see something which was invisible to me .
I read it from their tense faces and their staring eyes .
Toussac swung his axe over his shoulder and poised himself for a blow .
Lesage cowered away and put one hand between his eyes and the open door .
The other ceased swinging his spindle legs and sat like a little brown image upon the edge of his box .
There was a moist pattering of feet , a yellow streak shot through the doorway , and Toussac lashed at it as I have seen an English cricketer strike at a ball .
His aim was true , for he buried the head of the hatchet in the creature 's throat , but the force of his blow shattered his weapon , and the weight of the hound carried him backwards on to the floor .
Over they rolled and over , the hairy man and the hairy dog , growling and worrying in a bestial combat .
He was fumbling at the animal 's throat , and I could not see what he was doing , until it gave a sudden sharp yelp of pain , and there was a rending sound like the tearing of canvas .
The man staggered up with his hands dripping , and the tawny mass with the blotch of crimson lay motionless upon the floor .
cried Toussac in a voice of thunder , 'now ! '
and he rushed from the hut .
'I think , friend Lucien , ' said he in his quiet voice , 'that you had best stay where you are . '
Lesage looked at him with amazement gradually replacing terror upon his pallid features .
'Oh , yes , I think I do , ' said the other , smiling .
'You poor miserable dupe ! '
'You , Charles , you ! '
he stammered , hawking up each word .
'Yes , me , ' said the other , smiling grimly .
'I thought it would surprise you . '
'But you were the most republican of us all .
We were none of us advanced enough for you .
How often have we gathered round you , Charles , to listen to your philosophy !
And there is Sibylle , too !
Do n't tell me that Sibylle was a police spy also .
But you are joking , Charles .
Say that you are joking ! '
'I did that because I wished to be the one to throw light upon it all -- and at the proper moment . '
'Well , ' said he , 'well ? '
A younger officer with two troopers at his heels came clanking in to the hut , and the wretched creature , half swooning , was dragged out into the darkness .
'It is a quarter of an hour since he got away . '
'I had rather no names were mentioned , ' said the other abruptly .
'I can well understand that , ' General Savary answered with a sneer .
'Are there any papers in the cottage ? '
'Yet he is an absolutely honest man , which is no very common thing in these days , ' said he .
'He is one of those who , at the outbreak of the Revolution , embraced it with the whole strength of his simple nature .
He believed what the writers and the speakers told him , and he was convinced that , after a little disturbance and a few necessary executions , France was to become a heaven upon earth , the centre of peace and comfort and brotherly love .
A good many people got those fine ideas into their heads , but the heads have mostly dropped into the sawdust-basket by this time .
Toussac was true to them , and when instead of peace he found war , instead of comfort a grinding poverty , and instead of equality an Empire , it drove him mad .
He became the fierce creature you see , with the one idea of devoting his huge body and giant 's strength to the destruction of those who had interfered with his ideal .
He is fearless , persevering , and implacable .
I have no doubt at all that he will kill me for the part that I have played to-night . '
I turned round and looked carefully in every direction , but was unable to see one .
'Never mind , ' said he .
'You go first , and I will follow . '
'Go on until you come to a step down , ' said he .
'We shall have more room there , and we can strike a light . '
I looked round me , and gradually the spacious room , with the weapons upon the wall , and the deer 's heads , came dimly back to my memory .
That view through the oriel window , too , with the clump of oaks in the sloping park , and the sea in the distance beyond , I had certainly seen it before .
It was true then , and I was in our own castle of Grosbois , and this dreadful man in the snuff-coloured coat , this sinister plotter with the death's-head face , was the man whom I had heard my poor father curse so often , the man who had ousted him from his own property and installed himself in his place .
And yet I could not forget that it was he also who , at some risk to himself , had saved me the night before , and my soul was again torn between my gratitude and my repulsion .
She seemed startled by this retort of his , and rose as if she would follow him .
Then she tossed her head and laughed incredulously .
'Yes , I had . '
'You advise me to leave ? '
'Without losing an instant . '
Again she hesitated , and then , with a reckless motion like one who throws prudence to the winds , she turned upon me .
'It is from my father , ' said she .
'I shall never be happy until I see her . '
'You will forgive me for my rudeness , ' said she .
'I see that we are to be allies and not enemies . '
'I have some papers of importance to look over , ' said he .
'For an hour or so I shall be engaged .
I can guess that Louis would like to see the old place once again , and I am sure that he could not have a better guide than you , Sibylle , if you will take him over it . '
'Do not judge my father by his words , but by his deeds , ' said she , with a warning finger upraised ; 'and , above all , Cousin Louis , unless you wish to have my life upon your conscience , never let him suspect that I have said a word to set you on your guard . '
'You must think that I speak very freely to you , since I have only known you a few hours , Cousin Louis , ' said she .
'That thick English air has dimmed your wits , cousin , ' said she , shaking her stately head at me .
'But I can speak freely now that I know that this plan would be as hateful to you as to me .
You must know , then , that if my father could have married us he would have united all claims to the succession of Grosbois .
Then , come what might -- Bourbon or Buonaparte -- nothing could shake his position . '
'I have -- I have seen him , ' I stammered .
'I will know here and now , ' she cried .
'What have you done with Lucien ? '
'My message was to you , Monsieur de Laval , ' said the young hussar , turning his back contemptuously upon my uncle .
'The Emperor has sent me to bring you to him at once at the camp at Boulogne . '
'I ask nothing better , ' I cried .
'The Emperor 's commissions , sir , are not carried out in such a manner , ' said the young hussar sternly .
'I have already wasted too much time .
We must be upon our way in five minutes . '
'There is one matter that I wish to speak to you about before you go .
Since my time is so short you will forgive me if I introduce it without preamble .
You have seen your cousin Sibylle , and though her behaviour this morning is such as to prejudice you against her , yet I can assure you that she is a very amiable girl .
She spoke just now as if she had mentioned the plan which I had conceived to you .
I confess to you that I can not imagine anything more convenient than that we should unite in order to settle once for all every question as to which branch of the family shall hold the estates . '
'I fear that I have the English idea of marriage , that it should go by love and not by convenience .
But in any case your scheme is out of the question , for my own affections are pledged to a young lady in England . '
A group of hussars were standing by their horses ' heads in the gateway .
In a few minutes I had packed my scanty possessions , and I was hastening with them down the corridor when a chill struck suddenly through my heart at the thought of my cousin Sibylle .
How could I leave her alone with this grim companion in the old castle ?
Had she not herself told me that her very life might be at stake ?
I had stopped in my perplexity , and suddenly there was a patter of feet , and there she was running towards me .
'Your only chance was to get away from him .
But beware , for he will do you an injury if he can ! '
The swaggering vanity of the fellow amused me , for he cocked his busby , swung the blue dolman which hung from his shoulder , sat his horse , and clattered his scabbard in a manner which told of his boyish delight and pride in himself and his regiment .
As I looked at his lithe figure and his fearless bearing , I could quite imagine that he did himself no more than justice , while his frank smile and his merry blue eyes assured me that he would prove a good comrade .
He had himself been taking observations of me , for he suddenly placed his hand upon my knee as we rode side by side .
'I am very sorry for Mademoiselle your cousin , ' said he , 'but a fine girl should not love such a man when there are so many gallant soldiers upon the country side .
I hear that the Emperor is weary of these endless plottings , and that an example will be made of him . '
'That is the Emperor 's quarters , and the smaller tent there is the headquarters of General Ney , who commands this corps .
You understand that this is only one of several armies dotted along from Dunkirk in the north to this , which is the most southerly .
The Emperor goes from one to the other , inspecting each in its turn , but this is the main body , and contains most of the picked troops , so that it is we who see most of him , especially now that the Empress and the Court have come to Pont de Briques .
He is in there at the present moment , ' he added in a hushed voice , pointing to the great white tent in the centre .
'The men with the yellow facings ? '
'How do you know that ? '
'I am of the same blood as the de Rohans and the Montmorencies . '
'And the general next him ? '
'Why does he carry his head all upon one side ? '
'That is General Lannes , and he carries his head upon his left shoulder because he was shot through the neck at the siege of St. Jean d'Acre .
He is a Gascon , like myself , and I fear that he gives some ground to those who accuse my countrymen of being a little talkative and quarrelsome .
But monsieur smiles ? '
'And who is the stern-looking man , leaning on the Oriental sword ? '
And yet , fierce and masterful as these men were , having , as Auguereau boasted , fear neither of God nor of the devil , there was something which thrilled or cowed them in the pale smile or black frown of the little man who ruled them .
For , as I watched them , there suddenly came over the assembly a start and hush such as you see in a boys ' school when the master enters unexpectedly , and there near the open doors of his headquarters stood the master himself .
Even without that sudden silence , and the scramble to their feet of those upon the benches , I felt that I should have known instantly that he was present .
There was a pale luminosity about his ivory face which drew the eye towards it , and though his dress might be the plainest of a hundred , his appearance would be the first which one would notice .
There he was , with his little plump , heavy-shouldered figure , his green coat with the red collar and cuffs , his white , well-formed legs , his sword with the gilt hilt and the tortoise-shell scabbard .
His head was uncovered , showing his thin hair of a ruddy chestnut colour .
Under one arm was the flat cocked hat with the twopenny tricolour rosette , which was already reproduced in his pictures .
In his right hand he held a little riding switch with a metal head .
He walked slowly forward , his face immutable , his eyes fixed steadily before him , measured , inexorable , the very personification of Destiny .
There was a hush amidst all the great audience ; such a heavy silence as comes only when many are waiting , and all with bated breath .
The Emperor 's face was terrible .
His cheeks were of a greenish , livid tint , and there was a singular rotary movement of the muscles of his forehead .
It was the countenance of an epileptic .
He raised the whip to his shoulder , and took a step towards the admiral .
For a few instants the tension was terrible .
Then Napoleon brought the whip down with a sharp crack against his own thigh .
'He is here , Sire . '
'That is how it is managed , ' said my companion , as we turned from the tent .
'I have known twenty-three fowls got ready for him before he asked for his meal .
That day he called for his dinner at eleven at night .
He cares little what he eats or drinks , but he will not be kept waiting .
Half a bottle of Chambertin , a red mullet , or a pullet a la Marengo satisfy every need , but it is unwise to put pastry or cream upon the table , because he is as likely as not to eat it before the fowl .
Ah , that is a curious sight , is it not ? '
For my own part I had an excellent appetite for the cutlets and the salad , but what I relished above all was to hear the talk of my companions , for I was full of curiosity as to everything which concerned this singular man , whose genius had elevated him so rapidly to the highest position in the world .
The head of his household discussed him with an extraordinary frankness .
'So I have gathered from their papers .
They drive the Emperor frantic , and yet he will insist upon reading them .
I am willing to lay a wager that the very first thing which he does when he enters London will be to send cavalry detachments to the various newspaper offices , and to endeavour to seize the editors . '
'A clever man at his Court shows his cleverness best by pretending to be dull , ' said Caulaincourt , with some bitterness .
'Ah , you may say so , ' said de Meneval .
Eighteen hours out of twenty-four for weeks on end .
He has presided over the Legislative Council until they were fainting at their desks .
As to me , he will be the death of me , just as he wore out de Bourrienne ; but I will die at my post without a murmur , for if he is hard upon us he is hard upon himself also . '
De Meneval 's tent had been pitched in such a way that he could overlook the Royal headquarters , but whether it was that we were too absorbed in the interest of our conversation , or that the Emperor had used the other entrance in returning from the review , we were suddenly startled by the appearance of a captain dressed in the green jacket of the Chasseurs of the Guard , who had come to say that Napoleon was waiting for his secretary .
Poor de Meneval 's face turned as white as his beautiful ruffles as he sprang to his feet , hardly able to speak for agitation .
'You remind me of Cambaceres , de Meneval .
When I wrote him an account of the battle of Marengo , he thought that my letter was a rough plan of the engagement .
It is incredible how much difficulty you appear to have in reading what I write .
This document has nothing to do with cavalry horses , but it contains the instructions to Admiral Villeneuve as to the concentration of his fleet so as to obtain command of the Channel .
Give it to me and I will read it to you . '
'I will dictate it to you , ' said he ; and , pacing up and down the long room , he poured forth a torrent of words , which poor de Meneval , his face shining with his exertions , strove hard to put upon paper .
As he grew excited by his own ideas , Napoleon 's voice became shriller , his step faster , and he seized his right cuff in the fingers of the same hand , and twisted his right arm in the singular epileptic gesture which was peculiar to him .
But his thoughts and plans were so admirably clear that even I , who knew nothing of the matter , could readily follow them , while above all I was impressed by the marvellous grasp of fact which enabled him to speak with confidence , not only of the line-of-battle ships , but of the frigates , sloops , and brigs at Ferrol , Rochefort , Cadiz , Carthagena , and Brest , with the exact strength of each in men and in guns ; while the names and force of the English vessels were equally at his fingers ' ends .
Such familiarity would have been remarkable in a naval officer , but when I thought that this question of the ships was only one out of fifty with which this man had to deal , I began to realise the immense grasp of that capacious mind .
He did not appear to be paying the least attention to me , but it seems that he was really watching me closely , for he turned upon me when he had finished his dictation .
'It is the result of system , ' said he .
'It is as if I had drawers in my brain , so that when I opened one I could close the others .
It is seldom that I fail to find what I want there .
I have a poor memory for names or dates , but an excellent one for facts or faces .
There is a good deal to bear in mind , Monsieur de Laval .
For example , I have , as you have seen , my one little drawer full of the ships upon the sea .
I have another which contains all the harbours and forts of France .
As an example , I may tell you that when my minister of war was reading me a report of all the coast defences , I was able to point out to him that he had omitted two guns in a battery near Ostend .
In yet another of my brain-drawers I have the regiments of France .
Is that drawer in order , Marshal Berthier ? '
'But they have a very small army . '
'Nearly every man is a volunteer , Sire . '
'Pooh , conscripts ! '
he cried , and made a motion with his hands as if to sweep them from before him .
I will land with a hundred thousand men in Kent or in Sussex .
I will fight a great battle which I will win with a loss of ten thousand men .
On the third day I shall be in London .
I will seize the statesmen , the bankers , the merchants , the newspaper men .
I will impose an indemnity of a hundred millions of their pounds .
I will favour the poor at the expense of the rich , and so I shall have a party .
I will detach Scotland and Ireland by giving them constitutions which will put them in a superior condition to England .
Thus I will sow dissensions everywhere .
Then as a price for leaving the island I will claim their fleet and their colonies .
In this way I shall secure the command of the world to France for at least a century to come . '
'And that you are the fastest eater , Sire , ' said a large-faced , benevolent-looking person who had been whispering to Marshal Berthier .
'It is four hours after it , Sire . '
'It is two days since I sent for you , Monsieur Isabey . '
'Have you the models there ? '
'Then you may lay them out on that table . '
The Emperor was as much amused as a child with a new toy .
He formed little groups of the figures upon the table , so that he might have an idea of how the dignitaries would look when they chatted together .
Then he threw them all back into the basket .
'I do not know why they should be , Sire . '
'He is in Germany . '
'Yes , in London , and not at the Tuileries , where he might have had what he liked for the asking .
I wonder if I were to fall whether I should have followers as faithful as those of the Bourbons .
Would the men that I have made go into exile and refuse all offers until I should return ?
Come here , Berthier ! '
he took his favourite by the ear with the caressing gesture which was peculiar to him .
'Could I count upon you , you rascal -- eh ? '
'I do not understand you , Sire . '
Our conversation had been carried on in a voice which had made it inaudible to the other people in the room , but now they were all listening to what Berthier had to say .
His blue eyes flashed suspicion at me .
'Well , mademoiselle , why do you come here ?
What is it that you want ? '
asked the Emperor in the brusque manner which he adopted to women , even if he were wooing them .
'I come , Sire , to implore a favour of you . '
Sibylle 's pale face flushed , and she looked down before the Emperor's keen sardonic glance .
The Emperors set face and firm manner showed it was hopeless , and yet my cousin persevered as no one but a woman who pleads for her lover would have dared to do .
'Sire , ' she cried .
'You say that an example must be made .
There is Toussac -- ! '
'Ah , if I could lay my hands upon Toussac ! '
'Surely , mademoiselle , you will permit me to help you ? '
he cried in a piteous voice .
'I may need you both , ' said she .
'I will come to you if I do .
Now I will ask you to ride with me to the edge of the camp and there to leave me . '
'To the death , ' cried Gerard .
It was upon the morning of the fifth day that I received a message from Duroc , who was the head of the household , that I was to attend the Emperor at the headquarters in the camp , and that a seat in one of the Imperial carriages would be at my disposal that I might proceed with the Court to Pont de Briques , there to be present at the reception of the Empress .
When I arrived I was shown at once through the large entrance tent , and admitted by Constant into the room beyond , where the Emperor stood with his back to the fire , kicking his heels against the grate .
Talleyrand and Berthier were in attendance , and de Meneval , the secretary , sat at the writing-table .
'Ah , Monsieur de Laval , ' said the Emperor with a friendly nod .
'Have you heard anything yet of your charming cousin ? '
'I fear that her efforts will be in vain .
I wish her every success , for we have no reason at all to fear this miserable poet , while the other is formidable .
All the same , an example of some sort must be made . '
'Ta , ta , ta ! '
cried the Emperor impatiently .
'You speak as if I had received my crown from my father the late king .
But even if I had , it would be intolerable , this government by newspaper .
The Bourbons allowed themselves to be criticised , and where are they now ?
Had they used their Swiss Guards as I did the Grenadiers upon the eighteenth Brumaire what would have become of their precious National Assembly ?
There was a time when a bayonet in the stomach of Mirabeau might have settled the whole matter .
Later it took the heads of a king and queen and the blood of a hundred thousand people . '
'No , I think not .
She was here yesterday . '
'And the other , the Countess ? '
And so for ten minutes he plied me with questions , which showed me clearly that the Emperor had read him aright , and that he was determined , come what might , to be upon the side which won .
We were still talking when Constant entered hurriedly , with a look of anxiety and perplexity which I could not have imagined upon so smooth and imperturbable a face .
'Good Heavens , Monsieur Talleyrand , ' he cried , clasping and unclasping his hands .
Who could have expected it ? '
'You had better keep Fortune outside , Roustem , ' said she , in a peculiarly sweet musical voice .
'The Emperor is not very fond of dogs , and if we intrude upon his quarters we can not do less than consult his tastes .
Good evening , Monsieur de Talleyrand !
Madame de Remusat and I have driven all along the cliffs , and we have stopped as we passed to know if the Emperor is coming to Pont de Briques .
But perhaps he has already started .
I had expected to find him here . '
'I hold my _salon_ -- such a _salon_ as Pont de Briques is capable of -- this evening , and the Emperor promised me that he would set his work aside for once , and favour us with his presence .
I wish we could persuade him to work less , Monsieur de Talleyrand .
He has a frame of iron , but he can not continue in this way .
These nervous attacks come more frequently upon him .
He will insist upon doing everything , everything himself .
It is noble , but it is to be a martyr .
I have no doubt that at the present moment -- but you have not yet told me where he is , Monsieur de Talleyrand . '
'It eases my mind so to know that he has brave and loyal men round him .
Ever since that dreadful affair of the infernal machine I have always been uneasy if he is away from me .
He is really safest in time of war , for it is only then that he is away from the assassins who hate him .
And now I understand that a new Jacobin plot has only just been discovered . '
'How is this , Monsieur de Talleyrand , ' she cried , and the dark eyes began to shine with anger and suspicion .
'You said to me that the Emperor was out , and here is his hat ! '
'What did you say then ? '
'Marshal Berthier , ' she cried , 'I insist upon your telling me this instant where the Emperor is , and what he is doing . '
'Allow me to announce you , your Majesty . '
'I shall announce myself . '
With swift undulations of her beautiful figure she darted past the protesting valet , parted the curtains , threw open the door , and vanished into the next room .
'You have no excuse for extravagance , Josephine , ' said he , laying his hand upon her shoulder .
'Diamonds and fine dresses are very necessary to an ugly woman in order to make her attractive , but _you_ can not need them for such a purpose .
You had no fine dresses when first I saw you in the Rue Chautereine , and yet there was no woman in the world who ever attracted me so .
Why will you vex me , Josephine , and make me say things which seem unkind ?
Drive back , little one , to Pont de Briques , and see that you do not catch cold . '
'My dear Louis , ' said he .
'It was really the hope of meeting you here which brought me over from Grosbois -- although you can understand that living so far from Paris I can not afford to miss such an opportunity of showing myself at Court .
Nevertheless I can assure you that it was of you principally that I was thinking .
I hear that you have had a splendid reception from the Emperor , and that you have been taken into his personal service .
I had spoken to him about you , and I made him fully realise that if he treats you well he is likely to coax some of the other young emigres into his service . '
'I know the Marshals , ' said I ; 'I saw them all at the council in the Emperor 's tent .
There is Ney with the red head .
And there is Lefebvre with his singular mouth , and Bernadotte with the beak of a bird of prey . '
The famous soldier had paused opposite to us , and shook hands with my companion .
His elegant well-knit figure , large fiery eyes , and noble bearing made this innkeeper 's boy a man who would have drawn attention and admiration to himself in any assembly in Europe .
His mop of curly hair and thick red lips gave that touch of character and individuality to his appearance which redeem a handsome face from insipidity .
But in spite of the evident hatred of her husband 's family , the Empress appeared to be entirely unconcerned and at her ease as she strolled about among the groups of her guests with a kindly glance and a pleasant word for each of them .
A tall , soldierly man , brown-faced and moustached , walked beside her , and she occasionally laid her hand with a caressing motion upon his arm .
'Come here , Monsieur de Laval , ' said he .
He laid his hand upon my shoulder and turned to a big , gaunt man who had accompanied him into the room .
'Look here , Cambaceres , you simpleton , ' said he .
'You always said that the old families would never come back , and that they would settle in England as the Huguenots have done .
You see that , as usual , you have miscalculated , for here is the heir of the de Lavals come to offer his services .
Monsieur de Laval , you are now my aide-de-camp , and I beg you to keep with me wherever I go . '
And soon there was something else to make me ashamed , and that was the conduct of him whose servant I had become .
His manners were outrageous .
As he had himself said , it was his nature to be always first , and this being so he resented those courtesies and gallantries by which men are accustomed to disguise from women the fact that they are the weaker sex .
The Emperor , unlike Louis XIV.
, felt that even a temporary and conventional attitude of humility towards a woman was too great a condescension from his own absolute supremacy .
Chivalry was among those conditions of society which he refused to accept .
The Emperor took a few steps between the people , who had formed a lane for us to pass through .
Then he stopped and looked over his shoulder at the Empress .
'I am Gretry , the musician . '
'I am writing a tragedy upon Henry IV.
'It is a foul calumny , sire . '
'I have never worn it before , sire ? '
You and Rapp and Lasalle are the spoiled children of the army .
But no more cards , you rascal !
I do not like low dresses , Madame Picard .
They spoil even pretty women , but in you they are inexcusable .
Now , Josephine , I am going to my room , and you can come in half an hour and read me to sleep .
I am tired to-night , but I came to your salon , since you desired that I should help you in welcoming and entertaining your guests .
You can remain here , Monsieur de Laval , for your presence will not be necessary until I send you my orders . '
'Mademoiselle insists upon it that I should not use soldiers , ' said Savary , shrugging his shoulders .
'But we have searched it , I assure you that he is not there . '
The setting sun lay dull and red upon the western horizon , and the white chalk cliffs of the French coast had all flushed into pink when I found myself once more at the gate of the Boulogne Camp .
There was no sign of my companions , but a tall man , dressed in a blue coat with brass buttons like a small country farmer , was tightening the girth of a magnificent black horse , whilst a little further on a slim young ostler was waiting by the roadside , holding the bridles of two others .
It was only when I recognised one of the pair as the horse which I had ridden on my first coming to camp that I answered the smile upon the keen handsome face of the ostler , and saw the swarthy features of Savary under the broad-brimmed hat of the farmer .
Our route , when we had left the uplands of Boulogne behind us , lay along the skirts of that desolate marsh in which I had wandered , and so inland , through plains of fern and bramble , until the familiar black keep of the Castle of Grosbois rose upon the left .
Then , under the guidance of Savary , we struck to the right down a sunken road , and so over the shoulder of a hill until , on a further slope beyond , we saw the old windmill black against the evening sky .
Its upper window burned red like a spot of blood in the last rays of the setting sun .
Close by the door stood a cart full of grain sacks , with the shafts pointing downwards and the horse grazing at some distance .
As we gazed , a woman appeared upon the downs and stared round , with her hand over her eyes .
'The window , Gerard , the window ! '
'Then we need be in no hurry , since he can not pass us , ' said Savary , as we sprang from our horses .
'You have carried his first line of entrenchments most gallantly , Lieutenant Gerard .
I hope you are not hurt ? '
'Surrender , Toussac ! '
'It is useless to attempt to escape us .
'He has found some hiding-place here amongst the brambles , ' I cried .
Gerard had already sprung from his horse , and was leading him through the bushes .
I followed his example , and in a minute or two we made our way down a winding path into a deep chalk quarry .
But suddenly I had understood it all .
His furious rage which the miller had described to us was caused no doubt by his learning how he came to be betrayed upon the night of his arrival .
This sweetheart of his had in some way discovered it , and had let him know .
His promise to deliver himself up to-morrow was in order to give him time to have his revenge upon my uncle .
And now with one idea in his head he had ridden to this chalk quarry .
Of course , it must be the same chalk quarry into which the underground passage of Grosbois opened , and no doubt during his treasonable meetings with my uncle he had learned the secret .
Twice I hit upon the wrong spot , but at the third trial I gained the face of the cliff , made my way between it and the bushes , and found the narrow opening , which was hardly visible in the gathering darkness .
During our search Savary had overtaken us on foot , so now , leaving our horses in the chalk-pit , my two companions followed me through the narrow entrance tunnel , and on into the larger and older passage beyond .
We had no lights , and it was as black as pitch within , so I stumbled forward as best I might , feeling my way by keeping one hand upon the side wall , and tripping occasionally over the stones which were scattered along the path .
It had seemed no very great distance when my uncle had led the way with the light , but now , what with the darkness , and what with the uncertainty and the tension of our feelings , it appeared to be a long journey , and Savary 's deep voice at my elbow growled out questions as to how many more miles we were to travel in this moleheap .
'You have made an excellent debut as aide-de-camp , ' said he ; 'Savary has told me all that has occurred , and nothing could have been better arranged .
I have not time to think of such things myself , but my wife will sleep more soundly now that she knows that this Toussac is out of the way . '
Constant had entered the room .
Silver Blaze `` I am afraid , Watson , that I shall have to go , '' said Holmes , as we sat down together to our breakfast one morning .
`` To Dartmoor ; to King 's Pyland . ''
I was not surprised .
Indeed , my only wonder was that he had not already been mixed up in this extraordinary case , which was the one topic of conversation through the length and breadth of England .
For a whole day my companion had rambled about the room with his chin upon his chest and his brows knitted , charging and recharging his pipe with the strongest black tobacco , and absolutely deaf to any of my questions or remarks .
Fresh editions of every paper had been sent up by our news agent , only to be glanced over and tossed down into a corner .
Yet , silent as he was , I knew perfectly well what it was over which he was brooding .
There was but one problem before the public which could challenge his powers of analysis , and that was the singular disappearance of the favorite for the Wessex Cup , and the tragic murder of its trainer .
When , therefore , he suddenly announced his intention of setting out for the scene of the drama it was only what I had both expected and hoped for .
`` I should be most happy to go down with you if I should not be in the way , '' said I .
`` My dear Watson , you would confer a great favor upon me by coming .
And I think that your time will not be misspent , for there are points about the case which promise to make it an absolutely unique one .
We have , I think , just time to catch our train at Paddington , and I will go further into the matter upon our journey .
You would oblige me by bringing with you your very excellent field-glass . ''
And so it happened that an hour or so later I found myself in the corner of a first-class carriage flying along en route for Exeter , while Sherlock Holmes , with his sharp , eager face framed in his ear-flapped travelling-cap , dipped rapidly into the bundle of fresh papers which he had procured at Paddington .
We had left Reading far behind us before he thrust the last one of them under the seat , and offered me his cigar-case .
`` We are going well , '' said he , looking out the window and glancing at his watch .
`` Our rate at present is fifty-three and a half miles an hour . ''
`` I have not observed the quarter-mile posts , '' said I .
`` Nor have I .
But the telegraph posts upon this line are sixty yards apart , and the calculation is a simple one .
I presume that you have looked into this matter of the murder of John Straker and the disappearance of Silver Blaze ? ''
`` I have seen what the Telegraph and the Chronicle have to say . ''
`` It is one of those cases where the art of the reasoner should be used rather for the sifting of details than for the acquiring of fresh evidence .
The tragedy has been so uncommon , so complete and of such personal importance to so many people , that we are suffering from a plethora of surmise , conjecture , and hypothesis .
The difficulty is to detach the framework of fact -- of absolute undeniable fact -- from the embellishments of theorists and reporters .
Then , having established ourselves upon this sound basis , it is our duty to see what inferences may be drawn and what are the special points upon which the whole mystery turns .
On Tuesday evening I received telegrams from both Colonel Ross , the owner of the horse , and from Inspector Gregory , who is looking after the case , inviting my cooperation . ''
`` Tuesday evening ! ''
`` And this is Thursday morning .
Why did n't you go down yesterday ? ''
`` Because I made a blunder , my dear Watson -- which is , I am afraid , a more common occurrence than any one would think who only knew me through your memoirs .
The fact is that I could not believe it possible that the most remarkable horse in England could long remain concealed , especially in so sparsely inhabited a place as the north of Dartmoor .
From hour to hour yesterday I expected to hear that he had been found , and that his abductor was the murderer of John Straker .
When , however , another morning had come , and I found that beyond the arrest of young Fitzroy Simpson nothing had been done , I felt that it was time for me to take action .
Yet in some ways I feel that yesterday has not been wasted . ''
`` You have formed a theory , then ? ''
`` At least I have got a grip of the essential facts of the case .
I shall enumerate them to you , for nothing clears up a case so much as stating it to another person , and I can hardly expect your co-operation if I do not show you the position from which we start . ''
I lay back against the cushions , puffing at my cigar , while Holmes , leaning forward , with his long , thin forefinger checking off the points upon the palm of his left hand , gave me a sketch of the events which had led to our journey .
`` Silver Blaze , '' said he , `` is from the Somomy stock , and holds as brilliant a record as his famous ancestor .
He is now in his fifth year , and has brought in turn each of the prizes of the turf to Colonel Ross , his fortunate owner .
Up to the time of the catastrophe he was the first favorite for the Wessex Cup , the betting being three to one on him .
He has always , however , been a prime favorite with the racing public , and has never yet disappointed them , so that even at those odds enormous sums of money have been laid upon him .
It is obvious , therefore , that there were many people who had the strongest interest in preventing Silver Blaze from being there at the fall of the flag next Tuesday .
`` The fact was , of course , appreciated at King 's Pyland , where the Colonel 's training-stable is situated .
Every precaution was taken to guard the favorite .
The trainer , John Straker , is a retired jockey who rode in Colonel Ross 's colors before he became too heavy for the weighing-chair .
He has served the Colonel for five years as jockey and for seven as trainer , and has always shown himself to be a zealous and honest servant .
Under him were three lads ; for the establishment was a small one , containing only four horses in all .
One of these lads sat up each night in the stable , while the others slept in the loft .
All three bore excellent characters .
John Straker , who is a married man , lived in a small villa about two hundred yards from the stables .
He has no children , keeps one maid-servant , and is comfortably off .
The country round is very lonely , but about half a mile to the north there is a small cluster of villas which have been built by a Tavistock contractor for the use of invalids and others who may wish to enjoy the pure Dartmoor air .
Tavistock itself lies two miles to the west , while across the moor , also about two miles distant , is the larger training establishment of Mapleton , which belongs to Lord Backwater , and is managed by Silas Brown .
In every other direction the moor is a complete wilderness , inhabited only by a few roaming gypsies .
Such was the general situation last Monday night when the catastrophe occurred .
`` On that evening the horses had been exercised and watered as usual , and the stables were locked up at nine o'clock .
Two of the lads walked up to the trainer 's house , where they had supper in the kitchen , while the third , Ned Hunter , remained on guard .
At a few minutes after nine the maid , Edith Baxter , carried down to the stables his supper , which consisted of a dish of curried mutton .
She took no liquid , as there was a water-tap in the stables , and it was the rule that the lad on duty should drink nothing else .
The maid carried a lantern with her , as it was very dark and the path ran across the open moor .
`` Edith Baxter was within thirty yards of the stables , when a man appeared out of the darkness and called to her to stop .
As he stepped into the circle of yellow light thrown by the lantern she saw that he was a person of gentlemanly bearing , dressed in a gray suit of tweeds , with a cloth cap .
He wore gaiters , and carried a heavy stick with a knob to it .
She was most impressed , however , by the extreme pallor of his face and by the nervousness of his manner .
His age , she thought , would be rather over thirty than under it .
`` 'Can you tell me where I am ? '
'I had almost made up my mind to sleep on the moor , when I saw the light of your lantern . '
`` 'You are close to the King 's Pyland training-stables , ' said she .
`` 'Oh , indeed !
What a stroke of luck ! '
'I understand that a stable-boy sleeps there alone every night .
Perhaps that is his supper which you are carrying to him .
Now I am sure that you would not be too proud to earn the price of a new dress , would you ? '
He took a piece of white paper folded up out of his waistcoat pocket .
'See that the boy has this to-night , and you shall have the prettiest frock that money can buy . '
`` She was frightened by the earnestness of his manner , and ran past him to the window through which she was accustomed to hand the meals .
It was already opened , and Hunter was seated at the small table inside .
She had begun to tell him of what had happened , when the stranger came up again .
`` 'Good-evening , ' said he , looking through the window .
'I wanted to have a word with you . '
The girl has sworn that as he spoke she noticed the corner of the little paper packet protruding from his closed hand .
`` 'What business have you here ? '
`` 'It 's business that may put something into your pocket , ' said the other .
'You 've two horses in for the Wessex Cup -- Silver Blaze and Bayard .
Let me have the straight tip and you wo n't be a loser .
Is it a fact that at the weights Bayard could give the other a hundred yards in five furlongs , and that the stable have put their money on him ? '
`` 'So , you 're one of those damned touts ! '
'I 'll show you how we serve them in King 's Pyland . '
He sprang up and rushed across the stable to unloose the dog .
The girl fled away to the house , but as she ran she looked back and saw that the stranger was leaning through the window .
A minute later , however , when Hunter rushed out with the hound he was gone , and though he ran all round the buildings he failed to find any trace of him . ''
`` One moment , '' I asked .
`` Did the stable-boy , when he ran out with the dog , leave the door unlocked behind him ? ''
`` Excellent , Watson , excellent ! ''
`` The importance of the point struck me so forcibly that I sent a special wire to Dartmoor yesterday to clear the matter up .
The boy locked the door before he left it .
The window , I may add , was not large enough for a man to get through .
`` About a quarter of a mile from the stables John Straker 's overcoat was flapping from a furze-bush .
Immediately beyond there was a bowl-shaped depression in the moor , and at the bottom of this was found the dead body of the unfortunate trainer .
His head had been shattered by a savage blow from some heavy weapon , and he was wounded on the thigh , where there was a long , clean cut , inflicted evidently by some very sharp instrument .
It was clear , however , that Straker had defended himself vigorously against his assailants , for in his right hand he held a small knife , which was clotted with blood up to the handle , while in his left he clasped a red and black silk cravat , which was recognized by the maid as having been worn on the preceding evening by the stranger who had visited the stables .
Hunter , on recovering from his stupor , was also quite positive as to the ownership of the cravat .
He was equally certain that the same stranger had , while standing at the window , drugged his curried mutton , and so deprived the stables of their watchman .
As to the missing horse , there were abundant proofs in the mud which lay at the bottom of the fatal hollow that he had been there at the time of the struggle .
But from that morning he has disappeared , and although a large reward has been offered , and all the gypsies of Dartmoor are on the alert , no news has come of him .
Finally , an analysis has shown that the remains of his supper left by the stable-lad contain an appreciable quantity of powdered opium , while the people at the house partook of the same dish on the same night without any ill effect .
`` What does he say about the cravat ? ''
`` Perhaps you would prefer at once to go on to the scene of the crime , Mr .
`` Yes ; he lies upstairs .
The inquest is to-morrow . ''
`` I have always found him an excellent servant . ''
`` This is a very singular knife , '' said Holmes , lifting it up and examining it minutely .
`` I presume , as I see blood-stains upon it , that it is the one which was found in the dead man 's grasp .
Watson , this knife is surely in your line ? ''
Why , I could have sworn to it .
You wore a costume of dove-colored silk with ostrich-feather trimming . ''
`` I never had such a dress , sir , '' answered the lady .
`` Where is he , then ? ''
We crossed the marshy bottom and passed over a quarter of a mile of dry , hard turf .
Again the ground sloped , and again we came on the tracks .
Then we lost them for half a mile , but only to pick them up once more quite close to Mapleton .
It was Holmes who saw them first , and he stood pointing with a look of triumph upon his face .
A man 's track was visible beside the horse 's .
`` The horse was alone before , '' I cried .
The double track turned sharp off and took the direction of King's Pyland .
Holmes whistled , and we both followed along after it .
His eyes were on the trail , but I happened to look a little to one side , and saw to my surprise the same tracks coming back again in the opposite direction .
`` Bless you , sir , if any one is about he will be , for he is always the first stirring .
But here he is , sir , to answer your questions for himself .
No , sir , no ; it is as much as my place is worth to let him see me touch your money .
Afterwards , if you like . ''
Shall we argue about it here in public or talk it over in your parlor ? ''
`` Oh , you can trust me , you can trust me ! ''
`` He tried to bluster out of it , but I described to him so exactly what his actions had been upon that morning that he is convinced that I was watching him .
Of course you observed the peculiarly square toes in the impressions , and that his own boots exactly corresponded to them .
Again , of course no subordinate would have dared to do such a thing .
I described to him how , when according to his custom he was the first down , he perceived a strange horse wandering over the moor .
How he went out to it , and his astonishment at recognizing , from the white forehead which has given the favorite its name , that chance had put in his power the only horse which could beat the one upon which he had put his money .
Then I described how his first impulse had been to lead him back to King 's Pyland , and how the devil had shown him how he could hide the horse until the race was over , and how he had led it back and concealed it at Mapleton .
When I told him every detail he gave it up and thought only of saving his own skin . ''
`` Oh , an old horse-faker like him has many a dodge . ''
`` On the contrary , we both go back to London by the night train . ''
`` So you despair of arresting the murderer of poor Straker , '' said he .
`` Yes , I have his assurance , '' said the Colonel , with a shrug of his shoulders .
`` I should prefer to have the horse . ''
I was about to make some reply in defence of my friend when he entered the room again .
`` Is there any point to which you would wish to draw my attention ? ''
`` To the curious incident of the dog in the night-time . ''
`` The dog did nothing in the night-time . ''
Four days later Holmes and I were again in the train , bound for Winchester to see the race for the Wessex Cup .
Colonel Ross met us by appointment outside the station , and we drove in his drag to the course beyond the town .
His face was grave , and his manner was cold in the extreme .
Wessex Plate [ it ran ] 50 sovs each h ft with 1000 sovs added for four and five year olds .
New course ( one mile and five furlongs ) .
Mr. Heath Newton 's The Negro .
Colonel Wardlaw 's Pugilist .
Blue and black jacket .
Lord Backwater 's Desborough .
Yellow cap and sleeves .
Colonel Ross 's Silver Blaze .
Duke of Balmoral 's Iris .
Yellow and black stripes .
Lord Singleford 's Rasper .
The Colonel and I stared at him in amazement .
`` You have got him !
Where is he , then ? ''
`` He is here . ''
`` The horse ! ''
cried both the Colonel and myself .
`` Yes , the horse .
And it may lessen his guilt if I say that it was done in self-defence , and that John Straker was a man who was entirely unworthy of your confidence .
But there goes the bell , and as I stand to win a little on this next race , I shall defer a lengthy explanation until a more fitting time . ''
`` We have here the explanation of why John Straker wished to take the horse out on to the moor .
So spirited a creature would have certainly roused the soundest of sleepers when it felt the prick of the knife .
It was absolutely necessary to do it in the open air . ''
`` From that time on all was plain .
Straker had led out the horse to a hollow where his light would be invisible .
Simpson in his flight had dropped his cravat , and Straker had picked it up -- with some idea , perhaps , that he might use it in securing the horse 's leg .
Once in the hollow , he had got behind the horse and had struck a light ; but the creature frightened at the sudden glare , and with the strange instinct of animals feeling that some mischief was intended , had lashed out , and the steel shoe had struck Straker full on the forehead .
He had already , in spite of the rain , taken off his overcoat in order to do his delicate task , and so , as he fell , his knife gashed his thigh .
Do I make it clear ? ''
`` You have explained all but one thing , '' cried the Colonel .
`` Where was the horse ? ''
Sherlock Holmes was a man who seldom took exercise for exercise 's sake .
Few men were capable of greater muscular effort , and he was undoubtedly one of the finest boxers of his weight that I have ever seen ; but he looked upon aimless bodily exertion as a waste of energy , and he seldom bestirred himself save when there was some professional object to be served .
Then he was absolutely untiring and indefatigable .
That he should have kept himself in training under such circumstances is remarkable , but his diet was usually of the sparest , and his habits were simple to the verge of austerity .
Save for the occasional use of cocaine , he had no vices , and he only turned to the drug as a protest against the monotony of existence when cases were scanty and the papers uninteresting .
`` How do you know that he values it highly ? ''
`` Well , I should put the original cost of the pipe at seven and sixpence .
Now it has , you see , been twice mended , once in the wooden stem and once in the amber .
Each of these mends , done , as you observe , with silver bands , must have cost more than the pipe did originally .
The man must value the pipe highly when he prefers to patch it up rather than buy a new one with the same money . ''
`` I wanted your advice , sir .
I do n't know what to do and my whole life seems to have gone to pieces . ''
`` 'Jack , ' said she , 'when you took my money you said that if ever I wanted any I was to ask you for it . '
`` 'What on earth for ? '
`` So I had to be content with that , though it was the first time that there had ever been any secret between us .
I gave her a check , and I never thought any more of the matter .
It may have nothing to do with what came afterwards , but I thought it only right to mention it .
`` I do n't know what there was about that face , Mr. Holmes , but it seemed to send a chill right down my back .
I was some little way off , so that I could not make out the features , but there was something unnatural and inhuman about the face .
That was the impression that I had , and I moved quickly forwards to get a nearer view of the person who was watching me .
But as I did so the face suddenly disappeared , so suddenly that it seemed to have been plucked away into the darkness of the room .
I stood for five minutes thinking the business over , and trying to analyze my impressions .
I could not tell if the face were that of a man or a woman .
It had been too far from me for that .
But its color was what had impressed me most .
It was of a livid chalky white , and with something set and rigid about it which was shockingly unnatural .
So disturbed was I that I determined to see a little more of the new inmates of the cottage .
I approached and knocked at the door , which was instantly opened by a tall , gaunt woman with a harsh , forbidding face .
`` She gave a violent start and a kind of gasping cry when I spoke , and that cry and start troubled me more than all the rest , for there was something indescribably guilty about them .
My wife had always been a woman of a frank , open nature , and it gave me a chill to see her slinking into her own room , and crying out and wincing when her own husband spoke to her .
`` 'You came here .
I am sure of it .
Who are these people , that you should visit them at such an hour ? '
`` 'I have not been here before . '
`` There was such earnestness , such despair , in her manner that her words arrested me , and I stood irresolute before the door .
`` 'I will trust you on one condition , and on one condition only , ' said I at last .
'It is that this mystery comes to an end from now .
You are at liberty to preserve your secret , but you must promise me that there shall be no more nightly visits , no more doings which are kept from my knowledge .
I am willing to forget those which are passed if you will promise that there shall be no more in the future . '
`` 'I think that she has gone out for a walk , ' she answered .
`` It was all still and quiet upon the ground floor .
In the kitchen a kettle was singing on the fire , and a large black cat lay coiled up in the basket ; but there was no sign of the woman whom I had seen before .
I ran into the other room , but it was equally deserted .
Then I rushed up the stairs , only to find two other rooms empty and deserted at the top .
There was no one at all in the whole house .
The furniture and pictures were of the most common and vulgar description , save in the one chamber at the window of which I had seen the strange face .
That was comfortable and elegant , and all my suspicions rose into a fierce bitter flame when I saw that on the mantelpiece stood a copy of a full-length photograph of my wife , which had been taken at my request only three months ago .
`` 'I am sorry that I broke my promise , Jack , ' said she ; 'but if you knew all the circumstances I am sure that you would forgive me . '
`` Each time that I saw it I was some distance away from it , so that it is impossible for me to say . ''
`` Did you ever meet any one who knew her in America ? ''
`` Did she ever talk of revisiting the place ? ''
`` Yes , a provisional one .
But I shall be surprised if it does not turn out to be correct .
This woman 's first husband is in that cottage . ''
But we had not a very long time to wait for that .
It came just as we had finished our tea .
`` The cottage is still tenanted , '' it said .
`` Have seen the face again at the window .
Will meet the seven o'clock train , and will take no steps until you arrive . ''
Holmes and I followed them down the lane , and my friend plucked at my sleeve as we came out .
`` And the practice ? ''
`` I do my neighbor 's when he goes .
He is always ready to work off the debt . ''
`` I am afraid that I rather give myself away when I explain , '' said he .
`` Results without causes are much more impressive .
You are ready to come to Birmingham , then ? ''
`` You shall hear it all in the train .
My client is outside in a four-wheeler .
Can you come at once ? ''
Hall Pycroft , I believe ? '
`` 'Yes , sir , ' I answered , pushing a chair towards him .
`` 'And now on the staff of Mawson 's . '
`` 'Pretty fair , ' I answered , modestly .
`` 'Five hundred a year ! '
`` 'But I know nothing about hardware . '
`` 'Are you Mr. Hall Pycroft ? '
I was expecting you , but you are a trifle before your time .
I had a note from my brother this morning in which he sang your praises very loudly . '
`` You may well look surprised , Dr. Watson ; but it is this way , '' said he : `` When I was speaking to the other chap in London , at the time that he laughed at my not going to Mawson 's , I happened to notice that his tooth was stuffed in this very identical fashion .
The glint of the gold in each case caught my eye , you see .
When I put that with the voice and figure being the same , and only those things altered which might be changed by a razor or a wig , I could not doubt that it was the same man .
Of course you expect two brothers to be alike , but not that they should have the same tooth stuffed in the same way .
He bowed me out , and I found myself in the street , hardly knowing whether I was on my head or my heels .
Back I went to my hotel , put my head in a basin of cold water , and tried to think it out .
Why had he sent me from London to Birmingham ?
Why had he got there before me ?
And why had he written a letter from himself to himself ?
It was altogether too much for me , and I could make no sense of it .
And then suddenly it struck me that what was dark to me might be very light to Mr. Sherlock Holmes .
I had just time to get up to town by the night train to see him this morning , and to bring you both back with me to Birmingham . ''
At seven o'clock that evening we were walking , the three of us , down Corporation Street to the company 's offices .
`` Ah yes , we shall want something of the sort .
And you , Mr .
`` You forget , Mr. Pinner , that I am here by appointment to receive some directions from you , '' said he .
`` It was empty yesterday . ''
`` That 's it , '' cried Pycroft .
`` What the deuce is he knocking at his own door for ? ''
Again and much louder came the rat-tat-tat .
We all gazed expectantly at the closed door .
Glancing at Holmes , I saw his face turn rigid , and he leaned forward in intense excitement .
Then suddenly came a low guggling , gargling sound , and a brisk drumming upon woodwork .
Holmes sprang frantically across the room and pushed at the door .
It was fastened on the inner side .
Following his example , we threw ourselves upon it with all our weight .
One hinge snapped , then the other , and down came the door with a crash .
Rushing over it , we found ourselves in the inner room .
`` Now you see the point about the handwriting .
Suppose that some one turned up in your place who wrote a completely different hand from that in which you had applied for the vacancy , of course the game would have been up .
But in the interval the rogue had learned to imitate you , and his position was therefore secure , as I presume that nobody in the office had ever set eyes upon you . ''
Of course it was of the utmost importance to prevent you from thinking better of it , and also to keep you from coming into contact with any one who might tell you that your double was at work in Mawson 's office .
Therefore they gave you a handsome advance on your salary , and ran you off to the Midlands , where they gave you enough work to do to prevent your going to London , where you might have burst their little game up .
That is all plain enough . ''
`` We must wire to Mawson 's . ''
The `` _Gloria Scott_ ''
I had often endeavored to elicit from my companion what had first turned his mind in the direction of criminal research , but had never caught him before in a communicative humor .
Now he sat forward in this arm-chair and spread out the documents upon his knees .
Then he lit his pipe and sat for some time smoking and turning them over .
`` 'Made all my money at the gold fields . '
`` 'You have visited Japan . '
`` You can imagine , Watson , how shocked both his son and I were .
His attack did not last long , however , for when we undid his collar , and sprinkled the water from one of the finger-glasses over his face , he gave a gasp or two and sat up .
`` 'I hope that I have said nothing to pain you ? '
`` The sailor stood looking at him with puckered eyes , and with the same loose-lipped smile upon his face .
`` 'You do n't know me ? '
`` 'I have no idea . '
`` 'It was the devil , Holmes , ' he cried .
`` 'That evening there came what seemed to me to be a grand release , for Hudson told us that he was going to leave us .
He walked into the dining-room as we sat after dinner , and announced his intention in the thick voice of a half-drunken man .
`` ' '' I 've not had my 'pology , '' said he sulkily , glancing in my direction .
`` ' '' On the contrary , I think that we have both shown extraordinary patience towards him , '' I answered .
`` As he spoke we came round the curve of the avenue , and saw in the fading light that every blind in the house had been drawn down .
As we dashed up to the door , my friend 's face convulsed with grief , a gentleman in black emerged from it .
`` Victor Trevor sank his face into his shaking hands .
'It must be that , I suppose , ' said he .
`` This is worse than death , for it means disgrace as well .
But what is the meaning of these `` head-keepers '' and `` hen-pheasants '' ? '
`` 'My name , dear lad , is not Trevor .
I was James Armitage in my younger days , and you can understand now the shock that it was to me a few weeks ago when your college friend addressed me in words which seemed to imply that he had surprised my secret .
As Armitage it was that I entered a London banking-house , and as Armitage I was convicted of breaking my country 's laws , and was sentenced to transportation .
Do not think very harshly of me , laddie .
It was a debt of honor , so called , which I had to pay , and I used money which was not my own to do it , in the certainty that I could replace it before there could be any possibility of its being missed .
But the most dreadful ill-luck pursued me .
The money which I had reckoned upon never came to hand , and a premature examination of accounts exposed my deficit .
The case might have been dealt leniently with , but the laws were more harshly administered thirty years ago than now , and on my twenty-third birthday I found myself chained as a felon with thirty-seven other convicts in 'tween-decks of the bark _Gloria Scott_ , bound for Australia .
`` ' '' I 'm Jack Prendergast , '' said he , `` and by God !
You 'll learn to bless my name before you 've done with me . ''
`` 'I remembered hearing of his case , for it was one which had made an immense sensation throughout the country some time before my own arrest .
He was a man of good family and of great ability , but of incurably vicious habits , who had by an ingenious system of fraud obtained huge sums of money from the leading London merchants .
`` ' '' Ha , ha !
You remember my case ! ''
`` ' '' Then maybe you remember something queer about it ? ''
`` ' '' I have no idea , '' said I .
`` Reginald Musgrave had been in the same college as myself , and I had some slight acquaintance with him .
He was not generally popular among the undergraduates , though it always seemed to me that what was set down as pride was really an attempt to cover extreme natural diffidence .
In appearance he was a man of exceedingly aristocratic type , thin , high-nosed , and large-eyed , with languid and yet courtly manners .
He was indeed a scion of one of the very oldest families in the kingdom , though his branch was a cadet one which had separated from the northern Musgraves some time in the sixteenth century , and had established itself in western Sussex , where the Manor House of Hurlstone is perhaps the oldest inhabited building in the county .
Something of his birth place seemed to cling to the man , and I never looked at his pale , keen face or the poise of his head without associating him with gray archways and mullioned windows and all the venerable wreckage of a feudal keep .
Once or twice we drifted into talk , and I can remember that more than once he expressed a keen interest in my methods of observation and inference .
`` 'You probably heard of my poor father 's death , ' said he ; 'he was carried off about two years ago .
Since then I have of course had the Hurlstone estates to manage , and as I am member for my district as well , my life has been a busy one .
But I understand , Holmes , that you are turning to practical ends those powers with which you used to amaze us ? '
`` 'I am delighted to hear it , for your advice at present would be exceedingly valuable to me .
We have had some very strange doings at Hurlstone , and the police have been able to throw no light upon the matter .
It is really the most extraordinary and inexplicable business . '
`` Reginald Musgrave sat down opposite to me , and lit the cigarette which I had pushed towards him .
`` ' '' For two days after this Brunton was most assiduous in his attention to his duties .
I made no allusion to what had passed , and waited with some curiosity to see how he would cover his disgrace .
On the third morning , however he did not appear , as was his custom , after breakfast to receive my instructions for the day .
As I left the dining-room I happened to meet Rachel Howells , the maid .
I have told you that she had only recently recovered from an illness , and was looking so wretchedly pale and wan that I remonstrated with her for being at work .
`` 'Of course , we had the drags at once , and set to work to recover the remains , but no trace of the body could we find .
On the other hand , we brought to the surface an object of a most unexpected kind .
It was a linen bag which contained within it a mass of old rusted and discolored metal and several dull-colored pieces of pebble or glass .
This strange find was all that we could get from the mere , and , although we made every possible search and inquiry yesterday , we know nothing of the fate either of Rachel Howells or of Richard Brunton .
The county police are at their wits ' end , and I have come up to you as a last resource . '
`` 'It is rather an absurd business , this ritual of ours , ' he answered .
'But it has at least the saving grace of antiquity to excuse it .
I have a copy of the questions and answers here if you care to run your eye over them . '
`` He handed me the very paper which I have here , Watson , and this is the strange catechism to which each Musgrave had to submit when he came to man 's estate .
I will read you the questions and answers as they stand .
`` 'He simply wished , I should imagine , to refresh his memory upon that last occasion .
He had , as I understand , some sort of map or chart which he was comparing with the manuscript , and which he thrust into his pocket when you appeared . '
`` 'There used to be a very old one over yonder but it was struck by lightning ten years ago , and we cut down the stump . '
`` 'I suppose it is impossible to find out how high the elm was ? '
`` 'I can give you it at once .
It was sixty-four feet . '
`` Reginald Musgrave looked at me in astonishment .
'Now that you call it to my mind , ' he answered , 'Brunton did ask me about the height of the tree some months ago , in connection with some little argument with the groom . '
`` It had been used for the storage of wood , but the billets , which had evidently been littered over the floor , were now piled at the sides , so as to leave a clear space in the middle .
In this space lay a large and heavy flagstone with a rusted iron ring in the centre to which a thick shepherd's-check muffler was attached .
`` But for two of them , and one a woman , it must have been heavy work the raising of that stone .
A burly Sussex policeman and I had found it no light job .
What would they do to assist them ?
Probably what I should have done myself .
I rose and examined carefully the different billets of wood which were scattered round the floor .
Almost at once I came upon what I expected .
One piece , about three feet in length , had a very marked indentation at one end , while several were flattened at the sides as if they had been compressed by some considerable weight .
Evidently , as they had dragged the stone up they had thrust the chunks of wood into the chink , until at last , when the opening was large enough to crawl through , they would hold it open by a billet placed lengthwise , which might very well become indented at the lower end , since the whole weight of the stone would press it down on to the edge of this other slab .
So far I was still on safe ground .
`` What smouldering fire of vengeance had suddenly sprung into flame in this passionate Celtic woman 's soul when she saw the man who had wronged her -- wronged her , perhaps , far more than we suspected -- in her power ?
Was it a chance that the wood had slipped , and that the stone had shut Brunton into what had become his sepulchre ?
Had she only been guilty of silence as to his fate ?
Or had some sudden blow from her hand dashed the support away and sent the slab crashing down into its place ?
Be that as it might , I seemed to see that woman 's figure still clutching at her treasure trove and flying wildly up the winding stair , with her ears ringing perhaps with the muffled screams from behind her and with the drumming of frenzied hands against the slab of stone which was choking her faithless lover 's life out .
`` 'Ah , that is a question that will take some time to answer . '
And with that I sketched out to him the whole long chain of surmise and of proof which I had constructed .
The twilight had closed in and the moon was shining brightly in the sky before my narrative was finished .
`` 'And how was it then that Charles did not get his crown when he returned ? '
asked Musgrave , pushing back the relic into its linen bag .
It was some time before the health of my friend Mr. Sherlock Holmes recovered from the strain caused by his immense exertions in the spring of '87 .
The whole question of the Netherland-Sumatra Company and of the colossal schemes of Baron Maupertuis are too recent in the minds of the public , and are too intimately concerned with politics and finance to be fitting subjects for this series of sketches .
They led , however , in an indirect fashion to a singular and complex problem which gave my friend an opportunity of demonstrating the value of a fresh weapon among the many with which he waged his life-long battle against crime .
`` The burglar , sir .
He was off like a shot and got clean away .
He 'd just broke in at the pantry window when William came on him and met his end in saving his master 's property . ''
`` It was last night , sir , somewhere about twelve . ''
It may prove the simplest matter in the world , but all the same at first glance this is just a little curious , is it not ?
A gang of burglars acting in the country might be expected to vary the scene of their operations , and not to crack two cribs in the same district within a few days .
When you spoke last night of taking precautions I remember that it passed through my mind that this was probably the last parish in England to which the thief or thieves would be likely to turn their attention -- which shows that I have still much to learn . ''
`` Yes , sir .
But he was off like a deer after the shot that killed poor William Kirwan was fired .
Mr. Cunningham saw him from the bedroom window , and Mr. Alec Cunningham saw him from the back passage .
It was quarter to twelve when the alarm broke out .
Mr. Cunningham had just got into bed , and Mr. Alec was smoking a pipe in his dressing-gown .
They both heard William the coachman calling for help , and Mr. Alec ran down to see what was the matter .
The back door was open , and as he came to the foot of the stairs he saw two men wrestling together outside .
One of them fired a shot , the other dropped , and the murderer rushed across the garden and over the hedge .
Mr. Cunningham , looking out of his bedroom , saw the fellow as he gained the road , but lost sight of him at once .
Mr. Alec stopped to see if he could help the dying man , and so the villain got clean away .
Beyond the fact that he was a middle-sized man and dressed in some dark stuff , we have no personal clue ; but we are making energetic inquiries , and if he is a stranger we shall soon find him out . ''
`` Some folks might say there was madness in his method , '' muttered the Inspector .
`` But he 's all on fire to start , Colonel , so we had best go out if you are ready . ''
We found Holmes pacing up and down in the field , his chin sunk upon his breast , and his hands thrust into his trousers pockets .
`` It should give a clue , Mr .
`` There 's only one , '' answered the Inspector .
`` We thought that if we could only find -- Good heavens , Mr. Holmes !
What is the matter ? ''
`` I was smoking in my dressing-room . ''
`` It depends on what the things were , '' said Holmes .
`` You must remember that we are dealing with a burglar who is a very peculiar fellow , and who appears to work on lines of his own .
Look , for example , at the queer lot of things which he took from Acton 's -- what was it ?
-- a ball of string , a letter-weight , and I do n't know what other odds and ends . ''
`` You see you begin , 'Whereas , at about a quarter to one on Tuesday morning an attempt was made , ' and so on .
It was at a quarter to twelve , as a matter of fact . ''
`` And now , '' said he , `` it really would be a good thing that we should all go over the house together and make certain that this rather erratic burglar did not , after all , carry anything away with him . ''
`` We have never found it necessary . ''
`` Still , I must ask you to humor me a little further .
I should like , for example , to see how far the windows of the bedrooms command the front .
This , I understand is your son 's room '' -- he pushed open the door -- '' and that , I presume , is the dressing-room in which he sat smoking when the alarm was given .
Where does the window of that look out to ? ''
He stepped across the bedroom , pushed open the door , and glanced round the other chamber .
`` You 've done it now , Watson , '' said he , coolly .
`` A pretty mess you've made of the carpet . ''
cried the Inspector , `` where 's he got to ? ''
`` Wait here an instant , '' said young Alec Cunningham .
`` The fellow is off his head , in my opinion .
Come with me , father , and see where he has got to ! ''
`` I am afraid that my explanation may disillusion you but it has always been my habit to hide none of my methods , either from my friend Watson or from any one who might take an intelligent interest in them .
But , first , as I am rather shaken by the knocking about which I had in the dressing-room , I think that I shall help myself to a dash of your brandy , Colonel .
My strength had been rather tried of late . ''
`` There is a further point , however , which is subtler and of greater interest .
There is something in common between these hands .
They belong to men who are blood-relatives .
It may be most obvious to you in the Greek e 's , but to me there are many small points which indicate the same thing .
I have no doubt at all that a family mannerism can be traced in these two specimens of writing .
I am only , of course , giving you the leading results now of my examination of the paper .
There were twenty-three other deductions which would be of more interest to experts than to you .
They all tend to deepen the impression upon my mind that the Cunninghams , father and son , had written this letter .
`` Good heavens ! ''
cried the Colonel , laughing , `` do you mean to say all our sympathy was wasted and your fit an imposture ? ''
`` I could see that you were commiserating me over my weakness , '' said Holmes , laughing .
`` I was sorry to cause you the sympathetic pain which I know that you felt .
We then went upstairs together , and having entered the room and seen the dressing-gown hanging up behind the door , I contrived , by upsetting a table , to engage their attention for the moment , and slipped back to examine the pockets .
I had hardly got the paper , however -- which was , as I had expected , in one of them -- when the two Cunninghams were on me , and would , I verily believe , have murdered me then and there but for your prompt and friendly aid .
As it is , I feel that young man 's grip on my throat now , and the father has twisted my wrist round in the effort to get the paper out of my hand .
They saw that I must know all about it , you see , and the sudden change from absolute security to complete despair made them perfectly desperate .
He has left two nail-marks from his boot upon your linoleum just where the light strikes it .
No , thank you , I had some supper at Waterloo , but I 'll smoke a pipe with you with pleasure . ''
`` I have no doubt Jackson would take my practice . ''
`` Colonel Barclay had married at the time when he was a sergeant , and his wife , whose maiden name was Miss Nancy Devoy , was the daughter of a former color-sergeant in the same corps .
There was , therefore , as can be imagined , some little social friction when the young couple ( for they were still young ) found themselves in their new surroundings .
They appear , however , to have quickly adapted themselves , and Mrs. Barclay has always , I understand , been as popular with the ladies of the regiment as her husband was with his brother officers .
I may add that she was a woman of great beauty , and that even now , when she has been married for upwards of thirty years , she is still of a striking and queenly appearance .
`` Colonel Barclay himself seems to have had some singular traits in his character .
He was a dashing , jovial old soldier in his usual mood , but there were occasions on which he seemed to show himself capable of considerable violence and vindictiveness .
This side of his nature , however , appears never to have been turned towards his wife .
Another fact , which had struck Major Murphy and three out of five of the other officers with whom I conversed , was the singular sort of depression which came upon him at times .
As the major expressed it , the smile had often been struck from his mouth , as if by some invisible hand , when he has been joining the gayeties and chaff of the mess-table .
For days on end , when the mood was on him , he has been sunk in the deepest gloom .
This and a certain tinge of superstition were the only unusual traits in his character which his brother officers had observed .
The latter peculiarity took the form of a dislike to being left alone , especially after dark .
This puerile feature in a nature which was conspicuously manly had often given rise to comment and conjecture .
`` Now for the events at Lachine between nine and ten on the evening of last Monday . ''
`` Your discoveries seem to have left the business more obscure that it was before , '' said I .
`` Thank you , you have gone rather too far to stop . ''
`` This is the street , '' said he , as we turned into a short thoroughfare lined with plain two-storied brick houses .
`` Ah , here is Simpson to report . ''
Are you in the police yourself ? ''
`` Who killed Colonel James Barclay , then ? ''
`` It was in this way , sir .
You see me now with my back like a camel and my ribs all awry , but there was a time when Corporal Henry Wood was the smartest man in the 117th foot .
We were in India then , in cantonments , at a place we 'll call Bhurtee .
Barclay , who died the other day , was sergeant in the same company as myself , and the belle of the regiment , ay , and the finest girl that ever had the breath of life between her lips , was Nancy Devoy , the daughter of the color-sergeant .
There were two men that loved her , and one that she loved , and you 'll smile when you look at this poor thing huddled before the fire , and hear me say that it was for my good looks that she loved me .
We were in time to overtake the major before he reached the corner .
`` That one word , my dear Watson , should have told me the whole story had I been the ideal reasoner which you are so fond of depicting .
It was evidently a term of reproach . ''
`` You do yourself an injustice .
The features are given to man as the means by which he shall express his emotions , and yours are faithful servants . ''
`` No , I can not . ''
A doctor 's -- general practitioner , I perceive , '' said Holmes .
`` Not been long in practice , but has had a good deal to do .
Come to consult us , I fancy !
Lucky we came back ! ''
`` A retired army surgeon . ''
`` 'But why ? '
`` I may say with confidence that he never had occasion to regret his speculation .
From the first it was a success .
A few good cases and the reputation which I had won in the hospital brought me rapidly to the front , and during the last few years I have made him a rich man .
`` Some weeks ago Mr. Blessington came down to me in , as it seemed to me , a state of considerable agitation .
He spoke of some burglary which , he said , had been committed in the West End , and he appeared , I remember , to be quite unnecessarily excited about it , declaring that a day should not pass before we should add stronger bolts to our windows and doors .
For a week he continued to be in a peculiar state of restlessness , peering continually out of the windows , and ceasing to take the short walk which had usually been the prelude to his dinner .
From his manner it struck me that he was in mortal dread of something or somebody , but when I questioned him upon the point he became so offensive that I was compelled to drop the subject .
Gradually , as time passed , his fears appeared to die away , and he had renewed his former habits , when a fresh event reduced him to the pitiable state of prostration in which he now lies .
`` 'Who has been in my room ? '
`` 'No one , ' said I .
`` Mr. Blessington seemed more excited over the matter than I should have thought possible , though of course it was enough to disturb anybody's peace of mind .
He actually sat crying in an arm-chair , and I could hardly get him to speak coherently .
It was his suggestion that I should come round to you , and of course I at once saw the propriety of it , for certainly the incident is a very singular one , though he appears to completely overrate its importance .
If you would only come back with me in my brougham , you would at least be able to soothe him , though I can hardly hope that you will be able to explain this remarkable occurrence . ''
`` You see that , '' said he , pointing to a big black box at the end of his bed .
`` I have never been a very rich man , Mr. Holmes -- never made but one investment in my life , as Dr. Trevelyan would tell you .
But I don't believe in bankers .
I would never trust a banker , Mr. Holmes .
Between ourselves , what little I have is in that box , so you can understand what it means to me when unknown people force themselves into my rooms . ''
`` And no advice for me ? ''
cried Blessington , in a breaking voice .
`` And the catalepsy ? ''
`` My dear fellow , '' said he , `` it was one of the first solutions which occurred to me , but I was soon able to corroborate the doctor 's tale .
This young man has left prints upon the stair-carpet which made it quite superfluous for me to ask to see those which he had made in the room .
When I tell you that his shoes were square-toed instead of being pointed like Blessington 's , and were quite an inch and a third longer than the doctor 's , you will acknowledge that there can be no doubt as to his individuality .
But we may sleep on it now , for I shall be surprised if we do not hear something further from Brook Street in the morning . ''
`` The Brook Street business . ''
`` Yes , he hanged himself during the night . ''
`` Oh , this is an Havana , and these others are cigars of the peculiar sort which are imported by the Dutch from their East Indian colonies .
They are usually wrapped in straw , you know , and are thinner for their length than any other brand . ''
He picked up the four ends and examined them with his pocket-lens .
`` Why should any one murder a man in so clumsy a fashion as by hanging him ? ''
`` That is what we have to find out . ''
`` It is cut off this , '' said Dr. Trevelyan , drawing a large coil from under the bed .
`` He was morbidly nervous of fire , and always kept this beside him , so that he might escape by the window in case the stairs were burning . ''
`` But you have told us nothing ! ''
`` Oh , there can be no doubt as to the sequence of events , '' said Holmes .
`` There were three of them in it : the young man , the old man , and a third , to whose identity I have no clue .
The first two , I need hardly remark , are the same who masqueraded as the Russian count and his son , so we can give a very full description of them .
They were admitted by a confederate inside the house .
If I might offer you a word of advice , Inspector , it would be to arrest the page , who , as I understand , has only recently come into your service , Doctor . ''
`` Having secured him , it is evident to me that a consultation of some sort was held .
Probably it was something in the nature of a judicial proceeding .
It must have lasted for some time , for it was then that these cigars were smoked .
The older man sat in that wicker chair ; it was he who used the cigar-holder .
The younger man sat over yonder ; he knocked his ash off against the chest of drawers .
The third fellow paced up and down .
Blessington , I think , sat upright in the bed , but of that I can not be absolutely certain .
`` Well , it ended by their taking Blessington and hanging him .
The matter was so prearranged that it is my belief that they brought with them some sort of block or pulley which might serve as a gallows .
That screw-driver and those screws were , as I conceive , for fixing it up .
Seeing the hook , however they naturally saved themselves the trouble .
Having finished their work they made off , and the door was barred behind them by their confederate . ''
During my long and intimate acquaintance with Mr. Sherlock Holmes I had never heard him refer to his relations , and hardly ever to his own early life .
This reticence upon his part had increased the somewhat inhuman effect which he produced upon me , until sometimes I found myself regarding him as an isolated phenomenon , a brain without a heart , as deficient in human sympathy as he was pre-eminent in intelligence .
His aversion to women and his disinclination to form new friendships were both typical of his unemotional character , but not more so than his complete suppression of every reference to his own people .
I had come to believe that he was an orphan with no relatives living , but one day , to my very great surprise , he began to talk to me about his brother .
I had never heard of the institution , and my face must have proclaimed as much , for Sherlock Holmes pulled out his watch .
`` You wonder , '' said my companion , `` why it is that Mycroft does not use his powers for detective work .
He is incapable of it . ''
`` I said that he was my superior in observation and deduction .
If the art of the detective began and ended in reasoning from an arm-chair , my brother would be the greatest criminal agent that ever lived .
But he has no ambition and no energy .
He will not even go out of his way to verify his own solutions , and would rather be considered wrong than take the trouble to prove himself right .
Again and again I have taken a problem to him , and have received an explanation which has afterwards proved to be the correct one .
And yet he was absolutely incapable of working out the practical points which must be gone into before a case could be laid before a judge or jury . ''
`` I can not recall the name . ''
`` Come , '' said I , laughing , `` this is a little too much . ''
`` Surely , '' answered Holmes , `` it is not hard to say that a man with that bearing , expression of authority , and sunbaked skin , is a soldier , is more than a private , and is not long from India . ''
`` By the way , Sherlock , '' said he , `` I have had something quite after your own heart -- a most singular problem -- submitted to my judgment .
I really had not the energy to follow it up save in a very incomplete fashion , but it gave me a basis for some pleasing speculation .
If you would care to hear the facts -- ''
`` I am all attention , '' said Sherlock Holmes .
`` As you can imagine , I was utterly taken aback by such an address .
My companion was a powerful , broad-shouldered young fellow , and , apart from the weapon , I should not have had the slightest chance in a struggle with him .
`` 'On no condition ? '
I asked , at the bidding of our tyrant .
`` 'Only if I see her married in my presence by a Greek priest whom I know . '
`` 'The property can never be yours .
What ails you ? '
`` How about the Greek Legation ? ''
As we walked home together , Holmes stopped at a telegraph office and sent off several wires .
`` What was your idea , then ? ''
`` It seemed to me to be obvious that this Greek girl had been carried off by the young Englishman named Harold Latimer . ''
`` Well , if our conjecture is correct and the girl 's name is or was Sophy Kratides , we should have no difficulty in tracing her .
That must be our main hope , for the brother is , of course , a complete stranger .
It is clear that some time has elapsed since this Harold established these relations with the girl -- some weeks , at any rate -- since the brother in Greece has had time to hear of it and come across .
If they have been living in the same place during this time , it is probable that we shall have some answer to Mycroft 's advertisement . ''
`` I passed you in a hansom . ''
`` I had an answer to my advertisement . ''
`` And to what effect ? ''
`` It 's charcoal , '' he cried .
`` Give it time .
It will clear . ''
There is no use writing of the details of that dreadful event .
In the event of your acceding to my request it is probable that I shall have to narrate them to you .
I have only just recovered from nine weeks of brain-fever , and am still exceedingly weak .
Do you think that you could bring your friend Mr. Holmes down to see me ?
I should like to have his opinion of the case , though the authorities assure me that nothing more can be done .
Do try to bring him down , and as soon as possible .
Every minute seems an hour while I live in this state of horrible suspense .
Assure him that if I have not asked his advice sooner it was not because I did not appreciate his talents , but because I have been off my head ever since the blow fell .
Now I am clear again , though I dare not think of it too much for fear of a relapse .
I am still so weak that I have to write , as you see , by dictating .
Do try to bring him .
I handed him the letter , which he read with the most concentrated attention .
`` But the writing is not his own . ''
`` A man 's surely , '' I cried .
I introduced him in a few words , and we both sat down .
The stout young man had left us , but his sister still remained with her hand in that of the invalid .
She was a striking-looking woman , a little short and thick for symmetry , but with a beautiful olive complexion , large , dark , Italian eyes , and a wealth of deep black hair .
Her rich tints made the white face of her companion the more worn and haggard by the contrast .
`` 'Yes , sir . '
`` In the centre ? ''
Phelps , sir ! '
said he , looking at me in bewilderment .
`` 'I was boiling the kettle when I fell asleep , sir . '
He looked at me and then up at the still quivering bell with an ever-growing astonishment upon his face .
`` A cold hand seemed to close round my heart .
Some one , then , was in that room where my precious treaty lay upon the table .
I ran frantically up the stair and along the passage .
There was no one in the corridors , Mr. Holmes .
There was no one in the room .
All was exactly as I left it , save only that the papers which had been committed to my care had been taken from the desk on which they lay .
The copy was there , and the original was gone . ''
`` You were satisfied that he could not have been concealed in the room all the time , or in the corridor which you have just described as dimly lighted ? ''
`` It is absolutely impossible .
A rat could not conceal himself either in the room or the corridor .
There is no cover at all . ''
`` 'How long ago was it ? '
`` But I was after him in an instant and caught him by the sleeve .
`` 'Where do you live ? '
`` We examined the room also .
There is no possibility of a secret door , and the windows are quite thirty feet from the ground .
Both of them were fastened on the inside .
The carpet prevents any possibility of a trap-door , and the ceiling is of the ordinary whitewashed kind .
I will pledge my life that whoever stole my papers could only have come through the door . ''
`` I never smoke myself , so I think I should have observed it if there had been any smell of tobacco .
There was absolutely no clue of any kind .
The only tangible fact was that the commissionnaire 's wife -- Mrs. Tangey was the name -- had hurried out of the place .
He could give no explanation save that it was about the time when the woman always went home .
The policeman and I agreed that our best plan would be to seize the woman before she could get rid of the papers , presuming that she had them .
`` The alarm had reached Scotland Yard by this time , and Mr. Forbes , the detective , came round at once and took up the case with a great deal of energy .
We hired a hansom , and in half an hour we were at the address which had been given to us .
A young woman opened the door , who proved to be Mrs. Tangey 's eldest daughter .
Her mother had not come back yet , and we were shown into the front room to wait .
`` It was in vain that she protested and resisted .
A four-wheeler was brought , and we all three drove back in it .
We had first made an examination of the kitchen , and especially of the kitchen fire , to see whether she might have made away with the papers during the instant that she was alone .
There were no signs , however , of any ashes or scraps .
When we reached Scotland Yard she was handed over at once to the female searcher .
I waited in an agony of suspense until she came back with her report .
There were no signs of the papers .
`` You have furnished me with seven , but , of course , I must test them before I can pronounce upon their value . ''
`` You suspect some one ? ''
`` Look at those big , isolated clumps of building rising up above the slates , like brick islands in a lead-colored sea . ''
`` Light-houses , my boy !
Beacons of the future !
Capsules with hundreds of bright little seeds in each , out of which will spring the wise , better England of the future .
I suppose that man Phelps does not drink ? ''
It was twenty past three when we reached our terminus , and after a hasty luncheon at the buffet we pushed on at once to Scotland Yard .
Holmes had already wired to Forbes , and we found him waiting to receive us -- a small , foxy man with a sharp but by no means amiable expression .
He was decidedly frigid in his manner to us , especially when he heard the errand upon which we had come .
`` Where did the money come from ? ''
`` She saw no one but the constable . ''
`` Well , I must confess that it beats me .
It was a cool hand , whoever it was , to go and give the alarm like that . ''
`` I shall be happy to give you any information in my power . ''
`` Then you could hardly have been overheard ? ''
`` It is out of the question . ''
`` That is most important , '' said Holmes .
`` Of course , it is a possible supposition that the thief has had a sudden illness -- ''
`` Any news ? ''
he asked , eagerly .
`` You have not lost heart , then ? ''
`` I hoped you might have something . ''
`` I should have followed him through the open window if I had been stronger .
As it was , I rang the bell and roused the house .
It took me some little time , for the bell rings in the kitchen and the servants all sleep upstairs .
I shouted , however , and that brought Joseph down , and he roused the others .
Joseph and the groom found marks on the bed outside the window , but the weather has been so dry lately that they found it hopeless to follow the trail across the grass .
There 's a place , however , on the wooden fence which skirts the road which shows signs , they tell me , as if some one had got over , and had snapped the top of the rail in doing so .
I have said nothing to the local police yet , for I thought I had best have your opinion first . ''
`` I am afraid not , '' said Holmes , shaking his head .
`` I think I must ask you to remain sitting exactly where you are . ''
`` It is the side entrance for trades-people .
Of course it is locked at night . ''
The plump young man led us to a spot where the top of one of the wooden rails had been cracked .
A small fragment of the wood was hanging down .
Holmes pulled it off and examined it critically .
`` He will come to London with us . ''
`` Why do you sit moping there , Annie ? ''
`` Come out into the sunshine ! ''
Phelps and I talked it over on our journey , but neither of us could devise a satisfactory reason for this new development .
`` Upon my word , you may put it down to my weak nerves or not , but I believe there is some deep political intrigue going on around me , and that for some reason that passes my understanding my life is aimed at by the conspirators .
It sounds high-flown and absurd , but consider the facts !
Why should a thief try to break in at a bedroom window , where there could be no hope of any plunder , and why should he come with a long knife in his hand ? ''
I was forced to confess that he was right .
`` After all , '' said I , `` the clue of the matter lies probably here in town . ''
said Holmes , soothing , patting him upon the shoulder .
`` It was too bad to spring it on you like this , but Watson here will tell you that I never can resist a touch of the dramatic . ''
Joseph a villain and a thief ! ''
Percy Phelps sank back in his chair .
`` My head whirls , '' said he .
`` Your words have dazed me . ''
`` In reaching the door he would have to pass seven bedrooms .
On the other hand , he could get out on to the lawn with ease .
`` I must apologize for calling so late , '' said he , `` and I must further beg you to be so unconventional as to allow me to leave your house presently by scrambling over your back garden wall . ''
`` 'Danger is part of my trade , ' I remarked .
`` No , my friend , you might find me a dangerous guest .
I have my plans laid , and all will be well .
Matters have gone so far now that they can move without my help as far as the arrest goes , though my presence is necessary for a conviction .
It is obvious , therefore , that I can not do better than get away for the few days which remain before the police are at liberty to act .
It would be a great pleasure to me , therefore , if you could come on to the Continent with me . ''
`` At the station .
The second first-class carriage from the front will be reserved for us . ''
In the morning I obeyed Holmes 's injunctions to the letter .
A hansom was procured with such precaution as would prevent its being one which was placed ready for us , and I drove immediately after breakfast to the Lowther Arcade , through which I hurried at the top of my speed .
A brougham was waiting with a very massive driver wrapped in a dark cloak , who , the instant that I had stepped in , whipped up the horse and rattled off to Victoria Station .
On my alighting there he turned the carriage , and dashed away again without so much as a look in my direction .
`` It was my brother Mycroft .
It is an advantage to get about in such a case without taking a mercenary into your confidence .
But we must plan what we are to do about Moriarty now . ''
`` What I should do ? ''
I was still looking rather ruefully after the rapidly disappearing luggage-van which contained my wardrobe , when Holmes pulled my sleeve and pointed up the line .
We made our way to Brussels that night and spent two days there , moving on upon the third day as far as Strasburg .
On the Monday morning Holmes had telegraphed to the London police , and in the evening we found a reply waiting for us at our hotel .
Holmes tore it open , and then with a bitter curse hurled it into the grate .
`` I might have known it ! ''
`` He has escaped ! ''
I could see his black figure clearly outlined against the green behind him .
I noted him , and the energy with which he walked but he passed from my mind again as I hurried on upon my errand .
`` Well , '' said I , as I came hurrying up , `` I trust that she is no worse ? ''
`` You did not write this ? ''
I said , pulling the letter from my pocket .
`` There is no sick Englishwoman in the hotel ? ''
It was the sight of that Alpine-stock which turned me cold and sick .
He had not gone to Rosenlaui , then .
He had remained on that three-foot path , with sheer wall on one side and sheer drop on the other , until his enemy had overtaken him .
The young Swiss had gone too .
He had probably been in the pay of Moriarty , and had left the two men together .
And then what had happened ?
Who was to tell us what had happened then ?
`` I chose my Paul Veroner monoplane for the job .
There 's nothing like a monoplane when real work is to be done .
Beaumont found that out in very early days .
For one thing it does n't mind damp , and the weather looks as if we should be in the clouds all the time .
It 's a bonny little model and answers my hand like a tender-mouthed horse .
The engine is a ten-cylinder rotary Robur working up to one hundred and seventy-five .
It has all the modern improvements -- enclosed fuselage , high-curved landing skids , brakes , gyroscopic steadiers , and three speeds , worked by an alteration of the angle of the planes upon the Venetian-blind principle .
I took a shot-gun with me and a dozen cartridges filled with buck-shot .
You should have seen the face of Perkins , my old mechanic , when I directed him to put them in .
I was dressed like an Arctic explorer , with two jerseys under my overalls , thick socks inside my padded boots , a storm-cap with flaps , and my talc goggles .
It was stifling outside the hangars , but I was going for the summit of the Himalayas , and had to dress for the part .
Perkins knew there was something on and implored me to take him with me .
Perhaps I should if I were using the biplane , but a monoplane is a one-man show -- if you want to get the last foot of life out of it .
Of course , I took an oxygen bag ; the man who goes for the altitude record without one will either be frozen or smothered -- or both .
`` It was a close , warm day for an English September , and there was the hush and heaviness of impending rain .
Now and then there came sudden puffs of wind from the south-west -- one of them so gusty and unexpected that it caught me napping and turned me half-round for an instant .
I remember the time when gusts and whirls and air-pockets used to be things of danger -- before we learned to put an overmastering power into our engines .
Just as I reached the cloud-banks , with the altimeter marking three thousand , down came the rain .
My word , how it poured !
It drummed upon my wings and lashed against my face , blurring my glasses so that I could hardly see .
I got down on to a low speed , for it was painful to travel against it .
As I got higher it became hail , and I had to turn tail to it .
One of my cylinders was out of action -- a dirty plug , I should imagine , but still I was rising steadily with plenty of power .
After a bit the trouble passed , whatever it was , and I heard the full , deep-throated purr -- the ten singing as one .
That's where the beauty of our modern silencers comes in .
We can at last control our engines by ear .
How they squeal and squeak and sob when they are in trouble !
All those cries for help were wasted in the old days , when every sound was swallowed up by the monstrous racket of the machine .
If only the early aviators could come back to see the beauty and perfection of the mechanism which have been bought at the cost of their lives !
`` These were the thoughts in my head as I climbed that monstrous , inclined plane with the wind sometimes beating in my face and sometimes whistling behind my ears , while the cloud-land beneath me fell away to such a distance that the folds and hummocks of silver had all smoothed out into one flat , shining plain .
But suddenly I had a horrible and unprecedented experience .
I have known before what it is to be in what our neighbours have called a tourbillon , but never on such a scale as this .
That huge , sweeping river of wind of which I have spoken had , as it appears , whirlpools within it which were as monstrous as itself .
Without a moment 's warning I was dragged suddenly into the heart of one .
I spun round for a minute or two with such velocity that I almost lost my senses , and then fell suddenly , left wing foremost , down the vacuum funnel in the centre .
I dropped like a stone , and lost nearly a thousand feet .
It was only my belt that kept me in my seat , and the shock and breathlessness left me hanging half-insensible over the side of the fuselage .
But I am always capable of a supreme effort -- it is my one great merit as an aviator .
I was conscious that the descent was slower .
The whirlpool was a cone rather than a funnel , and I had come to the apex .
With a terrific wrench , throwing my weight all to one side , I levelled my planes and brought her head away from the wind .
In an instant I had shot out of the eddies and was skimming down the sky .
Then , shaken but victorious , I turned her nose up and began once more my steady grind on the upward spiral .
I took a large sweep to avoid the danger-spot of the whirlpool , and soon I was safely above it .
Just after one o'clock I was twenty-one thousand feet above the sea-level .
To my great joy I had topped the gale , and with every hundred feet of ascent the air grew stiller .
On the other hand , it was very cold , and I was conscious of that peculiar nausea which goes with rarefaction of the air .
For the first time I unscrewed the mouth of my oxygen bag and took an occasional whiff of the glorious gas .
I could feel it running like a cordial through my veins , and I was exhilarated almost to the point of drunkenness .
I shouted and sang as I soared upwards into the cold , still outer world .
`` I had half-turned my monoplane , that I might look after this beautiful creature , when , in a moment , I found myself amidst a perfect fleet of them , of all sizes , but none so large as the first .
Some were quite small , but the majority about as big as an average balloon , and with much the same curvature at the top .
There was in them a delicacy of texture and colouring which reminded me of the finest Venetian glass .
Pale shades of pink and green were the prevailing tints , but all had a lovely iridescence where the sun shimmered through their dainty forms .
Some hundreds of them drifted past me , a wonderful fairy squadron of strange unknown argosies of the sky -- creatures whose forms and substance were so attuned to these pure heights that one could not conceive anything so delicate within actual sight or sound of earth .
`` But soon my attention was drawn to a new phenomenon -- the serpents of the outer air .
These were long , thin , fantastic coils of vapour-like material , which turned and twisted with great speed , flying round and round at such a pace that the eyes could hardly follow them .
Some of these ghost-like creatures were twenty or thirty feet long , but it was difficult to tell their girth , for their outline was so hazy that it seemed to fade away into the air around them .
These air-snakes were of a very light grey or smoke colour , with some darker lines within , which gave the impression of a definite organism .
One of them whisked past my very face , and I was conscious of a cold , clammy contact , but their composition was so unsubstantial that I could not connect them with any thought of physical danger , any more than the beautiful bell-like creatures which had preceded them .
There was no more solidity in their frames than in the floating spume from a broken wave .
`` And now it is my plan to go once again before I give my results to the world .
My reason for this is that I must surely have something to show by way of proof before I lay such a tale before my fellow-men .
It is true that others will soon follow and will confirm what I have said , and yet I should wish to carry conviction from the first .
Those lovely iridescent bubbles of the air should not be hard to capture .
They drift slowly upon their way , and the swift monoplane could intercept their leisurely course .
It is likely enough that they would dissolve in the heavier layers of the atmosphere , and that some small heap of amorphous jelly might be all that I should bring to earth with me .
And yet something there would surely be by which I could substantiate my story .
Yes , I will go , even if I run a risk by doing so .
These purple horrors would not seem to be numerous .
It is probable that I shall not see one .
If I do I shall dive at once .
At the worst there is always the shot-gun and my knowledge of ... ''
Such in its entirety is the Joyce-Armstrong Statement .
Of the man nothing has since been seen .
Pieces of his shattered monoplane have been picked up in the preserves of Mr. Budd-Lushington upon the borders of Kent and Sussex , within a few miles of the spot where the note-book was discovered .
If the unfortunate aviator 's theory is correct that this air-jungle , as he called it , existed only over the south-west of England , then it would seem that he had fled from it at the full speed of his monoplane , but had been overtaken and devoured by these horrible creatures at some spot in the outer atmosphere above the place where the grim relics were found .
The picture of that monoplane skimming down the sky , with the nameless terrors flying as swiftly beneath it and cutting it off always from the earth while they gradually closed in upon their victim , is one upon which a man who valued his sanity would prefer not to dwell .
There are many , as I am aware , who still jeer at the facts which I have here set down , but even they must admit that Joyce-Armstrong has disappeared , and I would commend to them his own words : `` This note-book may explain what I am trying to do , and how I lost my life in doing it .
But no drivel about accidents or mysteries , if YOU please . ''
I had known Dacre in England , for my researches in the Assyrian Room of the British Museum had been conducted at the time when he was endeavouring to establish a mystic and esoteric meaning in the Babylonian tablets , and this community of interests had brought us together .
Chance remarks had led to daily conversation , and that to something verging upon friendship .
I had promised him that on my next visit to Paris I would call upon him .
At the time when I was able to fulfil my compact I was living in a cottage at Fontainebleau , and as the evening trains were inconvenient , he asked me to spend the night in his house .
`` If the fittings are neither convenient nor conventional , they are at least costly , '' said he , looking round at his shelves .
`` I have expended nearly a quarter of a million of money upon these objects which surround you .
Books , weapons , gems , carvings , tapestries , images -- there is hardly a thing here which has not its history , and it is generally one worth telling . ''
`` I did not even know that there was such a psychology . ''
`` The charlatan is always the pioneer .
From the astrologer came the astronomer , from the alchemist the chemist , from the mesmerist the experimental psychologist .
The quack of yesterday is the professor of tomorrow .
Even such subtle and elusive things as dreams will in time be reduced to system and order .
When that time comes the researches of our friends on the bookshelf yonder will no longer be the amusement of the mystic , but the foundations of a science . ''
That 's the beauty of it .
He owned this curious object , and yet he had someone else 's initials upon it .
Why did he do this ? ''
`` Well , I might , perhaps , guess .
Do you observe something drawn a little farther along the rim ? ''
As I gazed the three men stood up and said something , but I could distinguish no words , though I was aware that it was the central one who was speaking .
They then swept out of the room , followed by the two men with the papers .
At the same instant several rough-looking fellows in stout jerkins came bustling in and removed first the red carpet , and then the boards which formed the dais , so as to entirely clear the room .
When this screen was removed I saw some singular articles of furniture behind it .
One looked like a bed with wooden rollers at each end , and a winch handle to regulate its length .
Another was a wooden horse .
There were several other curious objects , and a number of swinging cords which played over pulleys .
It was not unlike a modern gymnasium .
`` Was that you ?
For God 's sake what 's the matter ? ''
he asked in a husky voice .
`` Oh , Dacre , I am glad to see you !
I have been down into hell .
It was dreadful . ''
`` The torture of the water -- the 'Extraordinary Question , ' as it was called in the genial days of 'Le Roi Soleil . '
Did you stand it out to the end ? ''
`` Yes , it was so . ''
`` It does entirely .
There can be no question that it is indeed the same event .
But who , then , is this lady whose appearance was so attractive and whose end was so horrible ? ''
`` We have already agreed that this is the badge of a marquis or of a marquise , '' said he .
`` We have also settled that the last letter is B . ''
`` I now suggest to you that the other letters from left to right are , M , M , a small d , A , a small d , and then the final B . ''
`` I was puzzled with the same point , '' said Dacre , `` but it admits of a simple explanation .
The case excited extraordinary interest at the time , and nothing could be more natural than that La Reynie , the head of the police , should retain this filler as a grim souvenir .
It was not often that a marchioness of France underwent the extraordinary question .
That he should engrave her initials upon it for the information of others was surely a very ordinary proceeding upon his part . ''
`` And this ? ''
I asked , pointing to the marks upon the leathern neck .
`` Look here , Burger , '' said Kennedy , `` I do wish that you would confide in me . ''
The two famous students of Roman remains sat together in Kennedy's comfortable room overlooking the Corso .
The night was cold , and they had both pulled up their chairs to the unsatisfactory Italian stove which threw out a zone of stuffiness rather than of warmth .
Outside under the bright winter stars lay the modern Rome , the long , double chain of the electric lamps , the brilliantly lighted cafes , the rushing carriages , and the dense throng upon the footpaths .
But inside , in the sumptuous chamber of the rich young English archaeologist , there was only old Rome to be seen .
Cracked and timeworn friezes hung upon the walls , grey old busts of senators and soldiers with their fighting heads and their hard , cruel faces peered out from the corners .
On the centre table , amidst a litter of inscriptions , fragments , and ornaments , there stood the famous reconstruction by Kennedy of the Baths of Caracalla , which excited such interest and admiration when it was exhibited in Berlin .
Amphorae hung from the ceiling , and a litter of curiosities strewed the rich red Turkey carpet .
And of them all there was not one which was not of the most unimpeachable authenticity , and of the utmost rarity and value ; for Kennedy , though little more than thirty , had a European reputation in this particular branch of research , and was , moreover , provided with that long purse which either proves to be a fatal handicap to the student 's energies , or , if his mind is still true to its purpose , gives him an enormous advantage in the race for fame .
Kennedy had often been seduced by whim and pleasure from his studies , but his mind was an incisive one , capable of long and concentrated efforts which ended in sharp reactions of sensuous languor .
His handsome face , with its high , white forehead , its aggressive nose , and its somewhat loose and sensual mouth , was a fair index of the compromise between strength and weakness in his nature .
`` You have given yourself away , Burger ! ''
said he at last .
`` Your words can only apply to one thing .
You have discovered a new catacomb . ''
`` Ah , well , that was not a matter of much importance .
If I were to question you upon some intimate thing would you give me an answer , I wonder !
This new catacomb is a very intimate thing to me , and I should certainly expect some sign of confidence in return . ''
`` No , no ; you have refused , and there is an end of it , '' said Burger , with his basket on his arm .
`` No doubt you are quite right not to answer , and no doubt I am quite right also -- and so again , my dear Kennedy , good night ! ''
`` She is at home with her own people . ''
`` Oh , really -- in England ? ''
`` I tell you that I am very ignorant about these things . ''
`` But how about the other man ? ''
`` We had better do so , then .
A cabman 's suspicions would be aroused if he dropped us both at some lonely spot in the dead of the night . ''
I think it would be best for us to meet at the Gate of the Appian Way at midnight .
I must go back to my lodgings for the matches and candles and things . ''
`` I want you to follow me closely , my friend , '' said Burger .
`` Do not loiter to look at anything upon the way , for the place to which I will take you contains all that you can see , and more .
It will save time for us to go there direct . ''
`` I have a spare candle and a box of matches in my pocket .
By the way , Kennedy , have you any matches ? ''
`` No ; you had better give me some . ''
`` By Jove ! ''
cried Kennedy in an ecstasy , as Burger swung his lantern over the marble .
`` It is a Christian altar -- probably the first one in existence .
Here is the little consecration cross cut upon the corner of it .
No doubt this circular space was used as a church . ''
`` This is most interesting , '' said he , and his voice seemed to boom against the concave vault .
`` As far as my experience goes , it is unique .
Bring the lantern over , Burger , for I want to see them all . ''
`` And the darkness is something dreadful .
I tried it once for an experiment .
Let us try it again ! ''
He stooped to the lantern , and in an instant it was as if an invisible hand was squeezed tightly over each of Kennedy 's eyes .
Never had he known what such darkness was .
It seemed to press upon him and to smother him .
It was a solid obstacle against which the body shrank from advancing .
He put his hands out to push it back from him .
`` It 's very strange , Kennedy , but I could not in the least tell by the sound in which direction you stand .
Could you tell where I am ? ''
There was a rustle somewhere , the vague sound of a foot striking a stone , and then there fell silence upon that old Christian church -- a stagnant , heavy silence which closed round Kennedy and shut him in like water round a drowning man .
`` One of the most interesting discoveries of recent years is that of the new catacomb in Rome , which lies some distance to the east of the well-known vaults of St. Calixtus .
The finding of this important burial-place , which is exceeding rich in most interesting early Christian remains , is due to the energy and sagacity of Dr. Julius Burger , the young German specialist , who is rapidly taking the first place as an authority upon ancient Rome .
Although the first to publish his discovery , it appears that a less fortunate adventurer had anticipated Dr. Burger .
Some months ago Mr. Kennedy , the well-known English student , disappeared suddenly from his rooms in the Corso , and it was conjectured that his association with a recent scandal had driven him to leave Rome .
It appears now that he had in reality fallen a victim to that fervid love of archaeology which had raised him to a distinguished place among living scholars .
His body was discovered in the heart of the new catacomb , and it was evident from the condition of his feet and boots that he had tramped for days through the tortuous corridors which make these subterranean tombs so dangerous to explorers .
The deceased gentleman had , with inexplicable rashness , made his way into this labyrinth without , as far as can be discovered , taking with him either candles or matches , so that his sad fate was the natural result of his own temerity .
What makes the matter more painful is that Dr. Julius Burger was an intimate friend of the deceased .
His joy at the extraordinary find which he has been so fortunate as to make has been greatly marred by the terrible fate of his comrade and fellow-worker . ''
Douglas Stone in his prime was one of the most remarkable men in England .
Indeed , he could hardly be said to have ever reached his prime , for he was but nine-and-thirty at the time of this little incident .
Those who knew him best were aware that famous as he was as a surgeon , he might have succeeded with even greater rapidity in any of a dozen lines of life .
He could have cut his way to fame as a soldier , struggled to it as an explorer , bullied for it in the courts , or built it out of stone and iron as an engineer .
He was born to be great , for he could plan what another man dare not do , and he could do what another man dare not plan .
In surgery none could follow him .
His nerve , his judgement , his intuition , were things apart .
Again and again his knife cut away death , but grazed the very springs of life in doing it , until his assistants were as white as the patient .
His energy , his audacity , his full-blooded self-confidence -- does not the memory of them still linger to the south of Marylebone Road and the north of Oxford Street ?
`` It is too late , '' cried Douglas Stone peevishly .
`` I wo n't go . ''
The butler presented it upon the gold salver which had been given to his master by the wife of a Prime Minister .
A few moments later the butler swung open the door and ushered in a small and decrepit man , who walked with a bent back and with the forward push of the face and blink of the eyes which goes with extreme short sight .
His face was swarthy , and his hair and beard of the deepest black .
In one hand he held a turban of white muslin striped with red , in the other a small chamois-leather bag .
`` I could come in the morning , but I have an engagement which prevents me from seeing your wife tonight . ''
Douglas Stone glanced at his watch .
An hour would not make it too late to visit Lady Sannox .
He had been there later .
And the fee was an extraordinarily high one .
He had been pressed by his creditors lately , and he could not afford to let such a chance pass .
`` Oh , it is so sad a one !
So sad a one !
You have not , perhaps heard of the daggers of the Almohades ? ''
`` You will remember that I have an appointment , sir , '' said the surgeon , with some irritation ; `` pray confine yourself to the necessary details . ''
`` No , no , it is worse than that . ''
`` These daggers are poisoned . ''
`` It is chloroform . ''
`` Oh , no .
We have a very little quiet place off the Euston Road . ''
`` You can wait , '' said he to the driver .
`` Is all well ? ''
The merchant closed the door , and Douglas Stone walked down the narrow passage , glancing about him in some surprise as he did so .
There was no oil-cloth , no mat , no hat-rack .
Deep grey dust and heavy festoons of cobwebs met his eyes everywhere .
Following the old woman up the winding stair , his firm footfall echoed harshly through the silent house .
There was no carpet .
`` That is enough , '' the Turk cried , angrily .
`` Every minute is of importance , and I can not stand here and see my wife allowed to sink .
It only remains for me to give you my thanks for having come , and to call in some other surgeon before it is too late . ''
`` You have had personal experience of this poison ? ''
Douglas Stone turned fiercely upon the man .
The speech was a brutal one .
But the Turk has his own fashion of talk and of thought , and there was no time for wrangling .
Douglas Stone drew a bistoury from his case , opened it and felt the keen straight edge with his forefinger .
Then he held the lamp closer to the bed .
Two dark eyes were gazing up at him through the slit in the yashmak .
They were all iris , and the pupil was hardly to be seen .
`` You have given her a very heavy dose of opium . ''
`` Would it not be well to use the knife while it will be painless ? ''
`` You see you have kept your appointment after all , '' said Lord Sannox .
`` And how about yourself , sir ? ''
Strange how superstitious these countrymen are !
I should have thought better of young Armitage , for he is a man of some education and character , and a very fine fellow for his station in life .
I was standing at the Blue John Gap when he came across the field to me .
I observed this morning that among the numerous tufts of sheep 's wool which lay among the bushes near the cavern there was one which was smeared with blood .
Of course , my reason tells me that if sheep wander into such rocky places they are likely to injure themselves , and yet somehow that splash of crimson gave me a sudden shock , and for a moment I found myself shrinking back in horror from the old Roman arch .
A fetid breath seemed to ooze from the black depths into which I peered .
Could it indeed be possible that some nameless thing , some dreadful presence , was lurking down yonder ?
I should have been incapable of such feelings in the days of my strength , but one grows more nervous and fanciful when one 's health is shaken .
The greater part of the floor of the cavern was covered with boulders of rock or with hard incrustations of lime , but at this particular point there had been a drip from the distant roof , which had left a patch of soft mud .
In the very centre of this there was a huge mark -- an ill-defined blotch , deep , broad and irregular , as if a great boulder had fallen upon it .
No loose stone lay near , however , nor was there anything to account for the impression .
It was far too large to be caused by any possible animal , and besides , there was only the one , and the patch of mud was of such a size that no reasonable stride could have covered it .
As I rose from the examination of that singular mark and then looked round into the black shadows which hemmed me in , I must confess that I felt for a moment a most unpleasant sinking of my heart , and that , do what I could , the candle trembled in my outstretched hand .
And now I come to the point where I met with such sudden and desperate disaster .
A stream , some twenty feet broad , ran across my path , and I walked for some little distance along the bank to find a spot where I could cross dry-shod .
Finally , I came to a place where a single flat boulder lay near the centre , which I could reach in a stride .
As it chanced , however , the rock had been cut away and made top-heavy by the rush of the stream , so that it tilted over as I landed on it and shot me into the ice-cold water .
My candle went out , and I found myself floundering about in utter and absolute darkness .
But I very soon realized how impossible it was .
In that black , velvety darkness one lost all one 's bearings in an instant .
Before I had made a dozen paces , I was utterly bewildered as to my whereabouts .
The rippling of the stream , which was the one sound audible , showed me where it lay , but the moment that I left its bank I was utterly lost .
The idea of finding my way back in absolute darkness through that limestone labyrinth was clearly an impossible one .
By good luck I had slipped several biscuits into my pocket before I left the farm-house .
These I now devoured , and washed them down with a draught from that wretched stream which had been the cause of all my misfortunes .
Then I felt about for a comfortable seat among the rocks , and , having discovered a place where I could get a support for my back , I stretched out my legs and settled myself down to wait .
I was wretchedly damp and cold , but I tried to cheer myself with the reflection that modern science prescribed open windows and walks in all weather for my disease .
Gradually , lulled by the monotonous gurgle of the stream , and by the absolute darkness , I sank into an uneasy slumber .
For a long time I lay upon the rock , too much horrified to move .
I thought of the sound which I had heard coming from the depths of the cave , of Armitage 's fears , of the strange impression in the mud , and now came this final and absolute proof that there was indeed some inconceivable monster , something utterly unearthly and dreadful , which lurked in the hollow of the mountain .
Of its nature or form I could frame no conception , save that it was both light-footed and gigantic .
The combat between my reason , which told me that such things could not be , and my senses , which told me that they were , raged within me as I lay .
Finally , I was almost ready to persuade myself that this experience had been part of some evil dream , and that my abnormal condition might have conjured up an hallucination .
But there remained one final experience which removed the last possibility of doubt from my mind .
I had taken my matches from my armpit and felt them .
They seemed perfectly hard and dry .
Stooping down into a crevice of the rocks , I tried one of them .
To my delight it took fire at once .
I lit the candle , and , with a terrified backward glance into the obscure depths of the cavern , I hurried in the direction of the Roman passage .
As I did so I passed the patch of mud on which I had seen the huge imprint .
Now I stood astonished before it , for there were three similar imprints upon its surface , enormous in size , irregular in outline , of a depth which indicated the ponderous weight which had left them .
Then a great terror surged over me .
Stooping and shading my candle with my hand , I ran in a frenzy of fear to the rocky archway , hastened up it , and never stopped until , with weary feet and panting lungs , I rushed up the final slope of stones , broke through the tangle of briars , and flung myself exhausted upon the soft grass under the peaceful light of the stars .
It was three in the morning when I reached the farm-house , and today I am all unstrung and quivering after my terrific adventure .
As yet I have told no one .
I must move warily in the matter .
What would the poor lonely women , or the uneducated yokels here think of it if I were to tell them my experience ?
Let me go to someone who can understand and advise .
The night of Friday , May 3rd , was dark and cloudy -- the very night for the monster to walk .
About eleven o'clock I went from the farm-house with my lantern and my rifle , having first left a note upon the table of my bedroom in which I said that , if I were missing , search should be made for me in the direction of the Gap .
I made my way to the mouth of the Roman shaft , and , having perched myself among the rocks close to the opening , I shut off my lantern and waited patiently with my loaded rifle ready to my hand .
It was a melancholy vigil .
All down the winding valley I could see the scattered lights of the farm-houses , and the church clock of Chapel-le-Dale tolling the hours came faintly to my ears .
These tokens of my fellow-men served only to make my own position seem the more lonely , and to call for a greater effort to overcome the terror which tempted me continually to get back to the farm , and abandon for ever this dangerous quest .
And yet there lies deep in every man a rooted self-respect which makes it hard for him to turn back from that which he has once undertaken .
This feeling of personal pride was my salvation now , and it was that alone which held me fast when every instinct of my nature was dragging me away .
I am glad now that I had the strength .
In spite of all that is has cost me , my manhood is at least above reproach .
It is hard luck on a young fellow to have expensive tastes , great expectations , aristocratic connections , but no actual money in his pocket , and no profession by which he may earn any .
The fact was that my father , a good , sanguine , easy-going man , had such confidence in the wealth and benevolence of his bachelor elder brother , Lord Southerton , that he took it for granted that I , his only son , would never be called upon to earn a living for myself .
He imagined that if there were not a vacancy for me on the great Southerton Estates , at least there would be found some post in that diplomatic service which still remains the special preserve of our privileged classes .
He died too early to realize how false his calculations had been .
Neither my uncle nor the State took the slightest notice of me , or showed any interest in my career .
An occasional brace of pheasants , or basket of hares , was all that ever reached me to remind me that I was heir to Otwell House and one of the richest estates in the country .
In the meantime , I found myself a bachelor and man about town , living in a suite of apartments in Grosvenor Mansions , with no occupation save that of pigeon-shooting and polo-playing at Hurlingham .
Month by month I realized that it was more and more difficult to get the brokers to renew my bills , or to cash any further post-obits upon an unentailed property .
Ruin lay right across my path , and every day I saw it clearer , nearer , and more absolutely unavoidable .
`` But I was not thinking of going today , '' I answered , frankly -- perhaps even defiantly , for I was determined not to be driven out by this woman .
`` Oh , if it rests with you -- '' said she , and stopped with a most insolent expression in her eyes .
`` Oh , yes -- yes , certainly ! ''
`` Exactly -- a creaking hinge , if ever there was one .
Your inheritance may be a long way off .
Dear me , how awkwardly situated you are ! ''
`` Do n't say another word , my dear boy , '' he cried , with the utmost cordiality ; `` we shall talk it over tonight , and I give you my word that whatever is in my power shall be done . ''
`` My word ! ''
said he , `` what a night ! ''
We passed quietly down the lamp-lit Persian-rugged hall , and through the door at the farther end .
All was dark in the stone corridor , but a stable lantern hung on a hook , and my host took it down and lit it .
There was no grating visible in the passage , so I knew that the beast was in its cage .
`` Yes , but I do n't care about being locked in alone like this . ''
`` Do n't you ? ''
I heard his hearty , chuckling laugh .
`` You wo n't be alone long . ''
He seemed more excited now that he had begun to move about , and he ran swiftly and noiselessly round and round the den , passing continually underneath the iron couch upon which I lay .
It was wonderful to see so great a bulk passing like a shadow , with hardly the softest thudding of velvety pads .
The candle was burning low -- so low that I could hardly see the creature .
And then , with a last flare and splutter it went out altogether .
I was alone with the cat in the dark !
It helps one to face a danger when one knows that one has done all that possibly can be done .
There is nothing for it then but to quietly await the result .
In this case , there was no chance of safety anywhere except the precise spot where I was .
I stretched myself out , therefore , and lay silently , almost breathlessly , hoping that the beast might forget my presence if I did nothing to remind him .
I reckoned that it must already be two o'clock .
At four it would be full dawn .
I had not more than two hours to wait for daylight .
Outside , the storm was still raging , and the rain lashed continually against the little windows .
Inside , the poisonous and fetid air was overpowering .
I could neither hear nor see the cat .
I tried to think about other things -- but only one had power enough to draw my mind from my terrible position .
That was the contemplation of my cousin's villainy , his unparalleled hypocrisy , his malignant hatred of me .
Beneath that cheerful face there lurked the spirit of a mediaeval assassin .
And as I thought of it I saw more clearly how cunningly the thing had been arranged .
He had apparently gone to bed with the others .
No doubt he had his witness to prove it .
Then , unknown to them , he had slipped down , had lured me into his den and abandoned me .
His story would be so simple .
He had left me to finish my cigar in the billiard-room .
I had gone down on my own account to have a last look at the cat .
I had entered the room without observing that the cage was opened , and I had been caught .
How could such a crime be brought home to him ?
Suspicion , perhaps -- but proof , never !
Then he came near the bars , with his back still towards me .
And then I heard him fall , and rise , and fall again , with a sound like the ripping of sacking .
His screams grew fainter until they were lost in the worrying snarl .
And then , after I thought that he was dead , I saw , as in a nightmare , a blinded , tattered , blood-soaked figure running wildly round the room -- and that was the last glimpse which I had of him before I fainted once again .
I have one remembrance of that illness , which might have been part of the ever-changing panorama conjured up by a delirious brain were it not so definitely fixed in my memory .
One night , when the nurse was absent , the door of my chamber opened , and a tall woman in blackest mourning slipped into the room .
She came across to me , and as she bent her sallow face I saw by the faint gleam of the night-light that it was the Brazilian woman whom my cousin had married .
She stared intently into my face , and her expression was more kindly than I had ever seen it .
It was not until I had been back in London for some time that the doctors pronounced me to be well enough to do business .
It was not a very welcome permission to me , for I feared that it would be the signal for an inrush of creditors ; but it was Summers , my lawyer , who first took advantage of it .
A request for a special is not a very uncommon circumstance in a rich commercial centre , but that two should be required upon the same afternoon was most unusual .
It so happened , however , that Mr .
Bland had hardly dismissed the first traveller before a second entered with a similar request .
This was a Mr. Horace Moore , a gentlemanly man of military appearance , who alleged that the sudden serious illness of his wife in London made it absolutely imperative that he should not lose an instant in starting upon the journey .
His distress and anxiety were so evident that Mr .
Bland did all that was possible to meet his wishes .
A second special was out of the question , as the ordinary local service was already somewhat deranged by the first .
There was the alternative , however , that Mr. Moore should share the expense of Monsieur Caratal's train , and should travel in the other empty first-class compartment , if Monsieur Caratal objected to having him in the one which he occupied .
It was difficult to see any objection to such an arrangement , and yet Monsieur Caratal , upon the suggestion being made to him by Mr. Potter Hood , absolutely refused to consider it for an instant .
The train was his , he said , and he would insist upon the exclusive use of it .
All argument failed to overcome his ungracious objections , and finally the plan had to be abandoned .
Mr. Horace Moore left the station in great distress , after learning that his only course was to take the ordinary slow train which leaves Liverpool at six o'clock .
At four thirty-one exactly by the station clock the special train , containing the crippled Monsieur Caratal and his gigantic companion , steamed out of the Liverpool station .
The line was at that time clear , and there should have been no stoppage before Manchester .
`` Presume some mistake as to proposed running of special .
Local train from St. Helens timed to follow it has just arrived and has seen nothing of it .
Bland 's prophecy was not destined to be fulfilled .
Half an hour passed , and then there arrived the following message from the station-master of Kenyon Junction --
`` There are no traces of the missing special .
It is quite certain that she passed here , and that she did not arrive at Barton Moss .
We have detached engine from goods train , and I have myself ridden down the line , but all is clear , and there is no sign of any accident . ''
Bland tore his hair in his perplexity .
`` This is rank lunacy , Hood ! ''
`` Does a train vanish into thin air in England in broad daylight ?
The thing is preposterous .
An engine , a tender , two carriages , a van , five human beings -- and all lost on a straight line of railway !
Unless we get something positive within the next hour I 'll take Inspector Collins , and go down myself . ''
`` As to John Slater , there is no clue to be gathered from his appearance or injuries .
We can only say that , so far as we can see , he met his end by falling off his engine , though why he fell , or what became of the engine after his fall , is a question upon which I do not feel qualified to offer an opinion . ''
In conclusion , the inspector offered his resignation to the Board , being much nettled by an accusation of incompetence in the London papers .
A month elapsed , during which both the police and the company prosecuted their inquiries without the slightest success .
A reward was offered and a pardon promised in case of crime , but they were both unclaimed .
Every day the public opened their papers with the conviction that so grotesque a mystery would at last be solved , but week after week passed by , and a solution remained as far off as ever .
In broad daylight , upon a June afternoon in the most thickly inhabited portion of England , a train with its occupants had disappeared as completely as if some master of subtle chemistry had volatilized it into gas .
Indeed , among the various conjectures which were put forward in the public Press , there were some which seriously asserted that supernatural , or , at least , preternatural , agencies had been at work , and that the deformed Monsieur Caratal was probably a person who was better known under a less polite name .
Others fixed upon his swarthy companion as being the author of the mischief , but what it was exactly which he had done could never be clearly formulated in words .
`` It is one of the elementary principles of practical reasoning , '' he remarked , `` that when the impossible has been eliminated the residuum , HOWEVER IMPROBABLE , must contain the truth .
It is certain that the train left Kenyon Junction .
It is certain that it did not reach Barton Moss .
It is in the highest degree unlikely , but still possible , that it may have taken one of the seven available side lines .
It is obviously impossible for a train to run where there are no rails , and , therefore , we may reduce our improbables to the three open lines , namely the Carnstock Iron Works , the Big Ben , and the Perseverance .
Is there a secret society of colliers , an English Camorra , which is capable of destroying both train and passengers ?
It is improbable , but it is not impossible .
I confess that I am unable to suggest any other solution .
I should certainly advise the company to direct all their energies towards the observation of those three lines , and of the workmen at the end of them .
A careful supervision of the pawnbrokers' shops of the district might possibly bring some suggestive facts to light . ''
The suggestion coming from a recognized authority upon such matters created considerable interest , and a fierce opposition from those who considered such a statement to be a preposterous libel upon an honest and deserving set of men .
The only answer to this criticism was a challenge to the objectors to lay any more feasible explanations before the public .
In reply to this two others were forthcoming ( Times , July 7th and 9th ) .
The first suggested that the train might have run off the metals and be lying submerged in the Lancashire and Staffordshire Canal , which runs parallel to the railway for some hundred of yards .
This suggestion was thrown out of court by the published depth of the canal , which was entirely insufficient to conceal so large an object .
The second correspondent wrote calling attention to the bag which appeared to be the sole luggage which the travellers had brought with them , and suggesting that some novel explosive of immense and pulverizing power might have been concealed in it .
The obvious absurdity , however , of supposing that the whole train might be blown to dust while the metals remained uninjured reduced any such explanation to a farce .
The investigation had drifted into this hopeless position when a new and most unexpected incident occurred .
`` A man whom I could trust was dispatched instantly to South America to travel home with Monsieur Caratal .
Had he arrived in time the ship would never have reached Liverpool ; but alas !
it had already started before my agent could reach it .
I fitted out a small armed brig to intercept it , but again I was unfortunate .
Like all great organizers I was , however , prepared for failure , and had a series of alternatives prepared , one or the other of which must succeed .
You must not underrate the difficulties of my undertaking , or imagine that a mere commonplace assassination would meet the case .
We must destroy not only Monsieur Caratal , but Monsieur Caratal 's documents , and Monsieur Caratal 's companions also , if we had reason to believe that he had communicated his secrets to them .
And you must remember that they were on the alert , and keenly suspicious of any such attempt .
It was a task which was in every way worthy of me , for I am always most masterful where another would be appalled .
`` You may imagine that I could not do all this myself .
What could I know of the English railway lines ?
But money can procure willing agents all the world over , and I soon had one of the acutest brains in England to assist me .
I will mention no names , but it would be unjust to claim all the credit for myself .
My English ally was worthy of such an alliance .
He knew the London and West Coast line thoroughly , and he had the command of a band of workers who were trustworthy and intelligent .
The idea was his , and my own judgement was only required in the details .
We bought over several officials , amongst whom the most important was James McPherson , whom we had ascertained to be the guard most likely to be employed upon a special train .
Smith , the stoker , was also in our employ .
John Slater , the engine-driver , had been approached , but had been found to be obstinate and dangerous , so we desisted .
We had no certainty that Monsieur Caratal would take a special , but we thought it very probable , for it was of the utmost importance to him that he should reach Paris without delay .
It was for this contingency , therefore , that we made special preparations -- preparations which were complete down to the last detail long before his steamer had sighted the shores of England .
You will be amused to learn that there was one of my agents in the pilot-boat which brought that steamer to its moorings .
`` In the meantime you will be interested to know what my movements were .
Everything had been prepared for days before , and only the finishing touches were needed .
The side line which we had chosen had once joined the main line , but it had been disconnected .
We had only to replace a few rails to connect it once more .
These rails had been laid down as far as could be done without danger of attracting attention , and now it was merely a case of completing a juncture with the line , and arranging the points as they had been before .
The sleepers had never been removed , and the rails , fish-plates and rivets were all ready , for we had taken them from a siding on the abandoned portion of the line .
With my small but competent band of workers , we had everything ready long before the special arrived .
When it did arrive , it ran off upon the small side line so easily that the jolting of the points appears to have been entirely unnoticed by the two travellers .
`` The moment that the train was fairly on the side line , Smith , the stoker , slowed-down the engine , and then , having turned it on to the fullest speed again , he and McPherson , with my English lieutenant , sprang off before it was too late .
It may be that it was this slowing-down which first attracted the attention of the travellers , but the train was running at full speed again before their heads appeared at the open window .
It makes me smile to think how bewildered they must have been .
Picture to yourself your own feelings if , on looking out of your luxurious carriage , you suddenly perceived that the lines upon which you ran were rusted and corroded , red and yellow with disuse and decay !
What a catch must have come in their breath as in a second it flashed upon them that it was not Manchester but Death which was waiting for them at the end of that sinister line .
But the train was running with frantic speed , rolling and rocking over the rotten line , while the wheels made a frightful screaming sound upon the rusted surface .
I was close to them , and could see their faces .
Caratal was praying , I think -- there was something like a rosary dangling out of his hand .
The other roared like a bull who smells the blood of the slaughter-house .
He saw us standing on the bank , and he beckoned to us like a madman .
Then he tore at his wrist and threw his dispatch-box out of the window in our direction .
Of course , his meaning was obvious .
Here was the evidence , and they would promise to be silent if their lives were spared .
It would have been very agreeable if we could have done so , but business is business .
Besides , the train was now as much beyond our controls as theirs .
`` And now , having carried out our plans so successfully , it only remained to leave no trace behind us .
Our little band of workers at the other end had already ripped up the rails and disconnected the side line , replacing everything as it had been before .
We were equally busy at the mine .
The funnel and other fragments were thrown in , the shaft was planked over as it used to be , and the lines which led to it were torn up and taken away .
Then , without flurry , but without delay , we all made our way out of the country , most of us to Paris , my English colleague to Manchester , and McPherson to Southampton , whence he emigrated to America .
Let the English papers of that date tell how throughly we had done our work , and how completely we had thrown the cleverest of their detectives off our track .
`` You will remember that Gomez threw his bag of papers out of the window , and I need not say that I secured that bag and brought them to my employers .
It may interest my employers now , however , to learn that out of that bag I took one or two little papers as a souvenir of the occasion .
I have no wish to publish these papers ; but , still , it is every man for himself in this world , and what else can I do if my friends will not come to my aid when I want them ?
Messieurs , you may believe that Herbert de Lernac is quite as formidable when he is against you as when he is with you , and that he is not a man to go to the guillotine until he has seen that every one of you is en route for New Caledonia .
For your own sake , if not for mine , make haste , Monsieur de -- -- , and General -- -- , and Baron -- -- ( you can fill up the blanks for yourselves as you read this ) .
I promise you that in the next edition there will be no blanks to fill .
`` Do you fulfil the conditions which are there laid down ? ''
`` To talk to me about beetles . ''
I looked across to see if he was joking , but , on the contrary , he was leaning eagerly forward across his desk , and there was an expression of something like anxiety in his eyes .
`` Ask Lady Rossiter to have the goodness to step this way , '' said his lordship , and a few moments later the lady was ushered into the room .
She was a small , middle-aged woman , very like Lord Linchmere in appearance , with the same quick , alert features and grey-black hair .
The expression of anxiety , however , which I had observed upon his face was very much more marked upon hers .
Some great grief seemed to have cast its shadow over her features .
As Lord Linchmere presented me she turned her face full upon me , and I was shocked to observe a half-healed scar extending for two inches over her right eyebrow .
It was partly concealed by plaster , but none the less I could see that it had been a serious wound and not long inflicted .
`` Have you met my husband ? ''
The lady was standing beside the desk , and she put her hand upon his shoulder .
It was obvious to me as I saw their faces together that they were brother and sister .
`` Yes , yes , dear ; it is all settled , it is all decided ; in fact , there is no other possible way , that I can see . ''
`` If it ends happily , '' said the lady .
`` Please God ! ''
You may imagine that I had plenty to think of from the time that I left Brook Street until I set out to meet Lord Linchmere at Paddington .
The whole fantastic business kept arranging and rearranging itself in kaleidoscopic forms inside my brain , until I had thought out a dozen explanations , each of them more grotesquely improbable than the last .
And yet I felt that the truth must be something grotesquely improbable also .
At last I gave up all attempts at finding a solution , and contented myself with exactly carrying out the instructions which I had received .
With a hand valise , specimen-case , and a loaded cane , I was waiting at the Paddington bookstall when Lord Linchmere arrived .
He was an even smaller man than I had thought -- frail and peaky , with a manner which was more nervous than it had been in the morning .
He wore a long , thick travelling ulster , and I observed that he carried a heavy blackthorn cudgel in his hand .
`` I think it would very much better , sir , if you were to trust me entirely , '' said I .
`` It is impossible for me to act effectively , when I do not know what are the objects which we have in view , or even where we are going . ''
There was nothing more to be said , and a poor man can put up with a good deal for twenty pounds a day , but I felt none the less that Lord Linchmere was acting rather scurvily towards me .
He wished to convert me into a passive tool , like the blackthorn in his hand .
With his sensitive disposition I could imagine , however , that scandal would be abhorrent to him , and I realized that he would not take me into his confidence until no other course was open to him .
I must trust to my own eyes and ears to solve the mystery , but I had every confidence that I should not trust to them in vain .
A tall , thin figure , curiously angular and bony , had emerged through a gap in the hedge of laurels .
In his hand he held a spud , and he wore gauntleted gardener 's gloves .
A broad-brimmed , grey hat cast his face into shadow , but it struck me as exceedingly austere , with an ill-nourished beard and harsh , irregular features .
The fly pulled up and Lord Linchmere sprang out .
`` I know what I have learned from your work upon the coleoptera , Sir Thomas , '' I answered .
I have said that Sir Thomas Rossiter wore a large hat drawn down over his brows .
As he entered the hall he uncovered himself , and I was at once aware of a singular characteristic which the hat had concealed .
His forehead , which was naturally high , and higher still on account of receding hair , was in a continual state of movement .
Some nervous weakness kept the muscles in a constant spasm , which sometimes produced a mere twitching and sometimes a curious rotary movement unlike anything which I had ever seen before .
It was strikingly visible as he turned towards us after entering the study , and seemed the more singular from the contrast with the hard , steady , grey eyes which looked out from underneath those palpitating brows .
`` I am sorry , '' said he , `` that Lady Rossiter is not here to help me to welcome you .
By the way , Charles , did Evelyn say anything about the date of her return ? ''
`` Because I am nervous of being alone , '' said he .
`` That 's the reason , since you must have a reason . ''
`` And the other ? ''
`` In that case , why not lock your door ? ''
It looked more and more like lunacy .
However , there was nothing for it but to submit .
I shrugged my shoulders and sat down in the arm-chair beside the empty fireplace .
`` And for God 's sake do n't go to sleep , '' said he , and so , taking off only his coat , he threw the coverlet over him and settled down for the night .
`` No , sir .
It is two o'clock . ''
How long I slept I do not know ; but I was suddenly aroused by a sharp tug at my sleeve .
The room was in darkness , but a hot smell of oil told me that the lamp had only that instant been extinguished .
`` Over here ! ''
he whispered , and pulled me into a corner of the room .
In the silence of the night I could distinctly hear that someone was coming down the corridor .
It was a stealthy step , faint and intermittent , as of a man who paused cautiously after every stride .
Sometimes for half a minute there was no sound , and then came the shuffle and creak which told of a fresh advance .
My companion was trembling with excitement .
His hand , which still held my sleeve , twitched like a branch in the wind .
`` It 's he ! ''
The station clock was upon the stroke of five , and the guard was about to give the customary signal to the engine-driver when he observed two belated passengers hurrying down the platform .
The one was an exceptionally tall man , dressed in a long black overcoat with astrakhan collar and cuffs .
I have already said that the evening was an inclement one , and the tall traveller had the high , warm collar turned up to protect his throat against the bitter March wind .
He appeared , as far as the guard could judge by so hurried an inspection , to be a man between fifty and sixty years of age , who had retained a good deal of the vigour and activity of his youth .
In one hand he carried a brown leather Gladstone bag .
His companion was a lady , tall and erect , walking with a vigorous step which outpaced the gentleman beside her .
She wore a long , fawn-coloured dust-cloak , a black , close-fitting toque , and a dark veil which concealed the greater part of her face .
The two might very well have passed as father and daughter .
They walked swiftly down the line of carriages , glancing in at the windows , until the guard , John Palmer , overtook them .
The smoking carriage in which the short , red-faced man with the black beard had been seen was now empty .
Save for a half-smoked cigar , there was no trace whatever of its recent occupant .
The door of this carriage was fastened .
In the next compartment , to which attention had been originally drawn , there was no sign either of the gentleman with the astrakhan collar or of the young lady who accompanied him .
All three passengers had disappeared .
On the other hand , there was found upon the floor of this carriage -- the one in which the tall traveller and the lady had been -- a young man fashionably dressed and of elegant appearance .
He lay with his knees drawn up , and his head resting against the farther door , an elbow upon either seat .
A bullet had penetrated his heart and his death must have been instantaneous .
No one had seen such a man enter the train , and no railway ticket was found in his pocket , neither were there any markings upon his linen , nor papers nor personal property which might help to identify him .
Who he was , whence he had come , and how he had met his end were each as great a mystery as what had occurred to the three people who had started an hour and a half before from Willesden in those two compartments .
On the discovery of the tragedy an examination was instantly made of the tickets of all passengers , and the number of the passengers themselves was counted .
It was found that only three tickets were unaccounted for , corresponding to the three travellers who were missing .
The express was then allowed to proceed , but a new guard was sent with it , and John Palmer was detained as a witness at Rugby .
The carriage which included the two compartments in question was uncoupled and side-tracked .
Then , on the arrival of Inspector Vane , of Scotland Yard , and of Mr. Henderson , a detective in the service of the railway company , an exhaustive inquiry was made into all the circumstances .
The guard also deposed that there was a good deal of movement upon the platform at Willesden Junction , and that though it was certain that no one had either joined or left the train there , it was still quite possible that some of the passengers might have changed unseen from one compartment to another .
It was by no means uncommon for a gentleman to finish his cigar in a smoking carriage and then to change to a clearer atmosphere .
Supposing that the man with the black beard had done so at Willesden ( and the half-smoked cigar upon the floor seemed to favour the supposition ) , he would naturally go into the nearest section , which would bring him into the company of the two other actors in this drama .
Thus the first stage of the affair might be surmised without any great breach of probability .
But what the second stage had been , or how the final one had been arrived at , neither the guard nor the experienced detective officers could suggest .
`` You 'll excuse me if I 'm not very free with names .
There 's less reason now than there was five years ago when mother was still living .
But for all that , I had rather cover up our tracks all I can .
But I owe you an explanation , for if your idea of it was wrong , it was a mighty ingenious one all the same .
I 'll have to go back a little so as you may understand all about it .
`` My people came from Bucks , England , and emigrated to the States in the early fifties .
They settled in Rochester , in the State of New York , where my father ran a large dry goods store .
There were only two sons : myself , James , and my brother , Edward .
I was ten years older than my brother , and after my father died I sort of took the place of a father to him , as an elder brother would .
He was a bright , spirited boy , and just one of the most beautiful creatures that ever lived .
But there was always a soft spot in him , and it was like mould in cheese , for it spread and spread , and nothing that you could do would stop it .
Mother saw it just as clearly as I did , but she went on spoiling him all the same , for he had such a way with him that you could refuse him nothing .
I did all I could to hold him in , and he hated me for my pains .
`` 'Gentlemen , ' said I , 'are you aware whom you are playing with ? '
`` But he soon had his revenge upon me , for when it came to influencing my brother he outweighed me every time .
Edward had kept himself straight in London for the first few weeks , and had done some business with his American watches , until this villain came across his path once more .
I did my best , but the best was little enough .
The next thing I heard there had been a scandal at one of the Northumberland Avenue hotels : a traveller had been fleeced of a large sum by two confederate card-sharpers , and the matter was in the hands of Scotland Yard .
The first I learned of it was in the evening paper , and I was at once certain that my brother and MacCoy were back at their old games .
I hurried at once to Edward 's lodgings .
They told me that he and a tall gentleman ( whom I recognized as MacCoy ) had gone off together , and that he had left the lodgings and taken his things with him .
The landlady had heard them give several directions to the cabman , ending with Euston Station , and she had accidentally overheard the tall gentleman saying something about Manchester .
She believed that that was their destination .
I do n't know whether you are familiar with that part of the Midlands which is drained by the Avon .
It is the most English part of England .
Shakespeare , the flower of the whole race , was born right in the middle of it .
It is a land of rolling pastures , rising in higher folds to the westwards , until they swell into the Malvern Hills .
There are no towns , but numerous villages , each with its grey Norman church .
You have left the brick of the southern and eastern counties behind you , and everything is stone -- stone for the walls , and lichened slabs of stone for the roofs .
It is all grim and solid and massive , as befits the heart of a great nation .
`` You have heard it before , '' I cried .
`` Who can the woman be ? ''
`` But what had you done ? ''
`` Why , what else COULD it be ? ''
`` There are more things in heaven and earth , '' said he .
`` If it is a woman , how does she get there ? ''
How long I slept I do not know , but it was quite dark when I awoke .
Confused by the chlorodyne which I had taken , I lay motionless in a semi-conscious state .
The great room with its high walls covered with books loomed darkly all round me .
A dim radiance from the moonlight came through the farther window , and against this lighter background I saw that Sir John Bollamore was sitting at his study table .
His well-set head and clearly cut profile were sharply outlined against the glimmering square behind him .
He bent as I watched him , and I heard the sharp turning of a key and the rasping of metal upon metal .
As if in a dream I was vaguely conscious that this was the japanned box which stood in front of him , and that he had drawn something out of it , something squat and uncouth , which now lay before him upon the table .
I never realized -- it never occurred to my bemuddled and torpid brain that I was intruding upon his privacy , that he imagined himself to be alone in the room .
And then , just as it rushed upon my horrified perceptions , and I had half risen to announce my presence , I heard a strange , crisp , metallic clicking , and then the voice .
`` When I was a young man , sir , many years younger than you are now , I was launched upon town without a friend or adviser , and with a purse which brought only too many false friends and false advisers to my side .
I drank deeply of the wine of life -- if there is a man living who has drunk more deeply he is not a man whom I envy .
My purse suffered , my character suffered , my constitution suffered , stimulants became a necessity to me , I was a creature from whom my memory recoils .
And it was at that time , the time of my blackest degradation , that God sent into my life the gentlest , sweetest spirit that ever descended as a ministering angel from above .
She loved me , broken as I was , loved me , and spent her life in making a man once more of that which had degraded itself to the level of the beasts .
The sole occupants of the doctor 's house were his housekeeper , an elderly and most respectable woman , named Martha Woods , and a young servant -- Mary Pilling .
The coachman and the surgery-boy slept out .
It was the custom of the doctor to sit at night in his study , which was next the surgery in the wing of the house which was farthest from the servants ' quarters .
This side of the house had a door of its own for the convenience of patients , so that it was possible for the doctor to admit and receive a visitor there without the knowledge of anyone .
As a matter of fact , when patients came late it was quite usual for him to let them in and out by the surgery entrance , for the maid and the housekeeper were in the habit of retiring early .
There is a short , winding drive with a lamp at the end of it leading down from the house to the road .
As Mrs. Madding emerged from the gate a man was coming along the footpath .
Thinking that it might be Dr. Lana returning from some professional visit , she waited for him , and was surprised to see that it was Mr. Arthur Morton , the young squire .
In the light of the lamp she observed that his manner was excited , and that he carried in his hand a heavy hunting-crop .
He was turning in at the gate when she addressed him .
`` The doctor is not in , sir , '' said she .
There were no signs of robbery , and the doctor 's gold watch was safe in his pocket .
He kept a heavy cash-box in the room , and this was discovered to be locked but empty .
Mrs. Woods had an impression that a large sum was usually kept there , but the doctor had paid a heavy corn bill in cash only that very day , and it was conjectured that it was to this and not to a robber that the emptiness of the box was due .
One thing in the room was missing -- but that one thing was suggestive .
The portrait of Miss Morton , which had always stood upon the side-table , had been taken from its frame , and carried off .
Mrs. Woods had observed it there when she waited upon her employer that evening , and now it was gone .
On the other hand , there was picked up from the floor a green eye-patch , which the housekeeper could not remember to have seen before .
Such a patch might , however , be in the possession of a doctor , and there was nothing to indicate that it was in any way connected with the crime .
If this hypothesis were correct , and someone was with Dr. Lana before Mrs. Madding met Mr. Arthur Morton , then who was this someone , and what motives had he for wishing evil to the doctor ?
It was universally admitted that if the friends of the accused could throw light upon this , they would have gone a long way towards establishing his innocence .
But in the meanwhile it was open to the public to say -- as they did say -- that there was no proof that anyone had been there at all except the young squire ; while , on the other hand , there was ample proof that his motives in going were of a sinister kind .
When Mrs. Madding called , the doctor might have retired to his room , or he might , as she thought at the time , have gone out and returned afterwards to find Mr. Arthur Morton waiting for him .
Some of the supporters of the accused laid stress upon the fact that the photograph of his sister Frances , which had been removed from the doctor 's room , had not been found in her brother 's possession .
This argument , however , did not count for much , as he had ample time before his arrest to burn it or to destroy it .
As to the only positive evidence in the case -- the muddy footmarks upon the floor -- they were so blurred by the softness of the carpet that it was impossible to make any trustworthy deduction from them .
The most that could be said was that their appearance was not inconsistent with the theory that they were made by the accused , and it was further shown that his boots were very muddy upon that night .
There had been a heavy shower in the afternoon , and all boots were probably in the same condition .
There followed a prolonged sensation in court , which interrupted the examination of the witness .
Mr. Humphrey : Have you this letter ?
Mr. Humphrey : What is the post-mark ?
Mr. Humphrey : I am prepared to call six other witnesses , my lord , to testify that this letter is in the writing of Doctor Lana .
Miss Morton : Dr. Lana desired his secret to be preserved .
Miss Morton : To save my brother .
The Judge : Then the court adjourns until tomorrow .
As to Dr. Aloysius Lana , he returned to the village from which he had made so dramatic a disappearance , and a complete reconciliation was effected between him and the young squire , the latter having acknowledged that he had entirely misunderstood the other 's motives in withdrawing from his engagement .
That another reconciliation followed may be judged from a notice extracted from a prominent column in the Morning Post :
Leaning over the case I saw an object , some five inches square , which consisted of twelve precious stones in a framework of gold , with golden hooks at two of the corners .
The stones were all varying in sort and colour , but they were of the same size .
Their shapes , arrangement , and gradation of tint made me think of a box of water-colour paints .
Each stone had some hieroglyphic scratched upon its surface .
I was amazed at the variety and beauty of the stones .
`` You have only a few hundred yards to go , '' said he -- I was living in chambers in the Albany .
`` You may as well stay and have a quiet cigar with me .
I very much want your advice . ''
`` This is an anonymous letter which I received this morning , '' said he .
`` I want to read it to you and to have your advice . ''
`` Is that all ? ''
`` Yes , that is all . ''
`` At any rate , '' said I , `` this warning is meant in a friendly spirit , and I should certainly act upon it .
Are the present precautions enough to insure you against robbery ? ''
`` It looks to me , '' said the police inspector , `` as if someone had been trying to take out the stones . ''
`` My fear is , '' said Mortimer , `` that he not only tried , but succeeded .
I believe these four stones to be skilful imitations which have been put in the place of the originals . ''
`` It is certainly most extraordinary , '' said the inspector .
`` I never remember a case like it .
Let us see the watchman . ''
`` Or passed you at the door ? ''
`` That is locked at night , '' my friend explained , `` and in order to reach it anyone from the street would have to open the outside door as well . ''
His investigation , which lasted all the morning , was careful and intelligent , but it led in the end to nothing .
He pointed out to us that there were two possible entrances to the museum which we had not considered .
The one was from the cellars by a trap-door opening in the passage .
The other through a skylight from the lumber-room , overlooking that very chamber to which the intruder had penetrated .
As neither the cellar nor the lumber-room could be entered unless the thief was already within the locked doors , the matter was not of any practical importance , and the dust of cellar and attic assured us that no one had used either one or the other .
Finally , we ended as we began , without the slightest clue as to how , why , or by whom the setting of these four jewels had been tampered with .
There remained one course for Mortimer to take , and he took it .
Leaving the police to continue their fruitless researches , he asked me to accompany him that afternoon in a visit to Professor Andreas .
He took with him the two letters , and it was his intention to openly tax his predecessor with having written the anonymous warning , and to ask him to explain the fact that he should have anticipated so exactly that which had actually occurred .
The Professor was living in a small villa in Upper Norwood , but we were informed by the servant that he was away from home .
Seeing our disappointment , she asked us if we should like to see Miss Andreas , and showed us into the modest drawing-room .
`` Can you give me his Scotch address ? ''
`` No , sir , '' the commissionaire answered .
`` But when I made my round after daylight I had a special look at these stones , and I saw at once that someone had been meddling with them .
Then I called you , sir , and told you .
I was backwards and forwards all night , and I never saw a soul or heard a sound . ''
A curious idea came into my head .
`` This object is a Jewish relic of great antiquity and sanctity , '' said I .
`` How about the anti-Semitic movement ?
Could one conceive that a fanatic of that way of thinking might desecrate -- -- ''
`` No , we shall find our solution nearer than Scotland .
I will tell you what we shall do .
You know that skylight which overlooks the central hall ?
We will leave the electric lights in the hall , and we will keep watch in the lumber-room , you and I , and solve the mystery for ourselves .
If our mysterious visitor is doing four stones at a time , he has four still to do , and there is every reason to think that he will return tonight and complete the job . ''
`` With the utmost pleasure , '' said I ; and so it was agreed .
My companion 's indignation was so great that I could see that he dared not trust himself to reply .
We walked on each side of the old Professor , the astonished commissionaire bringing up the rear .
When we reached the violated case , Mortimer stopped and examined the breastplate .
Already one of the stones of the lower row had had its setting turned back in the same manner as the others .
My friend held it up and glanced furiously at his prisoner .
`` How did you get in ? ''
`` I am determined to hold back nothing , and to take you both completely into my confidence .
I will leave it to your own generosity how far you will use the facts with which I supply you . ''
`` He was much interested in Oriental antiquities , and his knowledge of the subject justified his interest .
Often when he spent the evening with us he would ask permission to go down into the museum and have an opportunity of privately inspecting the various specimens .
You can imagine that I , as an enthusiast , was in sympathy with such a request , and that I felt no surprise at the constancy of his visits .
After his actual engagement to Elise , there was hardly an evening which he did not pass with us , and an hour or two were generally devoted to the museum .
He had the free run of the place , and when I have been away for the evening I had no objection to his doing whatever he wished here .
This state of things was only terminated by the fact of my resignation of my official duties and my retirement to Norwood , where I hoped to have the leisure to write a considerable work which I had planned .
`` 'Elise , ' said he , 'your father has just discovered that I am a villain .
He knows now what you knew before . '
`` 'Good God ! '
'How have you escaped discovery ? '
`` We all stood in silence , my daughter white with emotion , but still holding this man by the hand .
`` 'I see that you are capable of repentance and restitution , ' she answered .
`` My position was a dreadful one .
Here I was with these precious relics in my possession , and how could I return them without a scandal and an exposure ?
I knew the depth of my daughter 's nature too well to suppose that I would ever be able to detach her from this man now that she had entirely given him her heart .
I was not even sure how far it was right to detach her if she had such an ameliorating influence over him .
How could I expose him without injuring her -- and how far was I justified in exposing him when he had voluntarily put himself into my power ?
I thought and thought until at last I formed a resolution which may seem to you to be a foolish one , and yet , if I had to do it again , I believe it would be the best course open to me .
Just one footnote to this narrative .
Within a month Elise Andreas was married to a man whose name , had I the indiscretion to mention it , would appeal to my readers as one who is now widely and deservedly honoured .
But if the truth were known that honour is due not to him , but to the gentle girl who plucked him back when he had gone so far down that dark road along which few return .
THE GREAT SHADOW AND OTHER NAPOLEONIC TALES A. CONAN DOYLE CONTENTS THE GREAT SHADOW I .
THE NIGHT OF THE BEACONS II .
COUSIN EDIE OF EYEMOUTH III .
THE SHADOW ON THE WATERS IV .
THE CHOOSING OF JIM V. THE MAN FROM THE SEA VI .
A WANDERING EAGLE VII .
THE SHADOW ON THE LAND VIII .
THE COMING OF THE CUTTER IX .
THE DOINGS AT WEST INCH X .
THE RETURN OF THE SHADOW XI .
THE GATHERING OF THE NATIONS XII .
THE SHADOW ON THE LAND XIII .
THE END OF THE STORM XIV .
THE TALLY OF DEATH XV .
THE END OF IT THE CRIME OF THE BRIGADIER THE `` SLAPPING SAL '' THE GREAT SHADOW .
THE NIGHT OF THE BEACONS .
It is strange to me , Jock Calder of West Inch , to feel that though now , in the very centre of the nineteenth century , I am but five-and-fifty years of age , and though it is only once in a week perhaps that my wife can pluck out a little grey bristle from over my ear , yet I have lived in a time when the thoughts and the ways of men were as different as though it were another planet from this .
For when I walk in my fields I can see , down Berwick way , the little fluffs of white smoke which tell me of this strange new hundred-legged beast , with coals for food and a thousand men in its belly , for ever crawling over the border .
On a shiny day I can see the glint of the brass work as it takes the curve near Corriemuir ; and then , as I look out to sea , there is the same beast again , or a dozen of them maybe , leaving a trail of black in the air and of white in the water , and swimming in the face of the wind as easily as a salmon up the Tweed .
Such a sight as that would have struck my good old father speechless with wrath as well as surprise ; for he was so stricken with the fear of offending the Creator that he was chary of contradicting Nature , and always held the new thing to be nearly akin to the blasphemous .
As long as God made the horse , and a man down Birmingham way the engine , my good old dad would have stuck by the saddle and the spurs .
But he would have been still more surprised had he seen the peace and kindliness which reigns now in the hearts of men , and the talk in the papers and at the meetings that there is to be no more war -- save , of course , with blacks and such like .
For when he died we had been fighting with scarce a break , save only during two short years , for very nearly a quarter of a century .
Think of it , you who live so quietly and peacefully now !
Babies who were born in the war grew to be bearded men with babies of their own , and still the war continued .
Those who had served and fought in their stalwart prime grew stiff and bent , and yet the ships and the armies were struggling .
It was no wonder that folk came at last to look upon it as the natural state , and thought how queer it must seem to be at peace .
During that long time we fought the Dutch , we fought the Danes , we fought the Spanish , we fought the Turks , we fought the Americans , we fought the Monte-Videans , until it seemed that in this universal struggle no race was too near of kin , or too far away , to be drawn into the quarrel .
But most of all it was the French whom we fought , and the man whom of all others we loathed and feared and admired was the great Captain who ruled them .
It was very well to draw pictures of him , and sing songs about him , and make as though he were an impostor ; but I can tell you that the fear of that man hung like a black shadow over all Europe , and that there was a time when the glint of a fire at night upon the coast would set every woman upon her knees and every man gripping for his musket .
He had always won : that was the terror of it .
The Fates seemed to be behind him .
And now we knew that he lay upon the northern coast with a hundred and fifty thousand veterans , and the boats for their passage .
But it is an old story , how a third of the grown folk of our country took up arms , and how our little one-eyed , one-armed man crushed their fleet .
There was still to be a land of free thinking and free speaking in Europe .
There was a great beacon ready on the hill by Tweedmouth , built up of logs and tar-barrels ; and I can well remember how , night after night , I strained my eyes to see if it were ablaze .
I was only eight at the time , but it is an age when one takes a grief to heart , and I felt as though the fate of the country hung in some fashion upon me and my vigilance .
And then one night as I looked I suddenly saw a little flicker on the beacon hill -- a single red tongue of flame in the darkness .
I remember how I rubbed my eyes , and pinched myself , and rapped my knuckles against the stone window-sill , to make sure that I was indeed awake .
And then the flame shot higher , and I saw the red quivering line upon the water between ; and I dashed into the kitchen , screeching to my father that the French had crossed and the Tweedmouth light was aflame .
He had been talking to Mr. Mitchell , the law student from Edinburgh ; and I can see him now as he knocked his pipe out at the side of the fire , and looked at me from over the top of his horn spectacles .
`` Are you sure , Jock ? ''
`` Sure as death ! ''
He reached out his hand for the Bible upon the table , and opened it upon his knee as though he meant to read to us ; but he shut it again in silence , and hurried out .
We went too , the law student and I , and followed him down to the gate which opens out upon the highway .
From there we could see the red light of the big beacon , and the glimmer of a smaller one to the north of us at Ayton .
My mother came down with two plaids to keep the chill from us , and we all stood there until morning , speaking little to each other , and that little in a whisper .
The road had more folk on it than ever passed along it at night before ; for many of the yeomen up our way had enrolled themselves in the Berwick volunteer regiments , and were riding now as fast as hoof could carry them for the muster .
Some had a stirrup cup or two before parting , and I can not forget one who tore past on a huge white horse , brandishing a great rusty sword in the moonlight .
They shouted to us as they passed that the North Berwick Law fire was blazing , and that it was thought that the alarm had come from Edinburgh Castle .
There were a few who galloped the other way , couriers for Edinburgh , and the laird 's son , and Master Clayton , the deputy sheriff , and such like .
And among others there was one a fine built , heavy man on a roan horse , who pulled up at our gate and asked some question about the road .
He took off his hat to ease himself , and I saw that he had a kindly long-drawn face , and a great high brow that shot away up into tufts of sandy hair .
`` I doubt it 's a false alarm , '' said he .
`` Maybe I 'd ha ' done well to bide where I was ; but now I 've come so far , I 'll break my fast with the regiment . ''
He clapped spurs to his horse , and away he went down the brae .
`` I ken him weel , '' said our student , nodding after him .
`` He 's a lawyer in Edinburgh , and a braw hand at the stringin ' of verses .
Wattie Scott is his name . ''
None of us had heard of it then ; but it was not long before it was the best known name in Scotland , and many a time we thought of how he speered his way of us on the night of the terror .
But early in the morning we had our minds set at ease .
It was grey and cold , and my mother had gone up to the house to make a pot of tea for us , when there came a gig down the road with Dr. Horscroft of Ayton in it and his son Jim .
The collar of the doctor 's brown coat came over his ears , and he looked in a deadly black humour ; for Jim , who was but fifteen years of age , had trooped off to Berwick at the first alarm with his father 's new fowling piece .
All night his dad had chased him , and now there he was , a prisoner , with the barrel of the stolen gun sticking out from behind the seat .
He looked as sulky as his father , with his hands thrust into his side-pockets , his brows drawn down , and his lower lip thrusting out .
`` It 's all a lie ! ''
shouted the doctor as he passed .
`` There has been no landing , and all the fools in Scotland have been gadding about the roads for nothing . ''
His son Jim snarled something up at him on this , and his father struck him a blow with his clenched fist on the side of his head , which sent the boy 's chin forward upon his breast as though he had been stunned .
My father shook his head , for he had a liking for Jim ; but we all walked up to the house again , nodding and blinking , and hardly able to keep our eyes open now that we knew that all was safe , but with a thrill of joy at our hearts such as I have only matched once or twice in my lifetime .
Now all this has little enough to do with what I took my pen up to tell about ; but when a man has a good memory and little skill , he can not draw one thought from his mind without a dozen others trailing out behind it .
And yet , now that I come to think of it , this had something to do with it after all ; for Jim Horscroft had so deadly a quarrel with his father , that he was packed off to the Berwick Academy , and as my father had long wished me to go there , he took advantage of this chance to send me also .
It has a brave sound , West Inch , but it is not a fine estate with a braw house upon it , but only a great hard-bitten , wind-swept sheep run , fringing off into links along the sea-shore , where a frugal man might with hard work just pay his rent and have butter instead of treacle on Sundays .
In the centre there is a grey-stoned slate-roofed house with a byre behind it , and `` 1703 '' scrawled in stonework over the lintel of the door .
There for more than a hundred years our folk have lived , until , for all their poverty , they came to take a good place among the people ; for in the country parts the old yeoman is often better thought of than the new laird .
There was one queer thing about the house of West Inch .
It has been reckoned by engineers and other knowing folk that the boundary line between the two countries ran right through the middle of it , splitting our second-best bedroom into an English half and a Scotch half .
Now the cot in which I always slept was so placed that my head was to the north of the line and my feet to the south of it .
My friends say that if I had chanced to lie the other way my hair might not have been so sandy , nor my mind of so solemn a cast .
This I know , that more than once in my life , when my Scotch head could see no way out of a danger , my good thick English legs have come to my help , and carried me clear away .
But at school I never heard the end of this , for they would call me `` Half-and-half '' and `` The Great Britain , '' and sometimes `` Union Jack . ''
When there was a battle between the Scotch and English boys , one side would kick my shins and the other cuff my ears , and then they would both stop and laugh as though it were something funny .
I could not see what he did , but there was a short , quick gasp of pain .
My mother shook her head , and looked up at the flitches of bacon that hung from the ceiling .
`` Aye , she 'll pay , and she 's coming this very day .
Jock lad , I 'll want you to drive to Ayton and meet the evening coach .
Your Cousin Edie will be in it , and you can fetch her over to West Inch . ''
well , I shall never see him again .
Here are all the green braes and the brown winding road just the same as ever .
And you , Jack , I do n't see any great change in you either .
I hope your manners are better than they used to be .
You wo n't try to put any frogs down my back , will you ? ''
`` It 's very kind of you to come , Cousin Edie , '' I stammered .
`` You 'll find it very dull , I fear . ''
`` Oh yes , that 's Jim Horscroft , my best friend . ''
`` You 're a deal changed from what you used to be , Jack , '' said she , looking at me sideways from under her dark lashes .
`` And there 's my mother , '' said I , `` I doubt she 'd never let me go . ''
We had sprung to our feet at the outburst , and Edie put her hand all in a tremble upon my arm .
For all that hour I had lived for nothing but the fight .
My cap had been whisked away by the wind , but I had never given it a thought .
Now with my heart full I turned upon my Cousin Edie , and the sight of her took me back six years .
There was the vacant staring eye and the parted lips , just as I had seen them in her girlhood , and her little hands were clenched until the knuckles gleamed like ivory .
`` Aye , he did well ! ''
I cried with enthusiasm .
I do not know that she meant to hurt me , though she was never very backward at that ; but whatever her intention , her words seemed to strike straight upon a naked nerve .
Then and there I set off running over the moor , until I burst into the kitchen where my mother and father were sitting on either side of the ingle .
Honest Jim wriggled in his chair at this .
Cousin Edie laughed at all this , and I laughed because she did ; but I was not so sure that it was funny .
But he looked at me in the way that I had often seen at school when the devil was strong in him , and when he knew that he was in the wrong , and yet set his will to brazen it out .
Not a word did he say , but he brushed past me on the narrow path and swaggered on , still brandishing his ash-plant and cutting at the bushes .
I had woke early that day , and with a little thrill of joy which is a rare thing to feel when a man first opens his eyes .
Edie had been kinder than usual the night before , and I had fallen asleep with the thought that maybe at last I had caught the rainbow , and that without any imaginings or make-believes she was learning to love plain , rough Jock Calder of West Inch .
It was this thought , still at my heart , which had given me that little morning chirrup of joy .
And then I remembered that if I hastened I might be in time for her , for it was her custom to go out with the sunrise .
`` Well now , be reasonable , Jock , '' said he , sticking his hands into his pockets and rocking to and fro as he stood .
`` Let me show you how it stands .
Look me in the eye , and you 'll see that I do n't lie .
It 's this Way .
I had met Edi -- Miss Calder that is -- before I came that morning , and there were things which made me look upon her as free ; and , thinking that , I let my mind dwell on her .
Then you said she was n't free , but was promised to you , and that was the worst knock I 've had for a time .
It clean put me off , and I made a fool of myself for some days , and it's a mercy I 'm not in Berwick gaol .
Then by chance I met her again -- on my soul , Jock , it was chance for me -- and when I spoke of you she laughed at the thought .
It was cousin and cousin , she said ; but as for her not being free , or you being more to her than a friend , it was fool 's talk .
So you see , Jock , I was not so much to blame , after all : the more so as she promised that she would let you see by her conduct that you were mistaken in thinking that you had any claim upon her .
You must have noticed that she has hardly had a word for you for these last two weeks . ''
`` I was in a ship that was wrecked , '' said he shortly .
`` What is the town down yonder ? ''
He turned towards the boat , and as he did so he gave a lurch , and would have fallen had he not caught the prow .
On this he seated himself and looked round with a face that was flushed , and two eyes that blazed like a wild beast 's .
He did not look glad , but he drew his brows down over his keen eyes .
`` You are French , are you not ? ''
I asked , as we all walked up the hill together , he with his black bag in his hand and his long blue cloak slung over his shoulder .
With my head cocked and feeling as if I was doing something very fine , instead of being the most egregious fool south of Edinburgh , I marched on down the path with my new acquaintance at my elbow .
I could but thank him for the present , which was of more value than anything I had ever owned in my life .
`` Well , he would be more careful of them if he had them from your hand . ''
I did not know very much French , but I had enough to make that out .
What sort of eagle was this which had flown into our humble little nest ?
`` If the wind were not from the east , '' said I .
`` Oh yes , very brave men , but imbecile .
Ah , _mon Dieu_ , it is incredible how imbecile they would be !
Not they alone , I mean , but all young troops .
They are so afraid of being afraid that they would take no precaution .
Ah , I have seen it !
In Spain I have seen a battalion of conscripts attack a battery of ten pieces .
Up they went , ah , so gallantly !
and presently the hillside looked , from where I stood , like -- how do you say it in English ?
-- a raspberry tart .
And where was our fine battalion of conscripts ?
Then another battalion of young troops tried it , all together in a rush , shouting and yelling ; but what will shouting do against a mitraille of grape ?
And there was our second battalion laid out on the hillside .
And then the foot chasseurs of the Guard , old soldiers , were told to take the battery ; and there was nothing fine about their advance -- no column , no shouting , nobody killed -- just a few scattered lines of tirailleurs and pelotons of support ; but in ten minutes the guns were silenced , and the Spanish gunners cut to pieces .
War must be learned , my young friend , just the same as the farming of sheep . ''
`` Well , but your laws are made down there , and surely that is not good , '' he said at last .
`` No , it would be well to have a Parliament back in Edinburgh , '' said my father ; `` but I am kept so busy with the sheep that I have little enough time to think of such things . ''
`` It is for fine young men like you two to think of it , '' said de Lapp .
`` When a country is injured , it is to its young men that it looks to avenge it . ''
`` But not by so much , '' said he , arching his brows .
`` I was nine-and-twenty in December . ''
That was the most that I ever heard him confess of his past life , and he only shook his head and laughed when we tried to get something more out of him .
There were times when we thought that he was but a clever impostor ; for what could a man of such influence and talents be loitering here in Berwickshire for ?
But one day there came an incident which showed us that he had indeed a history in the past .
`` I do not know who you are , sir , '' he said at last ; `` but you look at me as if you had seen me before . ''
`` Never to my knowledge . ''
`` At the village of Astorga , in the year '8 . ''
You know what the border peel castles are like , I have no doubt .
They were just square heaps built every here and there along the line , so that the folk might have some place of protection against raiders and mosstroopers .
When Percy and his men were over the Marches , then the people would drive some of their cattle into the yard of the tower , shut up the big gate , and light a fire in the brazier at the top , which would be answered by all the other Peel towers , until the lights would go twinkling up to the Lammermuir Hills , and so carry the news on to the Pentlands and to Edinburgh .
But now , of course , all these old keeps were warped and crumbling , and made fine nesting places for the wild birds .
Many a good egg have I had for my collection out of the Corriemuir Peel Tower .
He was not a man whom you could put out of countenance , and his face changed no more than if he had been expecting me there for a twelvemonth ; but there was something in his eyes which let me know that he would have paid a good price to have me back on the brae path again .
And he stepped out suddenly through the hole in the wall , so as to be out of my sight .
`` What are you doing ? ''
I cried ; and then , running out to his side , I looked across the moors to see whom he was beckoning to .
I did not like it , I can tell you ; for there was neither stick nor stone about , and I knew that the brute was dangerous .
The Major was shrieking to it from behind , and I think that the creature thought that he was hallooing it on , so furiously did it rush .
But I knew its name , and I thought that maybe that might give me the privileges of acquaintanceship ; so as it came at me with bristling hair and its nose screwed back between its two red eyes , I cried out `` Bounder !
at the pitch of my lungs .
It had its effect , for the beast passed me with a snarl , and flew along the path on the traces of Bonaventure de Lapp .
`` I was afraid lest he might have hurt you , '' he panted .
`` I am well enough , '' answered the Major ; `` but they will never give me a place unless there is war , and there will be no more war in my time . ''
_ It is only a wolf bite , '' said he .
`` You would not think how I came by it !
You will understand that my horse and I had been struck , the horse killed , and I with my ribs broken by the tumbril .
Well , it was cold -- oh , bitter , bitter !
-- the ground like iron , and no one to help the wounded , so that they froze into such shapes as would make you smile .
I too felt that I was freezing , so what did I do ?
I took my sword , and I opened my dead horse , so well as I could , and I made space in him for me to lie , with one little hole for my mouth .
_ It was warm enough there .
But there was not room for the entire of me , so my feet and part of my legs stuck out .
Then in the night , when I slept , there came the wolves to eat the horse , and they had a little pinch of me also , as you can see ; but after that I was on guard with my pistols , and they had no more of me .
There I lived , very warm and nice , for ten days . ''
It was a dainty cutter of about thirty tons , very swift by the rake of her masts and the lines of her bow .
She was coming up from the south under jib , foresail , and mainsail ; but even as we watched her all her white canvas shut suddenly in , like a kittiwake closing her wings , and we saw the splash of her anchor just under her bowsprit .
She may have been rather less than a quarter of a mile from the shore -- so near that I could see a tall man with a peaked cap , who stood at the quarter with a telescope to his eye , sweeping it backwards and forwards along the coast .
As you come to the farmhouse from the front , you pass up a garden , with little enough in it , which leads out by a wicket-gate to the road ; the same gate at which we stood on the night when the beacons were lit , the night that we saw Walter Scott ride past on his way to Edinburgh .
On the right of this gate , on the garden side , was a bit of a rockery which was said to have been made by my father 's mother many years before .
She had fashioned it out of water-worn stones and sea shells , with mosses and ferns in the chinks .
Well , as we came in through the gates my eyes fell upon this stone heap , and there was a letter stuck in a cleft stick upon the top of it .
I took a step forward to see what it was , but Edie sprang in front of me , and plucking it off she thrust it into her pocket .
`` You confess it ! ''
`` Have you , then , no shame left ? ''
THE DOINGS AT WEST INCH .
`` He wished it to be in a Catholic Church . ''
I remembered then that on that day she had driven over to Berwick , while de Lapp had been away on a long walk , as he said , among the hills .
I waited some little time , and tapped , for I had much still to ask her ; but she would return no answer , and I thought that I could hear her sobbing .
At last I gave it up ; and I was about to go into the house , for it was nearly dark now , when I heard the click of the garden gate .
It was de Lapp himself .
`` And this was whom you were awaiting at the peel tower ! ''
I cried , seeing light suddenly .
`` Why , Jock , you are becoming quite sharp , '' said he , in a mocking tone ; and an instant later I heard the door of his room close and the key turn in the lock .
`` Madame , '' said he , bowing down with his hand over his heart , in his own queer fashion , `` I have met with much kindness in your hands , and it shall always be in my heart .
I did n't thought I could have been so happy in the quiet country as you have made me .
You will accept this small souvenir ; and you also , sir , you will take this little gift , which I have the honour to make to you . ''
My heart was bitter against Cousin Edie as I stood looking into her room .
To think that for the sake of a newcomer she could leave us all without one kindly word , or as much as a hand-shake .
And he , too !
I had been afraid of what would happen when Jim met him ; but now there seemed to be something cowardly in this avoidance of him .
I was angry and hurt and sore , and I went out into the open without a word to my father , and climbed up on to the moors to cool my flushed face .
I stood with my arms folded , feeling as glum as ever I did in my life , until their cutter was only a square hickering patch of white among the mists of the morning .
It was breakfast time and the porridge upon the table before I got back , but I had no heart for the food .
The old folk had taken the matter coolly enough , though my mother had no word too hard for Edie ; for the two had never had much love for each other , and less of late than ever .
`` My friends , -- I did n't thought to have left you so suddenly , but the matter was in other hands than mine .
Duty and honour have called me back to my old comrades .
This you will doubtless understand before many days are past .
I take your Edie with me as my wife ; and it may be that in some more peaceful time you will see us again at West Inch .
Meanwhile , accept the assurance of my affection , and believe me that I shall never forget the quiet months which I spent with you , at the time when my life would have been worth a week at the utmost had I been taken by the Allies .
But the reason of this you may also learn some day . ''
`` Yours , '' `` BONAVENTURE DE LISSAC '' `` ( Colonel des Voltigeurs de la Garde , et aide-de-camp de S.M.I .
said he , and stood nodding his head and looking at me , though I knew very well that he could neither see me , nor the steading , nor anything else .
So he stood for a minute or more , with his hands clenched and his head still nodding .
Then he gave a gulp in his throat , and spoke in a queer dry , rasping voice .
`` May God blast my soul on the day I do !
Where have they gone to ? ''
`` Take it away ! ''
We were in Glasgow next day , and the Major took us down to the depot , where a soldier with three stripes on his arm and a fistful of ribbons from his cap , showed every tooth he had in his head at the sight of Jim , and walked three times round him to have the view of him , as if he had been Carlisle Castle .
Then he came over to me and punched me in the ribs and felt my muscle , and was nigh as pleased as with Jim .
`` These are the sort , Major , these are the sort , '' he kept saying .
`` With a thousand of these we could stand up to Boney 's best . ''
`` A poor show , '' said he , `` but they may lick into shape .
The best men have been drafted to America , and we are full of Militiamen and recruities . ''
Well , well , why should I trouble you with these things ?
I could wear out a good quill-pen just writing about what we did , Jim and I , at the depot in Glasgow ; and how we came to know our officers and our comrades , and how they came to know us .
Soon came the news that the folk of Vienna , who had been cutting up Europe as if it had been a jigget of mutton , had flown back , each to his own country , and that every man and horse in their armies had their faces towards France .
We heard of great reviews and musterings in Paris too , and then that Wellington was in the Low Countries , and that on us and on the Prussians would fall the first blow .
The Government was shipping men over to him as fast as they could , and every port along the east coast was choked with guns and horses and stores .
On the third of June we had our marching orders also , and on the same night we took ship from Leith , reaching Ostend the night after .
It was my first sight of a foreign land , and indeed most of my comrades were the same , for we were very young in the ranks .
I can see the blue waters now , and the curling surf line , and the long yellow beach , and queer windmills twisting and turning -- a thing that a man would not see from one end of Scotland to the other .
It was a clean , well-kept town , but the folk were undersized , and there was neither ale nor oatmeal cakes to be bought amongst them .
Then in an instant all was buzz and bustle , and the news on every lip .
Napoleon had crossed the frontier the day before , had pushed the Prussians before him , and was already deep in the country to the east of us with a hundred and fifty thousand men .
Away we scuttled to gather our things together and have our breakfast , and in an hour we had marched off and left Ath and the Dender behind us for ever .
There was good need for haste , for the Prussians had sent no news to Wellington of what was doing , and though he had rushed from Brussels at the first whisper of it , like a good old mastiff from its kennel , it was hard to see how he could come up in time to help the Prussians .
Out we went , the beautiful music still sounding in our ears , and stood on a rise just outside the barn .
Down below at the bottom of the slope , about half a musket-shot from us , was a snug tiled farm with a hedge and a bit of an apple orchard .
All round it a line of men in red coats and high fur hats were working like bees , knocking holes in the wall and barring up the doors .
From where we stood it was a sight now that was worth coming over the seas to see .
On our own ridge was the chequer of red and blue stretching right away to a village over two miles from us .
It was whispered from man to man in the ranks , however , that there was too much of the blue and too little of the red ; for the Belgians had shown on the day before that their hearts were too soft for the work , and we had twenty thousand of them for comrades .
Then , even our British troops were half made up of militiamen and recruits ; for the pick of the old Peninsular regiments were on the ocean in transports , coming back from some fool 's quarrel with our kinsfolk of America .
But for all that we could see the bearskins of the Guards , two strong brigades of them , and the bonnets of the Highlanders , and the blue of the old German Legion , and the red lines of Pack 's brigade , and Kempt 's brigade and the green dotted riflemen in front , and we knew that come what might these were men who would bide where they were placed , and that they had a man to lead them who would place them where they should bide .
The English battery which fired the first gun was still banging away on our left , and a German one was hard at work upon our right , so that we were wrapped round with the smoke ; but we were not so hidden as to screen us from a line of French guns opposite , for a score of round shot came piping through the air and plumped right into the heart of us .
As I heard the scream of them past my ear my head went down like a diver , but our sergeant gave me a prod in the back with the handle of his halbert .
`` Do n't be so blasted polite , '' said he ; `` when you 're hit , you can bow once and for all . ''
A thin rain was falling and the damp air held the smoke low , so that we could only catch glimpses of what was doing just in front of us , though the roar of the guns told us that the battle was general all along the lines .
Four hundred of them were all crashing at once now , and the noise was enough to split the drum of your ear .
Indeed , there was not one of us but had a singing in his head for many a long day afterwards .
Just opposite us on the slope of the hill was a French gun , and we could see the men serving her quite plainly .
They were small active men , with very tight breeches and high hats with great straight plumes sticking up from them ; but they worked like sheep-shearers , ramming and sponging and training .
There were fourteen when I saw them first , and only four left standing at the last , but they were working away just as hard as ever .
So we lay all morning , looking down at the fight at Hougoumont ; but soon the Duke saw that there was nothing to fear upon his right , and so he began to use us in another way .
`` Steady , 71st !
for God 's sake , steady ! ''
shrieked the voice of our colonel behind us ; but in front was nothing but the green gentle slope of the grassland , all mottled with daisies and dandelions .
`` I fear I 'm here on a wild-goose chase , '' said he gloomily , `` but it 's not over yet .
By God , I 'll have him , or he 'll have me ! ''
When that devil 's roar burst upon our ears there was not a man , down to the drummer boys , who did not understand what it meant .
It was Napoleon 's last great effort to crush us .
There were but two more hours of light , and if we could hold our own for those all would be well .
Starved and weary and spent , we prayed that we might have strength to load and stab and fire while one of us stood upon his feet .
I saw it , and Jim did too .
I heard a shout , and saw him rush forward madly at the French column ; and , as quick as thought , the whole brigade took their cue from him , officers and all , and flung themselves upon the Guard in front , while our comrades charged them on the flanks .
We had been waiting for the order , and they all thought now that it had been given ; but you may take my word for it , that Jim Horscroft was the real leader of the brigade when we charged the Old Guard .
`` Yes , Major ? ''
`` Hola , Jock ! ''
`` I did n't thought to have seen you here , and yet I might have known it , too , when I saw friend Jim . ''
`` It is you that has brought all this trouble , '' said I .
`` This man 's blood lies at your door , '' said I , with my hand on poor Jim's shoulder .
`` And mine on his , so we have paid our debts . ''
The Major had some brandy and water .
De Lissac supped it up eagerly .
His eyes brightened , and a little fleck of colour came back in each of his haggard cheeks .
`` I will remember . ''
`` Oh , my dear old Jock , '' she cried , `` how fine you look in a red coat ! ''
`` My dear Jock , '' said Edie , jumping up , `` this is very important .
I am sorry to cut our chat short , but I am sure that you will come to see me again , will you not , when I am less desolate ?
And would you mind going out by the side door instead of the main one ?
Thank you , you dear old Jock ; you were always such a good boy , and did exactly what you were told . ''
One day Massena sent for me , and I found him in his tent with a great plan pinned upon the table .
He looked at me in silence with that single piercing eye of his , and I felt by his expression that the matter was serious .
He was nervous and ill at ease , but my bearing seemed to reassure him .
It is good to be in contact with brave men .
It was not for me to confirm such a report , and yet it would be folly to deny it , so I clinked my spurs together and saluted .
Ah , how my heart swelled with pride and joy as I sprang into the saddle and galloped this grand horse up and down to show the Marshal the mastery which I had of him !
He was magnificent -- we were both magnificent , for Massena clapped his hands and cried out in his delight .
It was not I , but he , who said that a gallant beast deserves a gallant rider .
Then , when for the third time , with my panache flying and my dolman streaming behind me , I thundered past him , I saw upon his hard old face that he had no longer any doubt that he had chosen the man for his purpose .
I drew my sabre , raised the hilt to my lips in salute , and galloped on to my own quarters .
Already the news had spread that I had been chosen for a mission , and my little rascals came swarming out of their tents to cheer me .
it brings the tears to my old eyes when I think how proud they were of their Colonel .
And I was proud of them also .
They deserved a dashing leader .
My route , then , lay across the face of the high ground of Torres Vedras , then over a streamlet , past a farmhouse which had been burned down and was now only a landmark , then through a forest of young cork oaks , and so to the monastery of San Antonio , which marked the left of the English position .
Here I turned south and rode quietly over the downs , for it was at this point that Massena thought that it would be most easy for me to find my way unobserved through the position .
I went very slowly , for it was so dark that I could not see my hand in front of me .
In such cases I leave my bridle loose and let my horse pick its own way .
Voltigeur went confidently forward , and I was very content to sit upon his back and to peer about me , avoiding every light .
For three hours we advanced in this cautious way , until it seemed to me that I must have left all danger behind me .
I then pushed on more briskly , for I wished to be in the rear of the whole army by daybreak .
There are many vineyards in these parts which in winter become open plains , and a horseman finds few difficulties in his way .
And first of all it was certain that I could not get back .
Long before I could pass the lines it would be broad daylight .
I must hide myself for the day , and then devote the next night to my escape .
I took the saddle , holsters , and bridle from poor Voltigeur , and I concealed them among some bushes , so that no one finding him could know that he was a French horse .
Then , leaving him lying there , I wandered on in search of some place where I might be safe for the day .
In every direction I could see camp fires upon the sides of the hills , and already figures had begun to move around them .
I must hide quickly , or I was lost .
`` You are late , Sir George , '' said the orderly .
The farther we went the faster galloped my horse , and soon there were but three men as near the dogs as I was .
All thought of fear of discovery had vanished .
My brain throbbed , my blood ran hot -- only one thing upon earth seemed worth living for , and that was to overtake this infernal fox .
I passed one of the horsemen -- a Hussar like myself .
There were only two in front of me now : the one in a black coat , the other the blue artilleryman whom I had seen at the inn .
His grey whiskers streamed in the wind , but he rode magnificently .
For a mile or more we kept in this order , and then , as we galloped up a steep slope , my lighter weight brought me to the front .
I passed them both , and when I reached the crown I was riding level with the little , hard-faced English huntsman .
In front of us were the dogs , and then , a hundred paces beyond them , was a brown wisp of a thing , the fox itself , stretched to the uttermost .
The sight of him fired my blood .
`` Aha , we have you then , assassin ! ''
I cried , and shouted my encouragement to the huntsman .
I waved my hand to show him that there was one upon whom he could rely .
`` Hold hard , sir !
Only then did I understand how difficult is this fox-chase , for one may cut again and again at the creature and never strike him once .
He is small , and turns quickly from a blow .
At every cut I heard those shouts of encouragement from behind me , and they spurred me to yet another effort .
And then , at last , the supreme moment of my triumph arrived .
In the very act of turning I caught him fair with such another back-handed cut as that with which I killed the aide-de-camp of the Emperor of Russia .
He flew into two pieces , his head one way and his tail another .
I looked back and waved the blood-stained sabre in the air .
For the moment I was exalted -- superb .
THE `` SLAPPING SAL . ''
`` We were to open them on reaching the deserted island of Sombriero , lying in north latitude eighteen , thirty-six , west longitude sixty-three , twenty-eight .
Sombriero bore four miles to the north-east from our port-bow when the gale cleared , Mr .
`` ( Signed ) JAMES MONTGOMERY , ''
Both officers were looking through their glasses at the brig .
Suddenly the lieutenant showed his teeth in a grin , while the captain flushed a deeper red .
`` Four by the lead , sir . ''
`` Is it the Jolly Rodger , sir ? ''
`` He may hang where his breeches are hanging before I have done with him ! ''
`` What boats will you want , Mr .
`` Two companies of light infantry from Martinique .
Now we have her !
Hard-a-port , and let her have it as we cross her stern ! ''
`` Yes , sir . ''
`` Hold your volley till they touch ! ''
cried the captain of marines .
So that is how they arranged about the date .
My Own Dearest Maude , -- How I wish you were here , for I have been down , down , down , in the deepest state of despondency all day .
I have longed to hear the sound of your voice , or to feel the touch of your hand !
How can I be despondent , when in three weeks I shall be the husband of the dearest girl in England ?
That is what I ask myself , and then the answer comes that it is just exactly on that account that my wretched conscience is gnawing at me .
I feel that I have not used you well ; I owe you reparation , and I do n't know what to do .
And now you must turn to what is in store for you , if you are still content to face the future with me .
Position I have none to offer .
What is the exact position of the wife of the assistant-accountant of the Co-operative Insurance Office ?
What are my prospects ?
I may become head-accountant .
If Dinton died -- and I hope he wo n't , for he is an excellent fellow -- I should probably get his berth .
Beyond that I have no career .
I have some aspirations after literature -- a few critical articles in the monthlies -- but I don't suppose they will ever lead to anything of consequence .
My Own Dearest Girlie , -- How perfectly sweet you are !
I read and re- read your letter , and I understand more and more how infinitely your nature is above mine .
And your conception of love -- how lofty and unselfish it is !
How could I lower it by thinking that any worldly thing could be weighed for an instant against it !
And yet it was just my jealous love for you , and my keenness that you should never be the worse through me , which led me to write in that way , so I will not blame myself too much .
I am really glad that the cloud came , for the sunshine is so much brighter afterwards .
And I seem to know you so much better , and to see so much more deeply into your nature .
I knew that my own passion for you was the very essence of my soul -- oh , how hard it is to put the extreme of emotion into the terms of human speech !
-- but I did not dare to hope that your feelings were as deep .
I hardly ventured to tell even you how I really felt .
Somehow , in these days of lawn-tennis and afternoon tea , a strong strong passion , such a passion as one reads of in books and poems , seems out of place .
I thought that it would surprise , even frighten you , perhaps , if I were to tell you all that I felt .
And now you have written me two letters , which contain all that I should have said if I had spoken from my heart .
It is all my own inmost thought , and there is not a feeling that I do not share .
O Maude , I may write lightly and speak lightly , perhaps , sometimes , but there never was a woman , never , never in all the story of the world , who was loved more passionately than you are loved by me .
Come what may , while the world lasts and the breath of life is between my lips , you are the one woman to me .
If we are together , I care nothing for what the future may bring .
If we are not together , all the world can not fill the void .
I should like you to see me now -- or rather I would n't have you see me for the world .
I am so flushed and untidy , for I have been cooking .
Is it not absurd , if you come to think of it , that we girls should be taught the irregular French verbs , and the geography of China , and never to cook the simplest thing ?
It really does seem ridiculous .
I think the house will do splendidly .
The Lindens is the name , and it is on the Maybury Road , not more than a quarter of a mile from the station .
If your mother and you could come down on Tuesday or Wednesday , I should get a half-day off , and you would be able to inspect it .
Such a nice little lawn in front , and garden behind .
A conservatory , if you please , dining-room and drawing-room .
You can never assemble more than four or five guests .
On your at-home days , we shall put up little placards as they do outside the theatres , 'Drawing-room full , ' 'Dining-room full , ' 'Room in the Conservatory . '
There are two good bedrooms , one large maid 's room , and a lumber- room .
One cook and one housemaid could run it beautifully .
Rent 50 pounds on a three years ' lease -- with taxes , about 62 pounds .
I think it was just built for us .
Rupton Hale says that we must be careful not to brush against the walls , and that it would be safer to go outside to sneeze -- but that is only his fun .
CHAPTER IV -- THE TWO SOLOS
Their tryst was at the Charing Cross bookstall at one o'clock , and so Mr. Frank Crosse was there at quarter-past twelve , striding impatiently up and down , and stopping dead whenever a woman emerged from the entrance , like a pointer dog before a partridge .
Before he came he had been haunted by the idea that possibly Maude might have an impulse to come early -- and what if she were to arrive and not find him there !
Every second of her company was so dear to him , that when driving to meet her he had sometimes changed from one cab to another upon the way , because the second seemed to have the faster horse .
But now that he was on the ground he realised that she was very exact to her word , and that she would neither be early nor late .
And yet , in the illogical fashion of a lover , he soon forgot that it was he who was too soon , and he chafed and chafed as the minutes passed , until at about quarter to one he was striding gloomily about with despondent features and melancholy forebodings , imagining a thousand miserable reasons for her inexplicable delay .
A good many people stared at him as they passed , and we may do so among the number .
'By Jove , it is splendid -- beautiful ! '
'I do n't know .
I like our feelings to be our very very own , and never to show them to any one else at all .
I dare say it is absurd , but that is my instinct . '
'Come here , Maude , into the waiting-room . '
'I only hope you 'll find me out gradually and not suddenly , ' said he .
'Now , Maude , we have all day and all London before us .
What shall we do ?
I want you to choose . '
The workman 's family was still waiting , and Maude handed the child a shilling as she went out .
She was so happy herself that she wanted every one else to be happy also .
The people turned to look at her as she passed .
With the slight flush upon her cheeks and the light in her eyes , she seemed the personification of youth , and life , and love .
One tall old gentleman started as he looked , and watched her with a rapt face until she disappeared .
Some cheek had flushed and some eye had brightened at his words once , and sweet old days had for an instant lived again .
'I ca n't and wo n't be economical to-day . '
But we have not settled yet where we are to go to . '
'There is a good match at the Oval , the Australians against Surrey .
Would you care to see that ? '
'Well , then , first of all I vote that we go and have some lunch . '
Maude insisted upon hearing about Queen Eleanor , and Frank imparted the little that he knew as they walked out into the crowded Strand .
'It is the good kings who may be the dangerous ones . '
'If a king thinks only of pleasure , then he does not interfere with matters of state .
But if he is conscientious , he tries to do what he imagines to be his duty , and so he causes trouble .
Look at Charles , for example .
He was a very good man , and yet he caused a civil war .
George the Third was a most exemplary character , but his stupidity lost us America , and nearly lost us Ireland .
They were each succeeded by thoroughly bad men , who did far less harm . '
They had reached the end of Whitehall , and the splendid panorama of Westminster Abbey and the Houses of Parliament lay before them .
The most stately of ancient English buildings was contrasted with the most beautiful of modern ones .
How anything so graceful came to be built by this tasteless and utilitarian nation must remain a marvel to the traveller .
The sun was shining upon the gold-work of the roof , and the grand towers sprang up amid the light London haze , like some gorgeous palace in a dream .
It was a fit centre for the rule to whose mild sway one-fifth of the human race acquiesces -- a rule upheld by so small a force that only the consent of the governed can sustain it .
CHAPTER V -- IN BRITAIN 'S VALHALLA
'We 'll just get down there after lunch , ' said Frank , as he paid his bill .
'You have not seen the Australians , have you ? '
'I have only been once -- more shame to me to say so !
Is it not a sin that we young Englishmen should be familiar with every music-hall in London and should know so little of this which is the centre of the British race , the most august and tremendous monument that ever a nation owned .
Six hundred years ago the English looked upon it as their holiest and most national shrine , and since then our kings and our warriors and our thinkers and our poets have all been laid there , until there is such an accumulation that the huge Abbey has hardly space for another monument .
Let us spend an hour inside it . '
They made for Solomon 's porch , since it was the nearest and they had but the one umbrella .
Under its shelter they brushed themselves dry before they entered .
Then turning to the right at the end of the Statesmen 's Transept , they wandered aimlessly down the huge nave .
It was overwhelming , the grandeur of the roof above and of the contents below .
Any one of hundreds of these tombs was worth a devout pilgrimage , but how could one raise his soul to the appreciation of them all .
Here was Darwin who revolutionised zoology , and here was Isaac Newton who gave a new direction to astronomy .
Here were old Ben Jonson , and Stephenson the father of railways , and Livingstone of Africa , and Wordsworth , and Kingsley , and Arnold .
Here were the soldiers of the mutiny -- Clyde and Outram and Lawrence , -- and painters , and authors , and surgeons , and all the good sons who in their several degrees had done loyal service to the old mother .
And when their service was done the old mother had stretched out that long arm of hers and had brought them home , and always for every good son brought home she had sent another forth , and her loins were ever fruitful , and her children loving and true .
Go into the Abbey and think , and as the nation 's past is borne in upon you , you will have no fear for its future .
It was a very much defaced inscription underneath a battered Elizabethan effigy , whose feet had been knocked off , and whose features were blurred into nothing .
Two words of the inscription had caught Frank 's eye .
What an assembly it would be if at some supreme day each man might stand forth from the portals of his tomb .
Tennyson , the last and almost the greatest of that illustrious line , lay under the white slab upon the floor .
Maude and Frank stood reverently beside it .
What a clever face , and what a modern type .
Here is Walter Scott beside the door .
How kindly and humorous his expression was !
And see how high his head was from the ear to the crown .
It was a great brain .
There is Burns , the other famous Scot .
Do n't you think there is a resemblance between the faces ?
And here are Dickens , and Thackeray , and Macaulay .
I wonder whether , when Macaulay was writing his essays , he had a premonition that he would be buried in Westminster Abbey .
He is continually alluding to the Abbey and its graves .
I always think that we have a vague intuition as to what will occur to us in life . '
'We can guess what is probable . '
'Forty-four years of age at the time of her execution , ' said the guide .
They had followed the guide into another small chapel , which bore the name of Henry VII .
Surely they were great builders and great designers in those days !
Had stone been as pliable as wax it could not have been twisted and curved into more exquisite spirals and curls , so light , so delicate , so beautiful , twining and turning along the walls , and drooping from the ceiling .
Never did the hand of man construct anything more elaborately ornate , nor the brain of man think out a design more absolutely harmonious and lovely .
In the centre , with all the pomp of mediaeval heraldry , starred and spangled with the Tudor badges , the two bronze figures of Henry and his wife lay side by side upon their tomb .
The guide read out the quaint directions in the king 's will , by which they were to be buried 'with some respect to their Royal dignity , but avoiding damnable pomp and outrageous superfluities ! '
There was , as Frank remarked , a fine touch of the hot Tudor blood in the adjectives .
One could guess where Henry the Eighth got his masterful temper .
Yet it was an ascetic and priest-like face which looked upwards from the tomb .
They passed the rifled tombs of Cromwell , Blake , and Ireton -- the despicable revenge of the men who did not dare to face them in the field , -- and they marked the grave of James the First , who erected no monument to himself , and so justified in death the reputation for philosophy which he had aimed at in his life .
Then they inspected the great tomb of Villiers , Duke of Buckingham , as surprising and as magnificent as his history , cast a glance at the covering of plucky little George the Second , the last English king to lead his own army into battle , and so onwards to see the corner of the Innocents , where rest the slender bones of the poor children murdered in the Tower .
It was a profile and a face worth seeing -- the face of a queen who was worthy of her Shakespeares upon the land and her Drakes upon the sea .
Had the Spanish king seen her , he would have understood that she was not safe to attack -- this grim old lady with the eagle nose and the iron lips .
You could understand her grip upon her cash-box , you could explain her harshness to her lovers , you could realise the confidence of her people , you could read it all in that wonderful face .
The object in question proved to be nothing more singular than a square block of stone placed under an old chair .
And yet as the guide continued to speak , they felt that he had justified his words .
'Yes , she also .
The legend was that it was the stone upon which Jacob rested his head when he dreamed , but the geologists have proved that it is red sandstone of Scotland . '
'As high as the gallows , perhaps , ' said Frank , and every one tittered , but the guide hurried on with a grave face , for the dignity of the Abbey was in his keeping .
'And here is the tomb of her husband , Edward the First .
It was he who brought the stone from Scone .
At the time of his death the conquest of Scotland was nearly done , and he gave orders that his burial should be merely temporary until Scotland was thoroughly subdued .
He is still , as you perceive , in his temporary tomb . '
But Maude laid her hand upon his arm .
CHAPTER VI -- TWO SOLOS AND A DUET
'I was just thinking that my nose was .
It 's very kind of you to come and stand by me . '
'That 's all right .
We shall see it through together . '
'I feel a little chippy to-day . '
'We have them at all hours . '
And then in turn they repeated the fateful words -- 'I take thee to have and to hold from this day forward , for better , for worse , for richer , for poorer , in sickness and in health , to love , cherish , and obey , till death us do part , according to God 's holy ordinance , and thereto I give thee my troth . '
'Vestry -- afterwards , ' whispered the clergyman .
There now , it was done !
They were one , never more to part until the coffin-lid closed over one or the other .
They were kneeling together now , and the vicar was rapidly repeating some psalms and prayers .
But Frank 's mind was not with the ritual .
He looked slantwise at the graceful , girlish figure by his side .
Her hair hung beautifully over her white neck , and the reverent droop of her head was lovely to his eyes .
So gentle , so humble , so good , so beautiful , and all his , his sworn life-companion for ever !
A gush of tenderness flowed through his heart for her .
His love had always been passionate , but , for the instant , it was heroic , tremendous in its unselfishness .
Might he bring her happiness , the highest which woman could wish for !
God grant that he might do so !
But if he were to make her unhappy , or to take anything from her beauty and her goodness , then he prayed that he might die now , at this supreme moment , kneeling at her side before the altar rails .
So intense was his prayer that he looked up expectantly at the altar , as if in the presence of an imminent catastrophe .
But every one had risen to their feet , and the service was at an end .
The vicar led the way , and they all followed him , into the vestry .
There was a general murmur all round them of congratulation and approval .
'Bravo , Maude , you looked ripping ! '
cried Jack , kissing his sister .
'By Jove , it simply went with a buzz from the word `` go . ''
And so , with a curious dream-like feeling , Frank Crosse and Maude found themselves walking down the aisle , he very proud and erect , she very gentle and shy , while the organ thundered the wedding-march .
Carriages were waiting : he handed in his wife , stepped in after her , and they drove off , amidst a murmur of sympathy from a little knot of idlers who had gathered in the porch , partly from curiosity , and partly to escape the rain .
'Name , please ? '
'Maude Crosse -- O Frank ! '
'O Frank , what a dreadful prayer ! '
A broad-brimmed hat with a curling feather is not a good shape for driving with an ardent young bridegroom in a discreetly rain-blurred carriage .
Frank demonstrated the fact , and it took them all the way to the Langham to get those pins driven home again .
And then after an abnormal meal , which was either a very late breakfast or a very early lunch , they drove on to Victoria Station , from which they were to start for Brighton .
Jack Selby and the two regimental fizzers , who had secured immortality for the young couple , if the deep and constant drinking of healths could have done it , had provided themselves with packages of rice , old slippers , and other time- honoured missiles .
On a hint from Maude , however , that she would prefer a quiet departure , Frank coaxed the three back into the luncheon-room with a perfectly guileless face , and then locking the door on the outside , handed the key and a half-sovereign to the head- waiter , with instructions to release the prisoners when the carriage had gone -- an incident which in itself would cause the judicious observer to think that , given the opportunity , Mister Frank Crosse had it in him to go pretty far in life .
And so , quietly and soberly , they rolled away upon their first journey -- the journey which was the opening of that life 's journey , the goal of which no man may see .
CHAPTER VII -- KEEPING UP APPEARANCES
With the wonderful adaptability of women -- a hereditary faculty , which depends upon the fact that from the beginning of time the sex has been continually employed in making the best of situations which were not of their own choosing -- Maude carried off her new character easily and gracefully .
In her trim blue serge dress and sailor hat , with the warm tint of yesterday 's sun upon her cheeks , she was the very picture of happy and healthy womanhood .
Frank was also in a blue serge boating-suit , which was appropriate enough , for they spent most of their time upon the water , as a glance at his hands would tell .
Their conversation was unhappily upon a very much lower plane than when we overheard them last .
'So have I , Frank . '
'Good old mother Nature !
Cling on to her skirt and you never lose your way .
One wants a healthy physical basis for a healthy spiritual emotion .
Might I trouble you for the pickles ? '
'Did I , Frank ? '
'I wonder if he really believed it .
I have noticed that the maids and the waiters seem to look at us with a certain interest . '
'Oh , hang it , I ca n't -- not even for so good an object . '
It is only fun . '
'Then why wo n't you do it ? '
Sit tight , ' said Frank .
'I did my best , Frank .
I contradicted you . '
'Oh , it was a shocking display of temper . '
'All right , dear ; leave him to me .
Those reminiscences of mine must have settled him .
If they did n't , then I feel it is hopeless . '
It was as well for his peace of mind that Frank could not hear the conversation between the fat waiter and their chambermaid , for whom he nourished a plethoric attachment .
They had half an hour off in the afternoon , and were comparing notes .
'Nice-lookin ' couple , ai n't they , John ? '
said the maid , with the air of an expert .
'I do n't know as we 've 'ad a better since the spring weddin 's . '
'I tell you , Jane , I could n't 'ardly believe my ears .
They was married on Tuesday last , as we know well , and to-day 's Times to prove it , and yet if you 'll believe me , they was talkin ' about 'ow they 'ad travelled alone abroad -- '
'And alone in a Swiss 'otel ! '
Maude and Frank were lingering at the table d'hote over their walnuts and a glass of port wine , when their waiter came softly behind them .
'You old dear ! '
she cried , 'I do n't believe you are a bit better as a conspirator than I am .
There 's only one thing you can do .
Give the waiter half a crown , tell him the truth , and do n't conspire any more . '
And so ignominiously ended the attempt which so many have made , and at which so many have failed .
Take warning , gentle reader , and you also , gentler reader still , when your own turn comes .
The days of holiday were over , and for each of them the duties of life were waiting .
For him it was his work , and for her , her housekeeping .
They both welcomed the change , for there was a rush and a want of privacy about the hotel life which had been amusing at first , but was now becoming irksome .
It was pleasant , as they rolled out of Waterloo Station that summer night , to know that their cosy little home was awaiting them just five-and-twenty miles down the line .
They had a first-class carriage to themselves -- it is astonishing how easy it is for two people to fit into one of those armchair partitions , -- and they talked all the way down about their plans for the future .
Golden visions of youth , how they can glorify even a suburban villa and four hundred a year !
They exulted together over the endless vista of happy days which stretched before them .
'I should prefer it . '
'It 's just past the third lamp-post on the right , ' said Frank .
'Now it 's only the second lamp-post .
You see it will not be far from the station .
Those windows among the trees are where Hale lives -- my best man , you know !
Now it is only one lamp-post ! '
They quickened their pace almost to a run , and so arrived at the gate of The Lindens .
'Well , I 'm blessed ! '
'Are n't you hungry , Frank ? '
'Hold them up to the light , sir .
There , they are quite bright and nice .
Now , if you will cut some bread and butter it , we shall soon have our supper ready . '
'Where is it ? '
'Frank , I believe it 's a mouse . '
cried Frank , shaking her by the shoulder .
'Hullo , you there ! '
'The poor thing must be ill , ' said Maude .
'O Frank , shall I run for a doctor ? '
'But look here , my dear girl , we must be practical .
The woman weighs half a ton , and the bedrooms are at the top of the house .
It's simply impossible . '
So Frank , seeing that there was no help for it , seized her under the arms , and Maude took her ankles , and they bore her , bulging but serene , down the passage .
They staggered exhausted into the drawing- room , and the new sofa groaned beneath the weight .
It was a curious and unsavoury inaugural ceremony .
Maude put a rug over the prostrate form , and they returned to their boiling kettle and their uncooked eggs .
Then they laid the table , and served the supper , and enjoyed this picnic meal of their own creating as no conventional meal could ever have been enjoyed .
Everything seemed beautiful to the young wife -- the wall-paper , the pictures , the carpet , the rug ; but to him , she was so beautiful in mind , and soul , and body , that her presence turned the little room into an enchanted chamber .
They sat long together , and marvelled at their own happiness -- that pure serene happiness of mere companionship , which is so much more intimate and deeper than all the transports of passion .
'Nothing in the world . '
'Yes , dear , I am quite serious . '
'O Frank , how horrid ! '
'But that is absurd . '
'You ca n't live all your life and never be in a bad temper ! '
'And their dress and their hair ' -- Maude 's hand flew up to her curls .
'My darling , yours is just perfect .
But you know how often a woman grows careless .
`` He will love me anyhow , '' she says to herself , and perhaps she is right , but still it is not as it should be . '
'Let me hear it . '
'I have put it in this way , `` The tight cord is the easiest to snap . ''
'What do you mean ? '
'I do n't like that at all , Frank . '
'But you must eat and drink , Frank .
And as to Jemima and the cook , it is really extraordinary the amount which they consume . '
'Good gracious , we shall never have a second vegetable again ! '
'I notice that it is always after you have had a substantial meal that you discuss economy in food .
I wonder if you will feel the same when you come back starving from the City to-morrow ?
Now , sir , any other economy ? '
'Well , dear , I looked at that dressmaker 's bill yesterday . '
'Oh , does n't it ?
Just you try one and see . '
'When I rustle into a room , dear , every woman in it knows that my skirt is lined with silk . '
There is only one thing worse than quarrels in public .
'Yes , I may as well hear it . '
'Oh , I do n't know . '
'You make me feel such a brute , ' said he .
'Anyhow , I love you now with all my heart and mind and soul . '
'No , no -- certainly not . '
'You have said too much .
You must go on now . '
'Well , I could n't expect to find every quality in my husband , could I ?
It would not be reasonable .
I assure you , dear , that taking your tout ensemble , I like you far the best of all .
You may not be the handsomest , and you may not be the cleverest -- one can not expect one's absolute ideal , -- but I love you far , far the best of any .
I do hope I have n't hurt you by anything I have said . '
'How horrid it sounds , does n't it ? '
'Well , it did strike me in that way . '
'I had hoped that I was the first . '
'It was not fated to be so .
I could easily tell you a lie , Frank , and say that you were , but I should never forgive myself if I were to do such a thing .
You see I left school at seventeen , and I was twenty-three when I became engaged to you .
There are six years .
Imagine all the dances , picnics , parties , visitings of six years .
I could not help meeting young men continually .
A good many were interested in me , and I -- '
'Well , what was the next stage ? '
'Well , when you have been deeply interested some time , then you begin to have experiences . '
She leaned back in her armchair with her eyes half closed , and a quiet retrospective smile upon her face .
'Well , if you would really like to hear , Frank , as a proof of my confidence and trust , I will tell you .
You will remember that I had not seen you at the time . '
'Oh , I hardly answered him , but of course I was young and inexperienced , and I could not help being flattered and pleased at his words .
I may have shown him what I felt , for he suddenly -- '
'You really want to know ? '
'I wo n't be cross .
What did you do ? '
'Well , Frank , since you insist -- I kissed him back . '
'You kissed him back ! '
'He asked me if I would sit upon his knee . '
'Why , Frank , you are croaking like a frog . '
'What could you do ?
You could have screamed , you could have rung the bell , you could have struck him -- you could have risen in the dignity of your insulted womanhood and walked out of the room . '
I 'm raw all over .
It 's a nightmare .
O Maude , how could you have the heart ? '
'I 'll bet I am . '
'No , no , you ca n't be , Frank .
It says somewhere here that the happiness and comfort of the husband depend upon the housekeeping of the wife .
Mrs. Beeton must have been the finest housekeeper in the world .
Therefore , Mr. Beeton must have been the happiest and most comfortable man .
But why should Mr. Beeton be happier and more comfortable than my Frank ?
From the hour I read that I determined that he should n't be -- and he wo n't be . '
'Oh , you think so .
But then you know nothing about it .
You think it right because I do it .
But if you were visiting Mrs. Beeton , you would soon see the difference . '
'What an awkward trick you have of always sitting in a window , ' said Frank , after an interval .
'I 'll swear that the wise Mrs. Beeton never advocates that -- with half a dozen other windows within point- blank range . '
When I am tired of you , I shall be tired of life . '
'What DID you think of me , Frank ? '
'How did we leave it ? '
But I could look it up and learn .
Here it is -- paragraph 2847 .
It is a sort of pancake , you see .
That 's how you learn things . '
'Nothing that it can teach you , dear , can ever make up to me if it makes you cry , and bothers you.
-- You bloated , pedantic thing ! '
he cried , in sudden fury , aiming a kick at the squat volume .
'It is to you I owe all those sad , tired looks which I have seen upon my wife's face .
I know my enemy now .
You pompous , fussy old humbug , I 'll kick the red cover off you ! '
'Let us have some more wisdom . '
' '' Frugality and Economy are home virtues without which no household can prosper .
Dr. Johnson says , 'Frugality may be termed -- ' ''
'Johnson kept house for himself for years -- and a queer job he made of it . '
'That is why I got you , Maude . '
'You are sure you do n't envy Mr .
'Then why should I try to be Mrs .
I may have mentioned somewhere that Frank had a catholic taste in literature .
Upon a shelf in their bedroom -- a relic of his bachelor days -- there stood a small line of his intimate books , the books which filled all the chinks of his life when no new books were forthcoming .
They were all volumes which he had read in his youth , and many times since , until they had become the very tie-beams of his mind .
His tastes were healthy and obvious without being fine .
Macaulay's Essays , Holmes ' Autocrat , Gibbons ' History , Jefferies ' Story of my Heart , Carlyle 's Life , Pepys ' Diary , and Borrow 's Lavengro were among his inner circle of literary friends .
The sturdy East Anglian , half prize-fighter , half missionary , was a particular favourite of his , and so was the garrulous Secretary of the Navy .
One day it struck him that it would be a pleasant thing to induce his wife to share his enthusiasms , and he suggested that the evenings should be spent in reading selections from these old friends of his .
If he had proposed to read the rig-vedas in the original Sanskrit , Maude would have listened with a smiling face .
It is in such trifles that a woman 's love is more than a man 's .
'This is Mr. Pepys , ' said he solemnly .
'I AM so sorry , dear !
I do hope I did n't hurt , you ! '
'Well , Maude , Mr. Pepys was born -- '
'What was his first name ? '
'Well , it all amounts to this , that he got on very well in the world , that he became at last a high official of the navy in the time of Charles the Second , and that he died in fairly good circumstances , and left his library , which was a fine one , to one of the universities , I ca n't remember which . '
'No , dear , it will never all be published .
A good deal of it is , I believe , quite impossible .
And when he came to the impossible places , he doubled and trebled his cipher , so as to make sure that it should never be made out .
But all that is usually published is here . '
Frank turned over the leaves , which were marked here and there with pencilings .
'Only at his way of referring to his wife . '
'Oh yes , fairly so .
She was only twenty-nine when she died ! '
'Oh , the brute ! '
'But on the whole he was a good husband .
He had a few very good points about him . '
'I do n't know .
I suppose they had to get up early on washing-days , and so they wanted to go to sleep soon . '
Mrs. Hunt Mortimer 's sole last week was palpable plaice .
Mr. Pepys is right .
It was not handsome . '
'What are umbles , dear ? '
'I have no idea . '
'No wonder she died at twenty-nine .
What a splendid kitchen-range they must have had !
I never understood before why they had such enormous grates in the old days .
Naturally , if you have six pigeons , and a lamprey , and a lobster , and a side of lamb , and a leg of mutton , and all these other things cooking at the same time , you would need a huge fire . '
Have I any ? '
'Well , then , he had to do it after his death .
He had to write it in cipher , or else some one would have found him out during his lifetime .
But , very likely , he left a key to the cipher , so that every one might read it when he was gone , but the key and his directions were in some way lost . '
A week after the conversation about Mr. Pepys , when some progress had been made with the reading of the Diary , Maude received the following wire from Frank -
'Well , that 's brown .
Anyhow , it looks charming .
And so do you -- by Jove you do , Maude !
Come this way ! '
-- Two second singles , Mark Lane , please !
-- No , that 's for the west-end trains .
Next train , the man says . '
'Here 's one nearly empty , ' said Frank , with his hand on the handle .
He pushed open a folding oaken door , and they found themselves inside it .
Rows of modern seats filled the body of it , but the walls and windows gave an impression of great antiquity .
The stained glass -- especially that which surmounted the altar -- contained those rich satisfying purples and deep deep crimsons which only go with age .
It was a bright and yet a mellow light , falling in patches of vivid colour upon the brown woodwork and the grey floors .
Here and there upon the walls were marble inscriptions in the Latin tongue , with pompous allegorical figures with trumpets , for our ancestors blew them in stone as well as in epitaphs over their tombs .
They loved to die , as they had lived , with dignity and with affectation .
White statues glimmered in the shadows of the corners .
As Frank and his wife passed down the side-aisle , their steps clanged through the empty and silent church .
'He 's not a bad-looking chap , is he ? '
'No , we have only just come . '
'Come out into the air , Maude .
I have had enough of this stuffy old church . '
And then they finished their excursion in the dark , wainscotted , low- ceilinged coffee-room of an old-fashioned inn , once the mother of many coaches , and now barren and deserted , but with a strange cunning in the matter of buttered toast which had come down from more prosperous days .
It was a new waiter who served them , and he imagined them to be lovers and scented an intrigue ; but when they called for a second plate of toast and a jug of boiling water , he recognised the healthy appetite of the married .
And then , instead of going home like a good little couple , Maude suddenly got it into her head that it would cheer away the last traces of Frank 's gloom if they went to see 'Charley 's Aunt ' at the Globe .
So they loitered and shopped for a couple of hours , and then squeezed into the back of the pit ; and wedged in among honest , hearty folk who were not ashamed to show their emotions , they laughed until they were tired .
And so home , as their friend Pepys would have said , after such a day as comes into the memory , shining golden among the drab , when old folk look back , and think of the dear dead past .
May you and I , reader , if ever we also come to sit in our final armchairs in the chimney corners , have many such to which our minds may turn , sweet and innocent and fragrant , to cheer us in those darksome hours to come .
'I remember perfectly well . '
And so they were to spend an evening and a night without knowing whether they were merely crippled or absolutely ruined .
Frank's nature was really a very proud one , and the thought of failing in his engagements wounded his self-respect most deeply .
His nerves winced and quivered before it .
But her sweet , strong soul rose high above all fear , and bore him up with her , into the serenity of love and trust and confidence .
The really precious things , the things of the spirit , were permanent , and could not be lost .
What matter if they lived in an eight-roomed villa , or in a tent out on the heath ?
What matter if they had two servants , or if she worked for him herself ?
All this was the merest trifle , the outside of life .
But the intimate things , their love , their trust , their pleasures of mind and soul , these could not be taken away from them while they had life to enjoy them .
And so she soothed Frank with sweet caresses and gentle words , until this night of gloom had turned to the most beautiful of all his life , and he had learned to bless the misfortune which had taught him to know the serene courage and the wholehearted devotion which can only be felt , like the scent of a fragrant leaf , when Fate gives us a crush between its iron fingers .
They sat down at the table , the accountant in the centre , Farintosh on the right , and Frank on the left .
There was no talk save an occasional abrupt question and answer .
For two hours the swish and rustle of the great blue pages of the ledgers were the chief sound , with the scratching of Mr. Wingfield 's pen as he totalled up long columns of figures .
Frank 's heart turned to water as he saw the huge sums which had passed through this man 's hands .
How much had remained there ?
His whole future depended upon the answer to that question .
How prosaic and undramatic are the moments in which a modern career is made or marred !
In this obscure battlefield , the squire no longer receives his accolade in public for his work well done , nor do we see the butcher 's cleaver as it hacks off the knightly spurs , but failure and success come strangely and stealthily , determined by trifles , and devoid of dignity .
Here was the crisis of Frank 's young life , in this mean front room , amongst the almanacs and the account-books .
'You can , sir . '
But Wingfield came to his lunch within a solemn face .
'You have credited him within a hundred and twenty pounds in the bank , I see . '
'I could not let you go without THAT , dearest .
Keep a brave heart , my own laddie , for I know so well that we shall come through it all right . '
'I am sorry to have to say it , sir , but we have trusted in your word too often . '
'Show him in here . '
'Well , Mr. Crosse , I have come round to tell you , and you too , missus , the sorrow I feel that I have brought this trouble upon you .
I hoped all would have gone right after that last time , but I 've had to pay up back debts , and that 's what has put me wrong .
I 've never had what one may call a fair chance .
But I 'm really sorry , sir , that you who have , as one might say , befriended me , should have to suffer for it in this way . '
Frank writhed before this home question .
'No , sir , they did n't . '
'No , sir , I think not .
`` Frequently and periodically '' does not mean four times in fourteen months . '
'Consider , sir , that the object was that your liability should be limited .
Thousands of pounds were passing through my hands in that time , and therefore these four audits were , as one might say , insufficient for the object of the bond . '
'So I think , ' cried Maude , with conviction .
'Frank , we 'll have the best advice upon the subject to-morrow . '
'And meanwhile , Mr. Crosse , ' said Farintosh , rising from his chair , 'I am your witness , whether the Company prosecutes me or not .
And I hope that this will be some humble atonement for the trouble that I have brought you . '
Dear Sir , -- On arriving in London I came here at once , and checked Farintosh 's accounts from the books of the head office .
I am sorry to say that I find a further discrepancy of seventy pounds .
I am able , however , to assure you that we have now touched bottom .
The total amount is three hundred and forty pounds , and a cheque for that sum at your early convenience would oblige us , as we are anxious to bring so unpleasant a business to a conclusion.
It was a long blue document with the heading , 'The Hotspur Insurance Company , Limited , v. Frank Crosse . '
'I have perused the case submitted to me , and the papers accompanying the same , ' said the learned counsel , 'and in my opinion the Hotspur Insurance Company , Limited , are entitled to recover from Mr. Crosse under his guarantee , the sum of 340 pounds , being monies received by Mr. Farintosh , and not paid over by him to the said Company . '
There was a great deal more , but it was anticlimax .
'Well , what shall we do ? '
The British law makes one feel so .
'Well , I should stand out , if I were you .
There is certainly a chance . '
'Look here , old chap , ' said Frank , 'I may as well be honest with you .
If this thing goes against me , I am stony broke .
I do n't know where your costs are coming from . '
'Dead for us this time .
'Suppose we have another , and try the best of three , ' said Frank .
Victoria , by the grace of God , of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland , Queen , Defender of the Faith , remarked abruptly to Frank Crosse of Woking , in the county of Surrey , 'We command you that within eight days of the service of this writ on you , inclusive of the day of such service , you cause an appearance to be entered for you in an action at the suit of the Hotspur Insurance Company , Limited . '
If he did n't do so , Her Majesty remarked that several very unpleasant things might occur , and Hardinge Stanley , Earl of Halsbury , corroborated Her Majesty .
Maude was frightened to death when she saw the document , and felt as if unawares they must have butted up against the British Constitution , but Owen explained that it was only a little legal firework , which meant that there might be some trouble later .
'I ca n't do that , ' said Frank doggedly .
'He is such a good chap -- he wants to save us expense . '
'Oh , but I think I could find something .
I must look round when I am in town . '
'Now I call that exerting undue pressure , ' said he , extricating his white head .
'If this sort of thing is allowed in the city of London , there is an end of all business . '
However , his eyes twinkled and looked as if he liked it .
'Now madame , what can I do for you ? '
'I 'm going to be perfectly business-like , ' said she , and gave him another squeeze before sitting down .
'Look here , dad .
You give me an income of fifty pounds a year , do n't you ? '
'What did dad say about it ? '
'Speaking as a lawyer , ' said Owen , 'I think that it is very irregular .
Speaking as a man , I think no harm could come of it .
But I should not like you to offer the whole sum .
Simply say that you are prepared for a reasonable compromise , and ask them to suggest what is the lowest sum which the office would accept to close the business . '
'To give you an hour to think it over , ' cried Jack .
'Well , I was going to inquire about it . '
'Forty pounds is our offer , ' said Jack .
Mr. Wingfield rose from his chair .
'And please bring the bond back with you , ' said Maude .
'No , it is a paper of some kind .
`` Hotspur Insurance Company . ''
Good Lord , I never seem for one instant to be able to shake that infernal thing off !
How on earth did it get in there ?
-- '' I hereby guarantee to you -- '' What 's this ?
Maude , Maude , what have you been doing ? '
'Does it matter ? '
'We are all married . '
'Because I wanted to make sure that they HAD been omitted , ' said Mrs. Hunt Mortimer severely .
'There is Byron , of course .
But he is so very suggestive .
There are passages in his works -- '
'I could never see any harm in them , ' said Mrs. Beecher .
'Frank raves about Shelley , ' observed Maude .
'His work has some dreadful tendencies .
He was , I am informed , either a theist or an atheist , I can not for the moment recall which -- I think that we should make our little course as improving as possible . '
There was only one other point to be settled at this their inaugural meeting , which was , to choose the other ladies who should be admitted into their literary circle .
There were to be no men .
'My dear , my dear , remember that she is only a parlourmaid .
It is unreasonable . '
'I should be inclined to choose something with a title which suggests profundity -- '' A Pretty Woman , '' `` Love in a Life , '' `` Any Wife to any Husband '' -- '
'Oh , what DID she say to him ? '
'Well , the fact is , ' said Maude , 'Frank -- my husband , you know -- came to a fancy-dress at St. Albans as the Pied Piper .
I had no idea that it came from Browning . '
'It is not a very difficult costume , you know .
I have some old Point d'Alencon lace which has been in the family for a century .
I make it the starting-point of my costume .
The gown need not be very elaborate -- '
'What had you thought of , dear ? '
At the name of the poet their three consciences pricked simultaneously .
They looked at each other and then at the clock with dismay .
'Dear me , I had no idea that Browning was like this ! '
'Do read it , dear . '
'But we vowed not to skip . '
'We mast skip that line . '
'But why should he repeat it three times ? '
'Perhaps , ' said Mrs. Beecher , 'it was Mr. Setebos , and Mrs. Setebos , and a little Setebos . '
'But what nonsense it is ! '
Mrs. Hunt Mortimer looked at her reproachfully .
'It is very easy to call everything which we do not understand `` nonsense , '' ' said she .
'I have no doubt that Browning had a profound meaning in this . '
'It would be far better . '
'Then why should we meet to discuss him if there is nothing to discuss ? '
'You mean that we might as well each read him for herself . '
'How nice of you ! '
'Only one little hour of difference -- what can it matter ? '
'They do n't run offices on those lines .
An hour means a good deal in the City of London . '
'I suppose that it separates a good many loving couples every morning . '
'Never mind , dear , it is a beginning . '
'But it is a great responsibility , Frank . '
'A mortgage , then ? '
'Government stock , Frank -- if you think it is safe . '
'Rather less than more . '
He brought the morning paper over from the table .
Then he folded it so as to bring the financial columns to the top .
'I saw a fellow in the City yesterday who knows a great deal about gold-mining .
I only had a few minutes ' talk , but he strongly advised me to have some shares in the El Dorado Proprietary Gold Mine . '
'What a nice name !
I wonder if they would let us have any ? '
'I looked them up in the Mining Register before I came home yesterday .
The original price of each share was ten shillings , but as they have had these misfortunes , one would expect to find them rather lower . '
Well , we know that the original price of each share was ten shillings , and of course they must have dropped with a flood in the mine , so that these figures must mean that the price yesterday was four shillings and nine-pence , or thereabouts . '
'What a clear head for business you have , dear ! '
'Yes , he seemed quite confident about it .
Well , what do you think , Maude ?
Is it good enough or not ? '
'You have not said the price . '
'Yes , you have come back .
Oh I am so glad to see you , you dear old boy ! '
I rather expected to see Harrison in the train .
I should n't be surprised if he calls on his way from the station .
He has to pass our door , you know , on his way to Maybury . '
'What are you holding there ? '
No , the most venal rag in the city . '
'I thought you might .
I have only just got back myself , and I saw by your wire that you had bought them all right . '
Bought for Francis Crosse , Esq .
Harrison glanced from one of them to the other .
He saw that the matter was serious .
'What would the difference be ? '
'Better cold coffee with Maude 's society . '
'But it is such splendid stuff . '
'I have hardly glanced at it yet . '
'Just the same as ever , ' said she , as he handed her down .
'Married , ' said the lady .
The lady sat down and took off her gloves .
Frank stood by the window and smoked a cigarette .
The waiter rattled and banged and jingled with the final effect of producing a tea-tray and a hot-water dish .
'You 'll ring if you want me , sir , ' said he , and shut the door with ostentatious completeness .
'You have n't even looked at me yet .
I wo n't take any tea until you do . '
She stood up in front of him , and pushed up her veil .
It was a face and a figure worth looking at .
Hazel eyes , dark chestnut hair , a warm flush of pink in her cheeks , the features and outline of an old Grecian goddess , but with more of Juno than of Venus , for she might perhaps err a little upon the side of opulence .
There was a challenge and defiance dancing in those dark devil-may-care eyes of hers which might have roused a more cold-blooded man than her companion .
Her dress was simple and dark , but admirably cut .
She was clever enough to know that a pretty woman should concentrate attention upon herself , and a plain one divert it to her adornments .
'Frankie , what IS the matter with you ? '
'Why , of course I am .
I am married . '
'For that matter Charlie Scott is married . '
She had snatched it from his lips and thrown it into the grate .
'What is the use of that ?
I have a case full . '
'Well , what the better are you for that ? '
'Then what did you come here for ? '
'You were always a little mad , Frankie . '
'So sorry if I have upset you . '
'We have been very good friends , Violet .
Why should we part as enemies ? '
He faced round in his chair and looked helplessly at her with a hand upon each knee .
'I hope I have n't hurt your feelings , ' said he .
'I spoke too roughly . '
'Yes , I know I was . '
'Were you kept at the office ? '
Maude rose with her pleasant smile .
It was a peculiarly sweet and kindly smile , for it was inspired by a gentle womanly desire to make things pleasant for all who were around her .
Amiability was never artificial with her , for she had the true instincts of a lady -- those instincts so often spoken of , so seldom , so very seldom seen .
Like a gentleman , or a Christian , or any other ideal , it is but a poor approximation which is commonly attained .
But the visitor did not respond to the pretty gesture of welcome , nor did her handsome face return that sympathetic smile .
They stood for an instant looking at each other , the one tall , masterful , mature , the other sweet , girlish , and self-distrustful , but each beautiful and engaging in her own way .
Lucky Master Frank , whose past and present could take such a form ; but luckier still if he could have closed the past when the present opened .
The visitor was silent , but her dark eyes looked critically and fixedly at her rival .
Maude , setting the silence down to the shyness of a first visit , tried to make matters easier .
'It is right that you should think so , ' the other answered , with the same irritating laugh .
Her strong character and greater knowledge of the world gave her an ascendency over the girlish wife such as age has over youth .
There were not ten years between them , and yet Maude felt that for some reason the conversation between them could not quite be upon equal terms .
The quiet assurance of her visitor , whatever its cause , made resentment or remonstrance difficult .
Besides , they were a pair of very kindly as well as of very shrewd eyes which now looked down into hers .
'Did he -- oh yes , quite so !
That is so nice that you should both start with a clean sheet !
I thought you were very handsome just now when you were angry with me , but you are quite delightful with that little flush upon your cheeks .
If I had been a man , your husband would certainly have had one rival in his wooing .
And so he really never loved any one but you ?
I thought that also only happened in books . '
'Yes , there is a kind of family selfishness which is every bit as bad -- I am not sure that it is not worse -- than personal selfishness .
People love each other , and they shut out the world , and have no thought for any one else , and the whole universe can slide to perdition so long as their love is not disturbed .
That is what I call family selfishness .
It 's a sin and a shame . '
Maude 's lip trembled in a way which it had when she was hurt .
'I hope you are not disappointed , ' said Maude , making a roguish face .
'All right , Frankie , there is nothing to be tragic about . '
'Yes , I have . '
'And she said that I was -- oh !
I ca n't repeat it -- everything that is nice . '
'How horrid you are , Frank !
A year ago you would have promised first and asked afterwards . '
'Please take it for granted , darling , that I know nothing .
It is so jolly to have some one before whom it is not necessary to keep up appearances .
Now , begin at the beginning and go ahead . '
She pillowed her head luxuriously against his knees .
The graceful head beside his knee shook impatiently .
'But the smaller things are everything to a woman , ' said Maude .
'If ever you forget those smaller things , sir , to be as courteous to your wife as you would be to any other lady , to be loving and thoughtful and sympathetic , it will be no consolation to me to know that you have written the grandest book that ever was .
I should just hate that book , and I believe that in her inmost heart this poor lady hated all the books that had taken her husband away from her .
I wonder if their house is still standing . '
Frank and Maude got out and entered the small railed garden , in the centre of which the pedestal rose .
It was very simple and plain -- an old man in a dressing-gown , with homely wornout boots , a book upon his knee , his eyes and thoughts far away .
No more simple statue in all London , but human to a surprising degree .
They stood for five minutes and stared at it .
'Well , ' said Frank at last , 'small as it is , I think it is worthy of the man . '
'What other one is there ? '
'She did not like the smell in the room .
He often at night took his friends down into the kitchen . '
'Well , the habit of smoking was looked upon much less charitably at that time . '
'I ca n't imagine . '
It was curious to be brought back in this fashion to those far-off days , and to suddenly realise how many other people had played their tragi-comedies within these walls .
Only the dressy people wore wigs .
So people of fashion in the days of the early Georges trod these same rooms where Carlyle grumbled and his wife fretted .
And they too had grumbled and fretted -- or worse perhaps .
It was a ghostly old house .
'Yes , sir , the sofa that is mentioned in the letters . '
'By Jove , little woman , in all this house of wise sayings , no wiser or deeper saying has been said than that .
Well , thank God , we have that anyhow ! '
And he kissed his wife , while six grand electors of Brandenburg and kings of Prussia looked fiercely out upon them from the wall .
'The bed belonged to Mrs. Carlyle 's mother , ' the matron explained .
'It 's the same bed that Mrs. Carlyle talks about in her letters when she says how she pulled it to pieces . '
'Indeed you 're right , sir .
If you get them into these old houses , it is very hard to get them out .
A cleaner woman than Mrs. Carlyle never came out of Scotland .
This little room behind was his dressing-room .
There 's his stick in the corner .
Look what 's written upon the window ! '
'It is sweet to think so , ' cried Maude .
'Oh , I do hope that it is so !
How dear death would be if we could only be certain of that ! '
'See what positive misfortune can do for a man , ' said Frank .
'It raised him to a hero .
And yet he could not stand the test of a crowing cock .
How infinitely complex is the human soul -- how illimitably great and how pitiably small !
Now , if ever I have a study of my own , this is what I want engraved upon the wall .
This alone is well worth our pilgrimage to Chelsea . '
'No , I do n't suppose so . '
'Hear me swear ! '
cried Frank , and they turned laughing into their own little gateway at the Lindens .
There came a time when Maude was bad , and there came months when she was better , and then there were indications that a day was approaching , the very thought of which was a shadow upon her husband 's life .
For her part , with the steadfast , gentle courage of a woman , she faced the future with a sweet serenity .
But to him it was a nightmare -- an actual nightmare which brought him up damp and quivering in those gray hours of the dawn , when dark shadows fall upon the spirit of man .
He had a steady nerve for that which affected himself , a nerve which would keep him quiet and motionless in a dentist 's chair , but what philosophy or hardihood can steel one against the pain which those whom we love have to endure .
He fretted and chafed , and always with the absurd delusion that his fretting and chafing were successfully concealed .
A hundred failures never convince a man how impossible it is to deceive a woman who loves him .
Maude watched him demurely , and made her plans .
'You think the week afterwards ? '
What can it matter what form _I_ am in .
But in any case , it is out of the question . '
'You ca n't be so sure of that .
No , Maude , I should never forgive myself .
Such an idea would never enter my head . '
'That 's enough , Maude .
It is settled . '
'What nonsense , dear !
I want to keep very quiet until next week , when I may need all my strength . '
'I have a little headache .
Nothing to speak of , but just a little . '
'Do you think so ?
Well , just as you like .
You might call as you pass , and tell him to step up . '
'We 'll see about that , ' said he .
'And you think from your experience , Harrison , that it is not so very bad after all ? '
'Jordan was there six hours the first time . '
There was that bothersome kitten again .
He could hear it mewing away somewhere .
It did not sound so loud as in the garden , so perhaps it would not matter .
He felt very much inclined to steal upstairs upon tiptoe and see if Maude were stirring yet .
After all , if Jemima , or whoever it was , could go clumping about in heavy boots over his head , there was no fear that he could do any harm .
And yet she had said that she would ring or send word the moment she could see him , and so perhaps he had better wait where he was .
He put his head out of the window and cried 'Shoo ! '
into the laurel bushes several times .
Then he sat in the armchair with his back to the door .
Steps came heavily along the hall , and he saw dimly with the back corner of his eye that some one was in the doorway carrying something .
He thought that really Harrison might have brought the bulbs in more quietly , and so he treated him with some coldness , and did not turn round to him .
'I 'm blessed if that infernal kitten is n't somewhere in the room ! '
'I do n't suppose five minutes would do any harm . '
'My own dear sweet girlie ! '
Did you , Frank ?
Tell me that you never knew . '
( Extract from a letter to the Author from Mrs. Frank Crosse . )
A moment later the tall and portly form of Mycroft Holmes was ushered into the room .
Heavily built and massive , there was a suggestion of uncouth physical inertia in the figure , but above this unwieldy frame there was perched a head so masterful in its brow , so alert in its steel-gray , deep-set eyes , so firm in its lips , and so subtle in its play of expression , that after the first glance one forgot the gross body and remembered only the dominant mind .
At his heels came our old friend Lestrade , of Scotland Yard -- thin and austere .
The gravity of both their faces foretold some weighty quest .
The detective shook hands without a word .
Mycroft Holmes struggled out of his overcoat and subsided into an armchair .
`` Ah , there 's the point !
Fortunately , it has not come out .
The press would be furious if it did .
The papers which this wretched youth had in his pocket were the plans of the Bruce-Partington submarine . ''
`` Its importance can hardly be exaggerated .
It has been the most jealously guarded of all government secrets .
You may take it from me that naval warfare becomes impossible within the radius of a Bruce-Partington 's operation .
Two years ago a very large sum was smuggled through the Estimates and was expended in acquiring a monopoly of the invention .
Every effort has been made to keep the secret .
The plans , which are exceedingly intricate , comprising some thirty separate patents , each essential to the working of the whole , are kept in an elaborate safe in a confidential office adjoining the arsenal , with burglar-proof doors and windows .
Under no conceivable circumstances were the plans to be taken from the office .
If the chief constructor of the Navy desired to consult them , even he was forced to go to the Woolwich office for the purpose .
And yet here we find them in the pocket of a dead junior clerk in the heart of London .
From an official point of view it 's simply awful . ''
`` I presume they were of value ? ''
`` Can you suggest any possible motive for taking the papers to London except to sell them ? ''
An hour later Holmes , Lestrade and I stood upon the Underground railroad at the point where it emerges from the tunnel immediately before Aldgate Station .
A courteous red-faced old gentleman represented the railway company .
`` I fear not , Mr. Holmes .
The train has been broken up before now , and the carriages redistributed . ''
`` We have quite a little round of afternoon calls to make , '' said he .
`` I think that Sir James Walter claims our first attention . ''
`` I assure you that it was all a mystery to him as it is to you and to all of us .
He had already put all his knowledge at the disposal of the police .
Naturally he had no doubt that Cadogan West was guilty .
But all the rest was inconceivable . ''
`` No ; his needs were very simple and his salary ample .
He had saved a few hundreds , and we were to marry at the New Year . ''
The quick eye of my companion had noted some change in her manner .
She coloured and hesitated .
`` Now tell us of that last evening . ''
`` He gave an exclamation ; that was all .
I waited but he never returned .
Then I walked home .
Next morning , after the office opened , they came to inquire .
About twelve o'clock we heard the terrible news .
Oh , Mr. Holmes , if you could only , only save his honour !
It was so much to him . ''
`` We have just come from his house . ''
`` The place is disorganized .
The chief dead , Cadogan West dead , our papers stolen .
And yet , when we closed our door on Monday evening , we were as efficient an office as any in the government service .
Good God , it 's dreadful to think of !
That West , of all men , should have done such a thing ! ''
`` I can see no other way out of it .
And yet I would have trusted him as I trust myself . ''
`` Only Sir James Walter and you had those keys ? ''
`` Every inquiry in this case reveals something inexplicable .
Now there are three papers still missing .
They are , as I understand , the vital ones . ''
`` The effect of our inquiries at Woolwich has in the main been against young Cadogan West ; but the indications at the window would lend themselves to a more favourable hypothesis .
Let us suppose , for example , that he had been approached by some foreign agent .
It might have been done under such pledges as would have prevented him from speaking of it , and yet would have affected his thoughts in the direction indicated by his remarks to his fiancee .
We will now suppose that as he went to the theatre with the young lady he suddenly , in the fog , caught a glimpse of this same agent going in the direction of the office .
He was an impetuous man , quick in his decisions .
Everything gave way to his duty .
He followed the man , reached the window , saw the abstraction of the documents , and pursued the thief .
In this way we get over the objection that no one would take originals when he could make copies .
This outsider had to take originals .
So far it holds together . ''
I felt some reflection of his elation in my own mind , for I knew well that he would not depart so far from his usual austerity of demeanour unless there was good cause for exultation .
All the long November evening I waited , filled with impatience for his return .
At last , shortly after nine o'clock , there arrived a messenger with a note :
`` Have you had something to eat ?
Then join me in a coffee and curacao .
Try one of the proprietor 's cigars .
They are less poisonous than one would expect .
Have you the tools ? ''
`` Could it not have been dropped from a bridge ? ''
`` We can not tell what correspondence may be there . ''
He sprang up and shook me by the hand .
`` It is nearly half a mile , but there is no hurry .
Let us walk , '' said he .
`` Do n't drop the instruments , I beg .
Your arrest as a suspicious character would be a most unfortunate complication . ''
Must withdraw offer unless contract completed .
Make appointment by letter .
Will confirm by advertisement .
One of the most remarkable characteristics of Sherlock Holmes was his power of throwing his brain out of action and switching all his thoughts on to lighter things whenever he had convinced himself that he could no longer work to advantage .
I remember that during the whole of that memorable day he lost himself in a monograph which he had undertaken upon the Polyphonic Motets of Lassus .
For my own part I had none of this power of detachment , and the day , in consequence , appeared to be interminable .
The great national importance of the issue , the suspense in high quarters , the direct nature of the experiment which we were trying -- all combined to work upon my nerve .
It was a relief to me when at last , after a light dinner , we set out upon our expedition .
Lestrade and Mycroft met us by appointment at the outside of Gloucester Road Station .
The area door of Oberstein 's house had been left open the night before , and it was necessary for me , as Mycroft Holmes absolutely and indignantly declined to climb the railings , to pass in and open the hall door .
By nine o'clock we were all seated in the study , waiting patiently for our man .
There had been a furtive step past the door .
We heard a shuffling sound outside , and then two sharp taps with the knocker .
Holmes rose , motioning us to remain seated .
The gas in the hall was a mere point of light .
He opened the outer door , and then as a dark figure slipped past him he closed and fastened it .
`` This way ! ''
we heard him say , and a moment later our man stood before us .
Holmes had followed him closely , and as the man turned with a cry of surprise and alarm he caught him by the collar and threw him back into the room .
Before our prisoner had recovered his balance the door was shut and Holmes standing with his back against it .
The man glared round him , staggered , and fell senseless upon the floor .
With the shock , his broad-brimmed hat flew from his head , his cravat slipped down from his lips , and there were the long light beard and the soft , handsome delicate features of Colonel Valentine Walter .
`` The younger brother of the late Sir James Walter , the head of the Submarine Department .
Yes , yes ; I see the fall of the cards .
He is coming to .
I think that you had best leave his examination to me . ''
`` What happened , then ? ''
`` He had his suspicions before , and he followed me as you describe .
I never knew it until I was at the very door .
It was thick fog , and one could not see three yards .
I had given two taps and Oberstein had come to the door .
The young man rushed up and demanded to know what we were about to do with the papers .
Oberstein had a short life-preserver .
He always carried it with him .
As West forced his way after us into the house Oberstein struck him on the head .
The blow was a fatal one .
He was dead within five minutes .
There he lay in the hall , and we were at our wit 's end what to do .
Then Oberstein had this idea about the trains which halted under his back window .
But first he examined the papers which I had brought .
He said that three of them were essential , and that he must keep them .
'You can not keep them , ' said I .
'There will be a dreadful row at Woolwich if they are not returned . '
'I must keep them , ' said he , 'for they are so technical that it is impossible in the time to make copies . '
'Then they must all go back together to-night , ' said I .
He thought for a little , and then he cried out that he had it .
'Three I will keep , ' said he .
'The others we will stuff into the pocket of this young man .
When he is found the whole business will assuredly be put to his account . '
I could see no other way out of it , so we did as he suggested .
We waited half an hour at the window before a train stopped .
It was so thick that nothing could be seen , and we had no difficulty in lowering West 's body on to the train .
That was the end of the matter so far as I was concerned . ''
`` Then reparation is still within your power , '' said Sherlock Holmes .
`` I will do anything I can .
I owe this fellow no particular good-will .
He has been my ruin and my downfall . ''
`` With regard to our transaction , you will no doubt have observed by now that one essential detail is missing .
I have a tracing which will make it complete .
This has involved me in extra trouble , however , and I must ask you for a further advance of five hundred pounds .
I will not trust it to the post , nor will I take anything but gold or notes .
I would come to you abroad , but it would excite remark if I left the country at present .
Therefore I shall expect to meet you in the smoking-room of the Charing Cross Hotel at noon on Saturday .
Remember that only English notes , or gold , will be taken .
It is a matter of history -- that secret history of a nation which is often so much more intimate and interesting than its public chronicles -- that Oberstein , eager to complete the coup of his lifetime , came to the lure and was safely engulfed for fifteen years in a British prison .
In his trunk were found the invaluable Bruce-Partington plans , which he had put up for auction in all the naval centres of Europe .
`` When the legions go no Roman would feel that his life was safe here .
For all that we have done , it is none the less the truth that it is no country of ours , and that we hold it as we won it by the sword . ''
`` I will send out the messengers within an hour .
This very morning there has come news that the Barbarians are through the old gap in the wall , and their outriders as far south as Vinovia . ''
`` Are not our laws just ? ''
`` There is a rumour in the market-place , '' said Celticus , `` that the northern Barbarians are through the gap in the wall .
Who is to stop their progress ? ''
`` Already they can see us from the watch-towers , '' he remarked .
`` Even from afar they may know the galley of Black Magro .
But which of all of them will guess that we alone remain of all that goodly fleet which sailed out with blare of trumpet and roll of drum but one short month ago ? ''
`` It is some sad comfort , '' said Magro , `` to know that what Rome holds she can not keep . ''
cried one , more hopeful than the rest , `` at least we are brave men with arms in our hands . ''
`` Then let us train ! ''
`` He sprang doon to get clear of the savages , '' said the woman .
She started as one who wakes from sleep .
`` What were we talking about ? ''
The old man shook his head .
`` There is no further side to the plain , '' said he .
`` It is the earth 's boundary , and stretches away to eternity .
For all these years I have sat beside it , but never once have I seen anything come across it .
It is manifest that if there had been a further side there would certainly at some time have come some traveller from that direction .
Over the great river yonder is the Roman post of Tyras ; but that is a long day 's journey from here , and they have never disturbed my meditations . ''
`` At first I meditated on many sacred mysteries ; but now , for twenty years , I have brooded continually on the nature of the Logos .
What is your view upon that vital matter , brother Simon ? ''
`` Out with you !
Out of my cell ! ''
`` Have I lived here so long to have it polluted by a vile Trinitarian -- a follower of the rascal Athanasius ?
Wretched idolater , learn once for all , that the Logos is in truth an emanation from the Deity , and in no sense equal or co-eternal with Him !
Out with you , I say , or I will dash out your brains with my staff ! ''
So another year passed , and save for the change of weather and the slow change of the seasons , one day was as another .
Every morning when Simon opened his eyes , he saw the same grey line ripening into red in the furthest east , until the bright rim pushed itself above that far-off horizon across which no living creature had ever been known to come .
Slowly the sun swept across the huge arch of the heavens , and as the shadows shifted from the black rocks which jutted upward from above his cell , so did the hermit regulate his terms of prayer and meditation .
There was nothing on earth to draw his eye , or to distract his mind , for the grassy plain below was as void from month to month as the heaven above .
So the long hours passed , until the red rim slipped down on the further side , and the day ended in the same pearl-grey shimmer with which it had begun .
Once two ravens circled for some days round the lonely hill , and once a white fish-eagle came from the Dniester and screamed above the hermit 's head .
Sometimes red dots were seen on the green plain where the antelopes grazed , and often a wolf howled in the darkness from the base of the rocks .
Such was the uneventful life of Simon Melas the anchorite , until there came the day of wrath .
It was in the late spring of the year 375 that Simon came out from his cell , his gourd in his hand , to draw water from the spring .
Darkness had closed in , the sun had set , but one last glimmer of rosy light rested upon a rocky peak , which jutted forth from the hill , on the further side from the hermit 's dwelling .
As Simon came forth from under his ledge , the gourd dropped from his hand , and he stood gazing in amazement .
One spring morning , in the year of 67 , Policles , with the aid of his boy Dorus , had driven his goats over to a new pasturage which overlooked from afar the town of Olympia .
Gazing down upon it from the mountain , the shepherd was surprised to see that a portion of the famous amphitheatre had been roofed in , as though some performance was being enacted .
Living far from the world and from all news , Policles could not imagine what was afoot , for he was well aware that the Grecian games were not due for two years to come .
Surely some poetic or musical contest must be proceeding of which he had heard nothing .
If so , there would perhaps be some chance of his gaining the votes of the judges ; and in any case he loved to hear the compositions and admire the execution of the great minstrels who assembled on such an occasion .
Calling to Dorus , therefore , he left the goats to his charge , and strode swiftly away , his harp upon his back , to see what was going forward in the town .
But what followed filled the shepherd poet with absolute amazement .
When Metas of Corinth had made his bow and withdrawn to half-hearted and perfunctory applause , there appeared upon the stage , amid the wildest enthusiasm upon the part of the audience , a most extraordinary figure .
He was a short fat man , neither old nor young , with a bull neck and a round , heavy face , which hung in creases in front like the dewlap of an ox .
He was absurdly clad in a short blue tunic , braced at the waist with a golden belt .
His neck and part of his chest were exposed , and his short , fat legs were bare from the buskins below to the middle of his thighs , which was as far as his tunic extended .
In his hair were two golden wings , and the same upon his heels , after the fashion of the god Mercury .
Behind him walked a negro bearing a harp , and beside him a richly dressed officer who bore rolls of music .
This strange creature took the harp from the hands of the attendant , and advanced to the front of the stage , whence he bowed and smiled to the cheering audience .
`` This is some foppish singer from Athens , '' thought Policles to himself , but at the same time he understood that only a great master of song could receive such a reception from a Greek audience .
This was evidently some wonderful performer whose reputation had preceded him .
Policles settled down , therefore , and prepared to give his soul up to the music .
Policles sprang readily to his feet at the challenge , and the great company making way for him to pass , he found himself a minute later standing in his unkempt garb , with his frayed and weather-beaten harp in his hand , before the expectant crowd .
He stood for a moment tightening a string here and slackening another there until his chords rang true .
Then , amid a murmur of laughter and jeers from the Roman benches immediately before him , he began to sing .
An hour later the shepherd was well on his way to his mountain home , and about the same time the Emperor , having received the Chaplet of Olympia for the incomparable excellence of his performance , was making enquiries with a frowning brow as to who the insolent person might be who had dared to utter such contemptuous criticisms .
The greater part of the men were sturdy fellows with red , yellow , or brown hair , mostly the latter .
To my surprise , I saw several women among them .
Eric , in answer to my question , explained that they always take their women with them so far as they can , and that instead of finding them an encumbrance as our Roman dames would be , they look upon them as helpmates and advisers .
Of course , I remembered afterwards that our excellent and accurate Tacitus has remarked upon this characteristic of the Germans .
All laws in the tribes are decided by votes , and a vote has not yet been given to the women , but many are in favour of it , and it is thought that woman and man may soon have the same power in the State , though many of the women themselves are opposed to such an innovation .
I observed to Eric that it was fortunate there were several women on board , as they could keep each other company ; but he answered that the wives of chiefs had no desire to know the wives of the inferior officers , and that both of them combined against the more common women , so that any companionship was out of the question .
He pointed as he spoke to Editha , the wife of Kenna , a red-faced , elderly woman , who walked among the others , her chin in the air , taking no more notice than if they did not exist .
Whilst I was talking to my friend Eric , a sudden altercation broke out upon the deck , and a great number of the men paused in their work , and flocked towards the spot with faces which showed that they were deeply interested in the matter .
Eric and I pushed our way among the others , for I was very anxious to see as much as I could of the ways and manners of these Barbarians .
A quarrel had broken out about a child , a little blue-eyed fellow with curly yellow hair , who appeared to be greatly amused by the hubbub of which he was the cause .
On one side of him stood a white-bearded old man , of very majestic aspect , who signified by his gestures that he claimed the lad for himself , while on the other was a thin , earnest , anxious person , who strongly objected to the boy being taken from him .
Eric whispered in my ear that the old man was the tribal high priest , who was the official sacrificer to their great god Woden , whilst the other was a man who took somewhat different views , not upon Woden , but upon the means by which he should be worshipped .
The majority of the crew were on the side of the old priest ; but a certain number , who liked greater liberty of worship , and to invent their own prayers instead of always repeating the official ones , followed the lead of the younger man .
The difference was too deep and too old to be healed among the grown men , but each had a great desire to impress his view upon the children .
This was the reason why these two were now so furious with each other , and the argument between them ran so high that several of their followers on either side had drawn the short saxes , or knives from which their name of Saxon is derived , when a burly , red-headed man pushed his way through the throng , and in a voice of thunder brought the controversy to an end .
`` You priests , who argue about the things which no man can know , are more trouble aboard this ship than all the dangers of the sea , '' he cried .
`` Can you not be content with worshipping Woden , over which we are all agreed , and not make so much of those small points upon which we may differ .
If there is all this fuss about the teaching of the children , then I shall forbid either of you to teach them , and they must be content with as much as they can learn from their mothers . ''
There was one peculiarity which I observed in their conversation which soothed me very much .
I am fond of these Britons , among whom I have spent so much of my life , and I wish them well .
It was very pleasing , therefore , to notice that these men insisted upon it in their conversation that the whole object of their visit was the good of the Islanders .
Any prospect of advantage to themselves was pushed into the background .
I was not clear that these professions could be made to agree with the speech in which Kenna had promised a hundred hides of land to every man on the ship ; but on my making this remark , the three chiefs seemed very surprised and hurt by my suspicions , and explained very plausibly that , as the Britons needed them as a guard , they could not aid them better than by settling on the soil , and so being continually at hand in order to help them .
In time , they said , they hoped to raise and train the natives to such a point that they would be able to look after themselves .
Lanc spoke with some degree of eloquence upon the nobleness of the mission which they had undertaken , and the others clattered their cups of mead ( a jar of that unpleasant drink was on the table ) in token of their agreement .
`` Nay , it was Datus who did it .
Bring him in , and let him explain it himself , '' said Sergius in a sulky voice .
The senator gave a cry of apprehension and rushed to the corner of the atrium , where a little shrine , curtained off by silken drapery , held the precious statue , the greatest art treasure of his collection -- perhaps of the whole world .
He tore the hangings aside and stood in speechless anger before the outraged goddess .
The red , perfumed lamp which always burned before her had been spilled and broken ; her altar fire had been quenched , her chaplet had been dashed aside .
But worst of all -- insufferable sacrilege !
-- her own beautiful nude body of glistening Pentelic marble , as white and fair as when the inspired Greek had hewed it out five hundred years before , had been most brutally mishandled .
Three fingers of the gracious outstretched hand had been struck off , and lay upon the pedestal beside her .
Above her delicate breast a dark mark showed , where a blow had disfigured the marble .
Emilius Flaccus , the most delicate and judicious connoisseur in Rome , stood gasping and croaking , his hand to his throat , as he gazed at his disfigured masterpiece .
Then he turned upon his slaves , his fury in his convulsed face ; but , to his amazement , they were not looking at him , but had all turned in attitudes of deep respect towards the opening of the peristyle .
As he faced round and saw who had just entered his house , his own rage fell away from him in an instant , and his manner became as humble as that of his servants .
`` Yes , I did . ''
The slave looked steadfastly at his master .
`` I do not fear death , '' he said .
`` My sister Candida died in the arena , and I am ready to do the same .
It is true that I have injured your statue , but I am able to find you something of far greater value in exchange .
I will give you the truth and the gospel in exchange for your broken idol . ''
But the Patrician still hesitated .
He would make a last effort .
`` Bow your head before the goddess , and entreat her forgiveness for the violence you have done her .
Then perhaps you may gain my pardon as well . ''
Whoever saw such a body of a man ! ''
`` What says he ?
What is amiss with the fellow ?
Whence comes he , and what is his name ? ''
`` Some post could surely be found for such a man , were it but as janitor at the Palatine Palace , '' said he to one of the Prefects .
`` I would fain see him walk even as he is through the forum .
He would turn the heads of half the women in Rome .
Talk to him , Crassus .
You know his speech . ''
`` Here is the Python , and here Varus the Lictor , each stripped for the bout .
Have a look at them , Barbarian , and see which you would choose .
What does he say ?
He would take them both ?
Nay then he is either the king of wrestlers or the king of boasters , and we shall soon see which .
Let him have his way , and he has himself to thank if he comes out with a broken neck . ''
And Giant Maximin -- what of him ?
He had carried his eight feet of manhood through the lowlands of Scotland and the passes of the Grampians .
He had seen Severus pass away , and had soldiered with his son .
He had fought in Armenia , in Dacia , and in Germany .
They had made him a centurion upon the field when with his hands he plucked out one by one the stockades of a northern village , and so cleared a path for the stormers .
His strength had been the jest and the admiration of the soldiers .
Legends about him had spread through the army , and were the common gossip round the camp fires -- of his duel with the German axe-man on the Island of the Rhine , and of the blow with his fist that broke the leg of a Scythian 's horse .
Gradually he had won his way upwards , until now , after quarter of a century 's service , he was tribune of the fourth legion and superintendent of recruits for the whole army .
The young soldier who had come under the glare of Maximin 's eyes , or had been lifted up with one huge hand while he was cuffed by the other , had his first lesson from him in the discipline of the service .
There was scarce a shout as he came down the line . ''
`` Nay , I am too old for change .
I will follow the eagle till I die .
And yet I had rather die in serving a soldier master than a long-gowned Syrian who comes of a stock where the women are men and the men are women . ''
There was a hush for the answer .
The sigh of the wind among the pines and the low lapping of the river swelled out louder in the silence .
Balbus looked hard at his commander .
`` Two names were whispered from rank to rank , '' said he .
`` One was Ascenius Pollio , the General .
The other was -- -- ''
`` Ave Maximinus Augustus ! ''
So they closed upon him and cut and stabbed and thrust , until his knees gave way beneath him and he dropped upon the floor .
`` 'When God has given me sufficient power , which will be within a few years , ' said he , 'I will unite all Arabia under my banner .
Then I will spread my doctrine over Syria and Egypt .
When this has been done , I will turn to Persia , and give them the choice of the true faith or the sword .
Having taken Persia , it will be easy then to overrun Asia Minor , and so to make our way to Constantinople . '
On Monday I came on the first trace of defalcation .
No heavy game hunter ever got a finer thrill when first he caught sight of the trail of his quarry .
But I look at the twenty ledgers and think of the jungle through which I have to follow him before I get my kill .
Hard work -- but rare sport , too , in a way !
I saw the fat fellow once at a City dinner , his red face glowing above a white napkin .
He looked at the little pale man at the end of the table .
He would have been pale too if he could have seen the task that would be mine .
Then , as I looked , the mist , or smoke , or cloud , or whatever one may call it , seemed to coalesce and solidify at two points quite close together , and I was aware , with a thrill of interest rather than of fear , that these were two eyes looking out into the room .
A vague outline of a head I could see -- a woman 's by the hair , but this was very shadowy .
Only the eyes were quite distinct ; such eyes -- dark , luminous , filled with some passionate emotion , fury or horror , I could not say which .
Never have I seen eyes which were so full of intense , vivid life .
They were not fixed upon me , but stared out into the room .
Then as I sat erect , passed my hand over my brow , and made a strong conscious effort to pull myself together , the dim head faded in the general opacity , the mirror slowly cleared , and there were the red curtains once again .
A sceptic would say , no doubt , that I had dropped asleep over my figures , and that my experience was a dream .
As a matter of fact , I was never more vividly awake in my life .
I was able to argue about it even as I looked at it , and to tell myself that it was a subjective impression -- a chimera of the nerves -- begotten by worry and insomnia .
But why this particular shape ?
And who is the woman , and what is the dreadful emotion which I read in those wonderful brown eyes ?
They come between me and my work .
For the first time I have done less than the daily tally which I had marked out .
Perhaps that is why I have had no abnormal sensations to-night .
To-morrow I must wake up , come what may .
11._ -- All well , and good progress with my work .
I wind the net , coil after coil , round that bulky body .
But the last smile may remain with him if my own nerves break over it .
The mirror would seem to be a sort of barometer which marks my brain pressure .
Each night I have observed that it had clouded before I reached the end of my task .
18._ -- Headaches , nervous twitches , mistiness , fullness of the temples -- all the premonitions of trouble , and the trouble came sure enough .
And yet my real sorrow is not so much that the vision should come as that it should cease before all is revealed .
Let me explain in the first instance that I am writing this in Dr. Sinclair 's private hospital some three weeks after the last entry in my diary .
On the night of January 20 my nervous system finally gave way , and I remembered nothing afterwards until I found myself three days ago in this home of rest .
And I can rest with a good conscience .
My work was done before I went under .
My figures are in the solicitors ' hands .
The hunt is over .
Your mirror came from Holyrood .
You have had one very singular experience , and have escaped .
I trust that you will never put yourself into the way of having such another . ''
The abbot turned away his face to avoid those questioning eyes .
`` Why did you not tell my mother that we were coming , Father Luke ?
Why did you not wait until you had her command ? ''
The abbot , who had made several visits to Constantinople upon the business of his monastery , walked with the assured step of one who knows his ground ; while the boy , alarmed and yet pleased by the rush of people , the roar and clatter of passing chariots , and the vista of magnificent buildings , held tightly to the loose gown of his guide , while staring eagerly about him in every direction .
Passing through the steep and narrow streets which led up from the water , they emerged into the open space which surrounds the magnificent pile of Saint Sophia , the great church begun by Constantine , hallowed by Saint Chrysostom , and now the seat of the Patriarch , and the very centre of the Eastern Church .
Only with many crossings and genuflections did the pious abbot succeed in passing the revered shrine of his religion , and hurried on to his difficult task .
Having passed Saint Sophia , the two travellers crossed the marble-paved Augusteum , and saw upon their right the gilded gates of the hippodrome through which a vast crowd of people was pressing , for though the morning had been devoted to the religious ceremony , the afternoon was given over to secular festivities .
So great was the rush of the populace that the two strangers had some difficulty in disengaging themselves from the stream and reaching the huge arch of black marble which formed the outer gate of the palace .
Within they were fiercely ordered to halt by a gold-crested and magnificent sentinel who laid his shining spear across their breasts until his superior officer should give them permission to pass .
The abbot had been warned , however , that all obstacles would give way if he mentioned the name of Basil the eunuch , who acted as chamberlain of the palace and also as Parakimomen -- a high office which meant that he slept at the door of the Imperial bed-chamber .
The charm worked wonderfully , for at the mention of that potent name the Protosphathaire , or Head of the Palace Guards , who chanced to be upon the spot , immediately detached one of his soldiers with instructions to convoy the two strangers into the presence of the chamberlain .
`` Indeed , he is the very image of the Empress , '' he muttered ; and then , with sudden suspicion , `` Is it not the chance of this likeness which has put the scheme into your head , old man ? ''
`` To no one in the whole world , '' the other answered .
`` There is Deacon Bardas at the monastery and myself .
No one else knows anything . ''
The eunuch had made up his mind .
If he alone of all men in the palace knew of this event , he would have a powerful hold over his masterful mistress .
He was certain that Justinian the Emperor knew nothing of this .
It would be a shock to him .
It might even alienate his affections from his wife .
She might care to take precautions to prevent him from knowing .
And if he , Basil the eunuch , was her confederate in those precautions , then how very close it must draw him to her .
All this flashed through his mind as he stood , the papyrus in his hand , looking at the old man and the boy .
`` I am in your power , '' she said .
`` The Emperor must never know of this . ''
`` There is only one way for safety , '' said the eunuch .
`` Must it be -- death ? ''
`` But the Holy Synod !
He is a tonsured priest .
What would the Patriarch do ? ''
Again she shuddered and shrank down among the cushions .
`` Do it ! ''
`` I have in very truth , great Empress .
I swear to you by Saint Nicephorus , patron of our house , that save old Deacon Bardas , there is none who knows . ''
It was evening in the port of Tyre , some eleven hundred years before the coming of Christ .
The city held , at that time , about a quarter of a million of inhabitants , the majority of whom dwelt upon the mainland , where the buildings of the wealthy merchants , each in its own tree-girt garden , extended for seven miles along the coast .
The great island , however , from which the town got its name , lay out some distance from the shore , and contained within its narrow borders the more famous of the temples and public buildings .
Of these temples the chief was that of Melmoth , which covered with its long colonnades the greater part of that side of the island which looked down upon the Sidonian port , so called because only twenty miles away the older city of Sidon maintained a constant stream of traffic with its rising offshoot .
`` Yes , there is not a chief from Thessaly to the Malea who has not called out his men , and there were twelve hundred galleys in the harbour of Aulis . ''
`` Who , then , is this who comes to Alaga of Tyre , the handmaiden of great Ashtaroth ?
Behold I see an island to the west , and an old man who is the father , and the great chief , and his wife , and his son who now waits him at home , being too young for the wars .
Is this not true ? ''
`` Nay , say not so , Alaga ! ''
The woman had looked up with wild inquiring eyes .
Her gaze was neither for the priest nor for the chief , but shot past them to the further door .
Looking round the Greek was aware that two new figures had entered the room .
They were the ruddy barbarian whom he had marked in the street , together with the youth who bore his harp .
As I stood in the darkness , wrapped in my scarlet chlamys -- for the evenings here are chill -- I was suddenly aware that I was not alone .
A tall , silent figure was near me , looking down at the town even as I was .
I could see in the moonlight that he was clad as an officer , and as I approached him I recognized that it was Longinus , third tribune of my own legion , and a soldier of great age and experience .
He is a strange , silent man , who is respected by all , but understood by none , for he keeps his own council and thinks rather than talks .
As I approached him the first flames burst from the temple , a high column of fire , which cast a glow upon our faces and gleamed upon our armour .
In this red light I saw that the gaunt face of my companion was set like iron .
He was speaking to himself rather than to me , for he started and seemed confused when I asked him what he meant .
`` I have heard , '' said he , `` that Seneca died the richest man in all Nero's Empire , so he made the best of this world in spite of his philosophy . ''
`` Have you ever heard , '' he asked , `` of the Christians ? ''
`` I was there , '' said the man simply , and became silent , while we both looked down at the huge column of flame from the burning temple .
As it flared up we could see the white tents of the army and all the country round .
There was a low hill just outside the city , and my companion pointed to it .
`` What about the eyes , then ? ''
'Barrow , Barrow , you shall pay me !
Me , your comrade , to betray me !
Well I know that little Amy Is as true as wife can be .
She to give this love-badged locket !
Ha , the rocket !
Yorkshires , Yorkshires , follow me ! '
Said Paul Leroy to Amy , 'Well , wifie , you may blame me , For my passion overcame me , When he told me of his shame ; But when I saw him lying , Dead amid a ring of dying , Why , poor devil , I was trying To forget , and not to blame .
The one was Corporal Robert Dick , Bearded and burly , short and thick , Rough of speech and in temper quick , A hard-faced old rapscallion .
The other , fresh from the barrack square , Was a raw recruit , smooth-cheeked and fair Half grown , half drilled , with the weedy air Of a draft from the home battalion .
Was THAT a kite ?
The yell That shrilly rose and faintly fell ?
No kite 's , and yet the kite knows well The long-drawn wild halloo .
And right athwart the evening sky The yellow sand-spray spurtled high , And shrill and shriller swelled the cry Of 'Allah !
Alas for the Emir Ali Khan !
A hundred paces before his clan , That ebony steed of the prophet 's breed Is the foal of death and of danger .
A spurt of fire , a gasp of pain , A blueish blurr on the yellow plain , The chief was down , and his bridle rein Was in the grip of the stranger .
'Say , what saw you in the vale , Campesino Garcia ? '
'There I saw my lambing ewe And an army riding through , Thick and brave the pennons flew From the lances o'er them . '
'Then what saw you on the hill , Campesino Garcia ? '
'I saw beside the milking byre , White with want and black with mire , The little man with eyes afire Marshalling his bowmen . '
Touring from London , so he said .
Was it copper they dug for ?
Where did they find it ?
How did it come ?
If he tried with a shovel might HE get some ?
Stooping so much Was bad for the spine ; And was n't it warmish in Pennarby mine ?
And Carnbrae Bob , the Pennarby wit , Told him the facts about the pit : How they bored the shaft till the brimstone smell Warned them off from tapping -- well , He would n't say what , But they took it as sign To dig no deeper in Pennarby mine .
The trader he had a daughter fair - Wake her up !
Try her with the foresail The trader he had a daughter fair , She had gold in her ears , and gold in her hair : All for bully rover Jack , Waiting with his yard aback , Out upon the Lowland sea !
'Alas the day , oh daughter mine ! '
- Shake her up !
Try her with the topsail !
'Alas the day , oh daughter mine !
Yon red , red flag is a fearsome sign ! '
Ho , the bully rover Jack , Reaching on the weather tack , Out upon the Lowland sea !
Who carries the gun ?
It 's you , and you , and you ; So let us go , and we wo n't say no If they give us a job to do .
Here we stand with a cross-linked hand , Comrades every one ; So one last cup , and drink it up To the man who carries the gun !
For the Colonel rides before , The Major 's on the flank , The Captains and the Adjutant Are in the foremost rank .
And when it 's 'Action front ! '
And there 's fighting to be done , Come one , come all , you stand or fall By the man who holds the gun .
And when the 'ydrophoby came five year ago next May , When Nailer was be'avin ' in a most owdacious way , I fixed 'im so 's 'e could n't bite , my 'ands on neck an ' back , An ' I 'eaved 'im from the kennels , and they say I saved the pack .
There 's Captain Kane an ' McIntyre an ' 'alf a dozen more , And two or three are 'untin ' whom I never seed afore ; Likely-lookin ' chaps they be , well groomed and 'orsed and dressed - I wish they could 'a seen the pack when it was at its best .
The course was the devil !
A start on the level , And then a stiff breather uphill ; A bank at the top with a four-foot drop , And a bullfinch down by the mill .
A stretch of straight from the Whittlesea gate , Then up and down and up ; And the mounts that stay through Farnshire clay May bid for the Farnshire Cup .
And the whisper grew and the whisper flew That she came of Isonomy stock .
'Fifty to one ! '
'It 's done -- and done !
Look at her haunch and hock !
Why yes , but one may guess That that is her owner 's guile . '
Ah , Farmer Brown , the sharps from town , Have read your simple smile !
For somebody laid AGAINST the gray , And somebody made a pile ; And Brown says he can make farming pay , And he smiles a simple smile .
'Them sharps from town were riled , ' says Brown ; 'But I ca n't see why -- can you ?
For I said quite fair as I knew that mare , And I proved my words was true . '
And yet we knew 't was in 'im , we knew as 'e could fly ; But what we could n't git at was 'ow to make 'im try .
We 'd almost turned the job up , until at last one day We got the last yard out of 'im in a most amazin ' way .
An ' then one day it would n't go .
'E screwed and screwed again , But somethin ' jammed , an ' there 'e stuck in the mud of a country lane .
It 'urt 'is pride most cruel , but what was 'e to do ?
So at last 'e bade me fetch a 'orse to pull the motor through .
Well , master 'e was in the car , a-fiddlin ' with the gear , And the 'orse was meditatin ' , an ' I was standin ' near , When master 'e touched somethin ' -- what it was we 'll never know - But it sort o ' spurred the boiler up and made the engine go .
''Old 'ard , old gal ! '
says master , and 'Gently then ! '
says I , But an engine wo n't 'eed coaxin ' an ' it ai n't no use to try ; So first 'e pulled a lever , an ' then 'e turned a screw , But the thing kept crawlin ' forrard spite of all that 'e could do .
Master 'eld the steerin ' gear , an ' kept the road all right , And away they whizzed and clattered -- my aunt !
it was a sight .
'E seemed the finest draught 'orse as ever lived by far , For all the country Juggins thought 't was 'im wot pulled the car .
'E was stretchin ' like a grey'ound , 'e was goin ' all 'e knew ; But it bumped an ' shoved be'ind 'im , for all that 'e could do ; It butted 'im an ' boosted 'im an ' spanked 'im on a'ead , Till 'e broke the ten-mile record , same as I already said .
The horse is up and saddled ; Girth the old horse tight !
The hounds are out and drawing In the morning light .
Now it 's 'Yoick ! '
among the heather , And it 's 'Yoick ! '
across the clover , And it 's 'To him , all together ! '
Hyke a Rover ! '
And the woodlands smell so sweetly in the morning .
'Who 's the fool that heads him ? '
Hold hard , and let him pass !
He 's out among the oziers He 's clear upon the grass .
You grip his flanks and settle , For the horse is stretched and straining , Here 's a game to test your mettle , And a sport to try your training , When the Chiddingfolds are running in the morning .
Put the saddle on the mare , For the wet winds blow ; There 's winter in the air , And autumn all below .
For the red leaves are flying And the red bracken dying , And the red fox lying Where the oziers grow .
They 'ad a check at Ebernoe An ' made a cast across the Down , Until they got a view 'ullo An ' chased 'im up to Kirdford town .
For 'e 'ad gone amazin ' fine , Two 'undred pounds between 'is knees ; Eight stone he was , an ' rode at nine , As light an ' limber as you please .
Spread the topgallants -- oh , lay them out lustily !
What though it darken o'er Netherby Combe ?
'T is but the valley wind , puffing so gustily - On for the Warner and Hayling and Home !
'Tut , the clack of them !
Aye , as you say , sir , they 're little ones still ; One long reach should open it readily , Round by St. Helens and under the hill .
It is mine -- the little chamber , Mine alone .
I had it from my forbears Years agone .
Yet within its walls I see A most motley company , And they one and all claim me As their own .
Said the king to the colonel , 'The complaints are eternal , That you Irish give more trouble Than any other corps . '
Said the colonel to the king , 'This complaint is no new thing , For your foemen , sire , have made it A hundred times before . '
Little boy Love grew pettish one day ; 'If you keep on complaining , ' he swore , 'I 'll pack both my bow and my quiver away , And so I shall plague you no more . '
'Hey , Love , you must n't do that !
Hi , Love , what would you be at ?
You may ruin our ease , You may do what you please , But we ca n't do without you , you dear little tease ! '
As in a steamy glass , Her face was dim and blurred ; Her voice was sweet and thin , Like the calling of a bird .
'Just that little pang , love , Just a throb of pain , And then your weary head Between my breasts again . '
'It is not YOU , my sweetheart , For you are here with me .
That frame was but the promise of The thing that was to be -
'But still the same ; for surely If we alter as we die , You would be you no longer , And I would not be I .
There came a squire so debonair , His dress was rich , his words were fair .
He sweetly sang , he deftly played - He could not win the franklin 's maid .
There came a mercer wonder-fine , With velvet cap and gaberdine ; For all his ships , for all his trade , He could not buy the franklin 's maid .
You can hear the distant drumming As the clock goes tick-a-tack , And the chiming of the hours Is the music of his pack .
You may hardly note their growling Underneath the noonday sun , But at night you hear them howling As they run .
He does not heed our suing , We never see his face ; He hunts to our undoing , We thank him for the chase .
We thank him and we flatter , We hope -- because we must - But have we cause ?
May we maintain the story Of honest , fearless right !
[ 7 ] Not ours , not ours the Glory !
What are we in Thy sight ?
Thy servants , and no other , Thy servants may we be , To help our weaker brother , As we crave for help from Thee !
[ 12 ] Now when the deal was finished And the money paid , you 'd think This Arab would 'ave asked the gent At once to name 'is drink , Or at least 'ave thanked 'im kindly , An ' wished 'im a good day , And own as 'e 'd been treated In a very 'andsome way .
Supposin ' this 'ere Arab man 'Ad wanted to be free , 'E could 'ave done it businesslike , The same as you or me ; A fiver might 'ave squared the gent , An ' then 'e could 'ave claimed As 'e 'd cleared 'imself quite 'andsome , And no call to be ashamed .
( Being a Sequel to `` The Groom 's Story '' in `` Songs of Action '' )
And the vision it was just a wolf , a big Siberian , A great , fierce , 'ungry devil from a show- man 's caravan , But it saved 'im from perdition and I do n't mind if I do , I 'ave n't seen no wolf myself so 'ere's my best to you !
Said one : `` I have a mother dear , Who lieth ill abed , And by my sin the wage I win From which she hath her bread . ''
[ 40 ] Said one : `` I am an outcast 's child , And such I came on earth .
If me ye blame , for this my shame , Whom blame ye for my birth ? ''
The third she sank a sin-blotched face , And prayed that she might rest , In the weary flow of the stream below , As on her mother 's breast .
Thirty or a trifle older , Rather over six foot high , Trim of waist and broad of shoulder , Yellow-haired and blue of eye ;
[ 46 ] He had never been to college , Got his teaching in the corps , You can pick up useful knowledge 'Twixt Saltash and Singapore .
With a shaggy bearded quota On commando at his order , He went off with Louis Botha Trekking for the British border .
Till he had a brush with Plumer , Got a bullet in his arm , And returned in sullen humour To the shelter of his farm .
When the sudden scrap was ended , And they sorted out the bag , Sergeant Evans lay extended Mauseritis in his leg .
So the Kaffirs bore him , cursing , From the scene of his disaster , [ 49 ] And they left him to the nursing Of the daughters of their master .
[ 50 ] Till he felt that he had rather He had died amid the slaughter , If the harshness of the father Were not softened in the daughter .
And they often greatly wonder Why old granddad and Papa , Should have been so far asunder , Till united by mamma .
He ruled us without malice , But as if he owned us all , A sultan in his palace With his servants at his call .
[ 58 ] I saw him lie and harken To the little songs she sung , And when the shadows darken I could hear his lisping tongue .
BENDY 'S SERMON [ 60 ]
I 'd tell you how he fought Ben Caunt , and how the deaf 'un fell , But the game is done , and the men are gone and maybe it 's as well .
[ 74 ] I can recall the Tigris ' strand , Where once the Turk and Tartar met , When the great Lord of Samarcand Struck down the Sultan Bajazet .
Under a ten-league swirl of dust The roaring battle swings and sways , Now reeling down , now upward thrust , The crescent sparkles through the haze .
THE BANNER OF PROGRESS [ 77 ]
There 's a banner in our van , And we follow as we can , For at times we scarce can see it , And at times it flutters high .
But however it be flown , Still we know it as our own , And we follow , ever follow , Where we see the banner fly .
Hope that He , the nameless , May still be best and blameless , Nor ever end His highest With the earthworm and the slime .
[ 81 ] Hope that o'er the border , There lies a land of order , With higher law to reconcile The lower laws of Time .
8 He chokes the infant throat with slime , He sets the ferment free ; He builds the tiny tube of lime That blocks the artery .
But perchance the arch above us Is one great mirror 's span , And the Figure seen so dimly Is a vast reflected man .
If it is love that gave us A thousand blossoms bright , Why should that love not save us From poisoned aconite ?
If you may justly thank Him For strength in mind and limb , Then what of yonder weakling & mdash ; Must he give thanks to Him ?
[ 88 ] There comes no word to tell us Why this and that should be , Why you should live with sorrow , And joy should live with me .
And then the blunder of a horse , The crash upon the frozen clods , And Death ?
no such dignity , But Life , all twisted and at odds !
[ 92 ] At odds in body and in soul , Degraded to some brutish state , A being loathsome and malign , Debased , obscene , degenerate .
I value him Precisely at his proper rate , A creature of caprice and whim , Unstable , weak , importunate .
[ 96 ] His thoughts are set on paltry gain & mdash ; You only tell me what I see & mdash ; I know him selfish , cold and vain ; But , oh !
he 's all the world to me !
Her cheek was wet with North Sea spray , We walked where tide and shingle meet ; The long waves rolled from far away To purr in ripples at our feet .
And as we walked it seemed to me That three old friends had met that day , The old , old sky , the old , old sea , And love , which is as old as they .
The bloom is on the May once more , The chestnut buds have burst anew ; But , darling , all our springs are o'er , 'T is winter still for me and you .
We plucked Life 's blossoms long ago What 's left is but December 's snow .
SHAKESPEARE 'S EXPOSTULATION [ 101 ]
[ 110 ] But there will come to you and me Some glimpse of spacious days gone by , The wide , wide stretches of the sea , The mighty curtain of the sky ,
Up , dear laddie , saddle quick , And spring upon the leather !
Away post haste o'er fell and waste With whip and spur together !
[ 118 ] But buy from off the saddler man The stoutest cord you see , Ride at your ease and say no word , But bring it back to me .
Through the lonely mountain land There rode a cavalier .
`` Oh ride I to my darling 's arms , Or to the grave so drear ? ''
The Echo answered clear , `` The grave so drear . ''
[ 121 ] Sitting still , Let it fill ; Never press ; Nerve stress Always shows .
A LILT OF THE ROAD [ 122 ]
In the future it will seem To have been a happy dream , But unless my hopes are vain We may dream it soon again .
I really have other things to engage me . ''
So spoke Sherlock Holmes and turned back to the great scrapbook in which he was arranging and indexing some of his recent material .
But the landlady had the pertinacity and also the cunning of her sex .
She held her ground firmly .
`` You arranged an affair for a lodger of mine last year , '' she said -- '' Mr. Fairdale Hobbs . ''
`` Ah , yes -- a simple matter . ''
`` But he would never cease talking of it -- your kindness , sir , and the way in which you brought light into the darkness .
I remembered his words when I was in doubt and darkness myself .
I know you could if you only would . ''
Holmes was accessible upon the side of flattery , and also , to do him justice , upon the side of kindliness .
The two forces made him lay down his gum-brush with a sigh of resignation and push back his chair .
`` Well , well , Mrs. Warren , let us hear about it , then .
You do n't object to tobacco , I take it ?
Thank you , Watson -- the matches !
You are uneasy , as I understand , because your new lodger remains in his rooms and you can not see him .
Why , bless you , Mrs. Warren , if I were your lodger you often would not see me for weeks on end . ''
`` No doubt , sir ; but this is different .
It frightens me , Mr. Holmes .
I ca n't sleep for fright .
To hear his quick step moving here and moving there from early morning to late at night , and yet never to catch so much as a glimpse of him -- it 's more than I can stand .
My husband is as nervous over it as I am , but he is out at his work all day , while I get no rest from it .
What is he hiding for ?
What has he done ?
Except for the girl , I am all alone in the house with him , and it 's more than my nerves can stand . ''
Holmes leaned forward and laid his long , thin fingers upon the woman's shoulder .
He had an almost hypnotic power of soothing when he wished .
The scared look faded from her eyes , and her agitated features smoothed into their usual commonplace .
She sat down in the chair which he had indicated .
`` If I take it up I must understand every detail , '' said he .
`` Take time to consider .
The smallest point may be the most essential .
You say that the man came ten days ago and paid you for a fortnight 's board and lodging ? ''
`` He asked my terms , sir .
I said fifty shillings a week .
There is a small sitting-room and bedroom , and all complete , at the top of the house . ''
`` He said , 'I 'll pay you five pounds a week if I can have it on my own terms . '
I 'm a poor woman , sir , and Mr. Warren earns little , and the money meant much to me .
He took out a ten-pound note , and he held it out to me then and there .
'You can have the same every fortnight for a long time to come if you keep the terms , ' he said .
'If not , I 'll have no more to do with you . '
`` What were the terms ? ''
`` Well , sir , they were that he was to have a key of the house .
That was all right .
Lodgers often have them .
Also , that he was to be left entirely to himself and never , upon any excuse , to be disturbed . ''
`` Nothing wonderful in that , surely ? ''
`` Not in reason , sir .
But this is out of all reason .
He has been there for ten days , and neither Mr. Warren , nor I , nor the girl has once set eyes upon him .
We can hear that quick step of his pacing up and down , up and down , night , morning , and noon ; but except on that first night he had never once gone out of the house . ''
`` Oh , he went out the first night , did he ? ''
`` Yes , sir , and returned very late -- after we were all in bed .
He told me after he had taken the rooms that he would do so and asked me not to bar the door .
I heard him come up the stair after midnight . ''
`` But his meals ? ''
`` It was his particular direction that we should always , when he rang , leave his meal upon a chair , outside his door .
Then he rings again when he has finished , and we take it down from the same chair .
If he wants anything else he prints it on a slip of paper and leaves it . ''
`` Prints it ? ''
`` Yes , sir ; prints it in pencil .
Just the word , nothing more .
Here's the one I brought to show you -- soap .
Here 's another -- match .
This is one he left the first morning -- daily gazette .
I leave that paper with his breakfast every morning . ''
`` Dear me , Watson , '' said Homes , staring with great curiosity at the slips of foolscap which the landlady had handed to him , `` this is certainly a little unusual .
Seclusion I can understand ; but why print ?
Printing is a clumsy process .
What would it suggest , Watson ? ''
`` That he desired to conceal his handwriting . ''
What can it matter to him that his landlady should have a word of his writing ?
Still , it may be as you say .
Then , again , why such laconic messages ? ''
`` I can not imagine . ''
`` It opens a pleasing field for intelligent speculation .
The words are written with a broad-pointed , violet-tinted pencil of a not unusual pattern .
You will observe that the paper is torn away at the side here after the printing was done , so that the 's ' of 'soap ' is partly gone .
Suggestive , Watson , is it not ? ''
`` Of caution ? ''
There was evidently some mark , some thumbprint , something which might give a clue to the person 's identity .
Mrs. Warren , you say that the man was of middle size , dark , and bearded .
What age would he be ? ''
`` Youngish , sir -- not over thirty . ''
`` Well , can you give me no further indications ? ''
`` He spoke good English , sir , and yet I thought he was a foreigner by his accent . ''
`` And he was well dressed ? ''
`` Very smartly dressed , sir -- quite the gentleman .
Dark clothes -- nothing you would note . ''
`` He gave no name ? ''
`` No , sir . ''
`` And has had no letters or callers ? ''
`` But surely you or the girl enter his room of a morning ? ''
`` No , sir ; he looks after himself entirely . ''
that is certainly remarkable .
What about his luggage ? ''
`` He had one big brown bag with him -- nothing else . ''
`` Well , we do n't seem to have much material to help us .
Do you say nothing has come out of that room -- absolutely nothing ? ''
The landlady drew an envelope from her bag ; from it she shook out two burnt matches and a cigarette-end upon the table .
`` They were on his tray this morning .
I brought them because I had heard that you can read great things out of small ones . ''
Holmes shrugged his shoulders .
`` There is nothing here , '' said he .
`` The matches have , of course , been used to light cigarettes .
That is obvious from the shortness of the burnt end .
Half the match is consumed in lighting a pipe or cigar .
But , dear me !
this cigarette stub is certainly remarkable .
The gentleman was bearded and moustached , you say ? ''
`` Yes , sir . ''
`` I do n't understand that .
I should say that only a clean-shaven man could have smoked this .
Why , Watson , even your modest moustache would have been singed . ''
`` A holder ? ''
`` No , no ; the end is matted .
I suppose there could not be two people in your rooms , Mrs .
`` No , sir .
He eats so little that I often wonder it can keep life in one . ''
`` Well , I think we must wait for a little more material .
After all , you have nothing to complain of .
You have received your rent , and he is not a troublesome lodger , though he is certainly an unusual one .
He pays you well , and if he chooses to lie concealed it is no direct business of yours .
We have no excuse for an intrusion upon his privacy until we have some reason to think that there is a guilty reason for it .
I 've taken up the matter , and I wo n't lose sight of it .
Report to me if anything fresh occurs , and rely upon my assistance if it should be needed .
`` How 's this , Watson ? ''
he cried , picking up the paper from the table .
`` 'High red house with white stone facings .
G. ' That is definite enough .
I think after breakfast we must make a little reconnaissance of Mrs. Warren's neighbourhood .
Ah , Mrs. Warren !
what news do you bring us this morning ? ''
`` I do n't see how that is to be managed , unless you break in the door .
I always hear him unlock it as I go down the stair after I leave the tray . ''
`` He has to take the tray in .
Surely we could conceal ourselves and see him do it . ''
The landlady thought for a moment .
`` But what is at the root of it ? ''
`` Ah , yes , Watson -- severely practical , as usual !
What is at the root of it all ?
Mrs. Warren 's whimsical problem enlarges somewhat and assumes a more sinister aspect as we proceed .
This much we can say : that it is no ordinary love escapade .
You saw the woman 's face at the sign of danger .
We have heard , too , of the attack upon the landlord , which was undoubtedly meant for the lodger .
These alarms , and the desperate need for secrecy , argue that the matter is one of life or death .
The attack upon Mr. Warren further shows that the enemy , whoever they are , are themselves not aware of the substitution of the female lodger for the male .
It is very curious and complex , Watson . ''
`` Why , Gregson ! ''
said my companion as he shook hands with the Scotland Yard detective .
`` Journeys end with lovers ' meetings .
What brings you here ? ''
The American , a quiet , businesslike young man , with a clean-shaven , hatchet face , flushed up at the words of commendation .
`` I am on the trail of my life now , Mr. Holmes , '' said he .
`` If I can get Gorgiano -- ''
`` Well , it figures out that way , does it not ?
Here he is , sending out messages to an accomplice -- there are several of his gang in London .
Then suddenly , just as by your own account he was telling them that there was danger , he broke short off .
What could it mean except that from the window he had suddenly either caught sight of us in the street , or in some way come to understand how close the danger was , and that he must act right away if he was to avoid it ?
What do you suggest , Mr .
`` That we go up at once and see for ourselves . ''
The door of the left-hand flat upon the third landing was standing ajar .
Gregson pushed it open .
Within all was absolute silence and darkness .
I struck a match and lit the detective 's lantern .
As I did so , and as the flicker steadied into a flame , we all gave a gasp of surprise .
On the deal boards of the carpetless floor there was outlined a fresh track of blood .
The red steps pointed towards us and led away from an inner room , the door of which was closed .
Gregson flung it open and held his light full blaze in front of him , while we all peered eagerly over his shoulders .
In the middle of the floor of the empty room was huddled the figure of an enormous man , his clean-shaven , swarthy face grotesquely horrible in its contortion and his head encircled by a ghastly crimson halo of blood , lying in a broad wet circle upon the white woodwork .
His knees were drawn up , his hands thrown out in agony , and from the centre of his broad , brown , upturned throat there projected the white haft of a knife driven blade-deep into his body .
Giant as he was , the man must have gone down like a pole-axed ox before that terrific blow .
Beside his right hand a most formidable horn-handled , two-edged dagger lay upon the floor , and near it a black kid glove .
it 's Black Gorgiano himself ! ''
cried the American detective .
`` Someone has got ahead of us this time . ''
`` I rather think that will be helpful , '' said he .
He came over and stood in deep thought while the two professionals were examining the body .
`` You say that three people came out from the flat while you were waiting downstairs , '' said he at last .
`` Did you observe them closely ? ''
`` Yes ; he was the last to pass me . ''
`` One night , when Gennaro returned from his work , he brought a fellow-countryman back with him .
His name was Gorgiano , and he had come also from Posilippo .
He was a huge man , as you can testify , for you have looked upon his corpse .
Not only was his body that of a giant but everything about him was grotesque , gigantic , and terrifying .
His voice was like thunder in our little house .
There was scarce room for the whirl of his great arms as he talked .
His thoughts , his emotions , his passions , all were exaggerated and monstrous .
He talked , or rather roared , with such energy that others could but sit and listen , cowed with the mighty stream of words .
His eyes blazed at you and held you at his mercy .
He was a terrible and wonderful man .
I thank God that he is dead !
`` A few days later came the meeting .
Gennaro returned from it with a face which told me that something dreadful had occurred .
It was worse than we could have imagined possible .
The funds of the society were raised by blackmailing rich Italians and threatening them with violence should they refuse the money .
It seems that Castalotte , our dear friend and benefactor , had been approached .
He had refused to yield to threats , and he had handed the notices to the police .
It was resolved now that such an example should be made of them as would prevent any other victim from rebelling .
At the meeting it was arranged that he and his house should be blown up with dynamite .
There was a drawing of lots as to who should carry out the deed .
Gennaro saw our enemy's cruel face smiling at him as he dipped his hand in the bag .
No doubt it had been prearranged in some fashion , for it was the fatal disc with the Red Circle upon it , the mandate for murder , which lay upon his palm .
He was to kill his best friend , or he was to expose himself and me to the vengeance of his comrades .
It was part of their fiendish system to punish those whom they feared or hated by injuring not only their own persons but those whom they loved , and it was the knowledge of this which hung as a terror over my poor Gennaro 's head and drove him nearly crazy with apprehension .
`` Well , Mr. Gregson , '' said the American , looking across at the official , `` I do n't know what your British point of view may be , but I guess that in New York this lady 's husband will receive a pretty general vote of thanks . ''
`` She will have to come with me and see the chief , '' Gregson answered .
`` If what she says is corroborated , I do not think she or her husband has much to fear .
But what I ca n't make head or tail of , Mr. Holmes , is how on earth YOU got yourself mixed up in the matter . ''
`` Education , Gregson , education .
Still seeking knowledge at the old university .
Well , Watson , you have one more specimen of the tragic and grotesque to add to your collection .
By the way , it is not eight o'clock , and a Wagner night at Covent Garden !
If we hurry , we might be in time for the second act . ''
And now I will tell you how my love for Lucia was the cause of one of the most terrible of all the wonderful adventures which have ever befallen me , and how it was that I came to lose the top of my right ear .
You have often asked me why it was missing .
To-night for the first time I will tell you .
This fellow had done his work and had resumed his journey as quietly and unconcernedly as if he were accustomed to clap a sack over a colonel of Hussars every day of the week .
`` Tumble him out and you will find that he is lively enough . ''
The cord which bound me was undone and the sack drawn from over my head .
With my eyes closed I lay motionless upon the floor .
`` Matteo is right , '' said a voice .
`` His heart beats like a hammer .
Let him lie and he will soon find his senses . ''
The same terrible silence fell upon the assembly , and the same twelve pairs of merciless eyes were bent upon my face .
Again it was the grey-beard who spoke .
`` Let him await his turn .
Take him down to the wooden cell . ''
They are wonderful places , these great Venetian houses , palaces , and fortresses , and prisons all in one .
I was led along a passage and down a bare stone stair until we came to a short corridor from which three doors opened .
Through one of these I was thrust and the spring lock closed behind me .
The only light came dimly through a small grating which opened on the passage .
I wish I could forget what I heard .
Many a hundred men have I seen die in battle , and I have slain more myself than I care to think of , but all that was fair fight and the duty of a soldier .
It was a very different matter to listen to a murder in this den of assassins .
They were pushing someone along the passage , someone who resisted and who clung to my door as he passed .
They must have taken him into the third cell , the one which was farthest from me .
cried a voice , and then I heard a blow and a scream .
cried the voice again , and then `` Gerard !
It was my poor captain of infantry whom they were slaughtering .
`` I implore the tribunal to reconsider this decision . ''
It was on my lips to tell him that he was a liar , but there is a time to argue and a time to be silent .
`` It can scarce be referred to without reopening a brother 's wounds , but I would remind you that there is a very particular reason why an exemplary punishment should be inflicted in the case of this officer . ''
`` I had not forgotten it , '' the old man answered .
`` I can not endure it , '' he cried .
`` Your Excellency must forgive me .
The tribunal can act without me .
I am mad . ''
He flung his hands out with a furious gesture and rushed from the room .
`` Let him go !
Let him go ! ''
`` It is , indeed , more than can be asked of flesh and blood that he should remain under this roof .
But he is a true Venetian , and when the first agony is over he will understand that it could not be otherwise . ''
I had been forgotten during this episode , and though I am not a man who is accustomed to being overlooked I should have been all the happier had they continued to neglect me .
But now the old president glared at me again like a tiger who comes back to his victim .
`` It can not be higher than they are worth , '' said I .
It was not a pleasant prospect , and yet it was a reprieve .
One is thankful for small mercies when a hairy savage with a blood-stained knife is standing at one 's elbow .
He dragged me from the room and I was thrust down the stairs and back into my cell .
The door was locked and I was left to my reflections .
It was a woman 's voice which spoke -- a voice which was always music to my ears .
I sprang through the gap and I flung my arms round her .
`` It will be nothing , Etienne .
Only a pang for an instant and then all over .
They mean it as a badge of infamy , dear , but I will carry it like a crown of honour since it was through you that I gained it . ''
The dear little ear which I had kissed so often .
I put my hand to each little velvet shell to make certain that this sacrilege had not yet been committed .
`` You must not care , Etienne .
And yet I love that you should care all the same . ''
`` He has abandoned me to my fate .
Etienne , Etienne , they are coming ! ''
She wrestled with me , this delicate creature , and by main force she dragged me to the opening between the cells .
But a sudden thought had crossed my mind .
`` Bring a light , '' said one of them .
My impulse was to spring to my feet and to rush through them all and out by the open door .
But how would that help Lucia ?
Suppose that I got clear away , she would be in their hands until I could come back with help , for single-handed I could not hope to clear a way for her .
All this flashed through my mind in an instant , and I saw that the only course for me was to lie still , take what came , and wait my chance .
The fellow 's coarse hand felt about among my curls -- those curls in which only a woman 's fingers had ever wandered .
The next instant he gripped my ear and a pain shot through me as if I had been touched with a hot iron .
I bit my lip to stifle a cry , and I felt the blood run warm down my neck and back .
`` What is this ? ''
`` How come you to have lost your ear ? ''
`` Colonel Gerard , '' he said , `` you are worthy of a great love .
I forgive you , for if you have wronged me you have made a noble atonement .
But I wonder to see you alive .
I left the tribunal before you were judged , but I understood that no mercy would be shown to any Frenchman since the destruction of the ornaments of Venice . ''
`` He did not destroy them , '' cried Lucia .
`` He has helped to preserve those in our palace . ''
`` One of them , at any rate , '' said I , as I stooped and kissed her hand .
It was a long journey from Berlin to the Pyrenees .
You have read , no doubt , of this famous siege of Saragossa , and I will only say that no general could have had a harder task than that with which Marshal Lannes was confronted .
The immense city was crowded with a horde of Spaniards -- soldiers , peasants , priests -- all filled with the most furious hatred of the French , and the most savage determination to perish before they would surrender .
There were eighty thousand men in the town and only thirty thousand to besiege them .
Yet we had a powerful artillery , and our engineers were of the best .
There was never such a siege , for it is usual that when the fortifications are taken the city falls , but here it was not until the fortifications were taken that the real fighting began .
Every house was a fort and every street a battle-field , so that slowly , day by day , we had to work our way inwards , blowing up the houses with their garrisons until more than half the city had disappeared .
Yet the other half was as determined as ever and in a better position for defence , since it consisted of enormous convents and monasteries with walls like the Bastille , which could not be so easily brushed out of our way .
This was the state of things at the time that I joined the army .
You will sympathise with me .
Up there I had been the model for every officer of my years in the army .
I was the first swordsman , the most dashing rider , the hero of a hundred adventures .
Here I found myself not only unknown , but even disliked .
Was it not natural that I should wish to tell these brave comrades what sort of man it was that had come among them ?
Was it not natural that I should wish to say , `` Rejoice , my friends , rejoice !
It is no ordinary man who has joined you to-night , but it is I , THE Gerard , the hero of Ratisbon , the victor of Jena , the man who broke the square at Austerlitz '' ?
I could not say all this .
But I could at least tell them some incidents which would enable them to say it for themselves .
I told them more .
At last , after my tale of how I had guided the army across the Danube , one universal shout of laughter broke from them all .
I sprang to my feet , flushed with shame and anger .
They had drawn me on .
They were making game of me .
They were convinced that they had to do with a braggart and a liar .
Was this my reception in the Hussars of Conflans ?
Again there was a roar of laughter .
I can see the ring of faces , the mocking eyes , the open mouths -- Olivier with his great black bristles , Pelletan thin and sneering , even the young sub-lieutenants convulsed with merriment .
Heavens , the indignity of it !
But my rage had dried my tears .
I was myself again , cold , quiet , self-contained , ice without and fire within .
`` What hour is the assembly ? ''
I asked , sharply , of Captain Pelletan .
Some mocking answer was on his tongue , but my glance kept it there .
`` The assembly is at six , '' he answered .
`` I thank you , '' I answered .
`` I feel , however , that I have some claim upon these other gentlemen who laughed at my expense . ''
I wished my new comrades good-night as I left the room , and I repeated that I should hold myself at their disposal at five o'clock next morning .
They bowed in silence , and I thought that I could see from the expression of their faces that they had already begun to take a more just view of my character .
I had expected that the colonel would at once inform me what it was that I had been chosen to do , but instead of that he walked on in silence , I following behind him .
As I saw Lannes 's eyes fixed in admiration upon my face it thrilled me to think how splendid was the debut which I was making in the army of Spain .
If I died that night my name would not be forgotten .
My new comrades and my old , divided in all else , would still have a point of union in their love and admiration of Etienne Gerard .
He led me to the door and pointed to the high grey wall which towered up amongst the debris of the shattered houses .
`` That is the enemy 's present line of defence , '' said he .
`` It is the wall of the great Convent of the Madonna .
If we can carry it the city must fall , but they have run countermines all round it , and the walls are so enormously thick that it would be an immense labour to breach it with artillery .
We happen to know , however , that the enemy have a considerable store of powder in one of the lower chambers .
If that could be exploded the way would be clear for us . ''
`` How can it be reached ? ''
`` It turns me into a spy , '' I cried .
`` Surely I can go in my uniform ? ''
It was true , and I had been long enough in Spain to know that that fate was likely to be something more serious than mere death .
All the way from the frontier I had heard grim tales of torture and mutilation .
I enveloped myself in the Franciscan gown .
`` It is an easy tree to climb , '' said he .
`` A scaling ladder would not be simpler .
Go up it , and you will find that the top branch will enable you to step upon the roof of that house .
After that it is your guardian angel who must be your guide , for I can help you no more . ''
Slowly I crept from branch to branch until I was near the top .
I had but to climb along a stout limb in order to reach the wall .
But suddenly my ears caught the patter of feet , and I cowered against the trunk and tried to blend myself with its shadow .
A man was coming toward me on the roof .
I saw his dark figure creeping along , his body crouching , his head advanced , the barrel of his gun protruding .
His whole bearing was full of caution and suspicion .
Once or twice he paused , and then came on again until he had reached the edge of the parapet within a few yards of me .
Then he knelt down , levelled his musket , and fired .
It was a narrow and deserted lane , but it opened into a broader road , which was dotted with fires , round which a great number of soldiers and peasants were sleeping .
There was a groaning , but no reply .
whispered the strange , tremulous voice .
`` Are you a Frenchman ? ''
They have sent me to learn what had befallen you . ''
One of them held the lantern which he carried up in front of the dying man , and both of them burst into a shout of mocking laughter .
Then the eyes of the man with the lantern fell upon the flagon of wine upon the table .
He picked it up , held it , with a devilish grin , to the lips of Hubert , and then , as the poor wretch involuntarily inclined his head forward to reach it , he snatched it back and took a long gulp himself .
At the same instant he uttered a loud cry , clutched wildly at his own throat , and fell stone-dead upon the floor .
His comrade stared at him in horror and amazement .
Then , overcome by his own superstitious fears , he gave a yell of terror and rushed madly from the room .
I heard his feet clattering wildly on the cobble-stones until the sound died away in the distance .
There I stopped , panting , in the shadow , and , my hand pressed to my side , I tried to collect my scattered senses and to plan out what I should do .
As I stood there , breathless , the great brass bells roared twice above my head .
It was two o'clock .
Four was the hour when the storming-party would be in its place .
I had still two hours in which to act .
It was built in a square with a garden in the centre .
In this garden some hundreds of men were assembled , all armed and ready , for it was known , of course , within the town that this was the point against which the French attack was likely to be made .
Up to this time our fighting all over Europe had always been done between one army and another .
It was only here in Spain that we learned how terrible a thing it is to fight against a people .
Even now if they had had the wit to put a barrel of powder against the door I should have been ruined .
It was their only chance , for I had come to the final stage of my adventure .
Here at last , after such a string of dangers as few men have ever lived to talk of , I was at one end of the powder train , with the Saragossa magazine at the other .
They were howling like wolves out in the passage , and muskets were crashing against the door .
I paid no heed to their clamour , but I looked eagerly around for that train of which Hubert had spoken .
Of course , it must be at the side of the room next to the magazine .
I crawled along it on my hands and knees , looking into every crevice , but no sign could I see .
Two bullets flew through the door and flattened themselves against the wall .
The thudding and smashing grew ever louder .
I saw a grey pile in a corner , flew to it with a cry of joy , and found that it was only dust .
Then I got back to the side of the door where no bullets could ever reach me -- they were streaming freely into the room -- and I tried to forget this fiendish howling in my ear and to think out where this train could be .
It must have been carefully laid by Hubert lest these nuns should see it .
I tried to imagine how I should myself have arranged it had I been in his place .
Yes , yes , there was a thin black line , which disappeared through a small hole in the wall .
I tilted over the lamp and threw myself on the ground .
Next instant came a roar like thunder , the walls wavered and tottered around me , the ceiling clattered down from above , and over the yell of the terrified Spaniards was heard the terrific shout of the storming column of Grenadiers .
As in a dream -- a happy dream -- I heard it , and then I heard no more .
`` Splendid , Captain Gerard , splendid ! ''
`` Good morning , gentlemen , '' said I .
`` I regret exceedingly if I have kept you waiting , but I have not been master of my own time . ''
`` What do you suggest ? ''
In all the great hosts of France there was only one officer toward whom the English of Wellington 's Army retained a deep , steady , and unchangeable hatred .
`` You are also an excellent rider . ''
A thin rain was falling and there was no moon , so you may imagine that it was not very cheerful .
But my heart was light at the thought of the honour which had been done me and the glory which awaited me .
This exploit should be one more in that brilliant series which was to change my sabre into a baton .
Ah , how we dreamed , we foolish fellows , young , and drunk with success !
Could I have foreseen that night as I rode , the chosen man of sixty thousand , that I should spend my life planting cabbages on a hundred francs a month !
Oh , my youth , my hopes , my comrades !
But the wheel turns and never stops .
Forgive me , my friends , for an old man has his weakness .
For five miles I rode south , striking a tinder from time to time to look at my pocket compass .
And then in an instant -- I feel the pang once more as my memory brings back the moment -- my horse , without a sob or staggers fell stone-dead beneath me !
One spasm of despair , and then a brain of ice and a heart of fire .
All was not yet lost .
I who had come through so many hazards would come through this one also .
I rose from my horse and considered what had best be done .
Presently an officer , in a blue uniform not unlike that of our flying artillery , came cantering down the road -- an elderly , stout man he was , with grey side-whiskers .
He stopped and began to talk with an orderly officer of dragoons , who waited outside the inn , and it was then that I learned the advantage of the English which had been taught me .
I could hear and understand all that was said .
`` Very good , Cotton .
I am late already , so I will ride on . ''
This English General rode his horse with a snaffle only , and the beast had a mouth of iron .
It was useless to pull him back .
One might as well try to keep a grenadier from a wine-bottle .
I gave it up in despair , and , settling down in the saddle , I prepared for the worst which could befall .
What a creature he was !
Never have I felt such a horse between my knees .
His great haunches gathered under him with every stride , and he shot forward ever faster and faster , stretched like a greyhound , while the wind beat in my face and whistled past my ears .
I was wearing our undress jacket , a uniform simple and dark in itself -- though some figures give distinction to any uniform -- and I had taken the precaution to remove the long panache from my busby .
The result was that , amidst the mixture of costumes in the hunt , there was no reason why mine should attract attention , or why these men , whose thoughts were all with the chase , should give any heed to me .
The idea that a French officer might be riding with them was too absurd to enter their minds .
I laughed as I rode , for , indeed , amid all the danger , there was something of comic in the situation .
The farther we went the faster galloped my horse , and soon there were but three men as near the dogs as I was .
Was Etienne Gerard to be stopped by a herd of fox-dogs ?
I gave a shout and spurred my horse .
Ah , the joy and pride of that moment !
To know that I had beaten the English at their own sport .
Here were three hundred , all thirsting for the life of this animal , and yet it was I who was about to take it .
I thought of my comrades of the light cavalry brigade , of my mother , of the Emperor , of France .
I had brought honour to each and all .
Every instant brought me nearer to the fox .
The moment for action had arrived , so I unsheathed my sabre .
I waved it in the air , and the brave English all shouted behind me .
How the Brigadier Saved the Army
But on our flanks and in our rear there had gathered great numbers of Portuguese militia , of armed peasants , and of guerillas .
These people had kept a safe distance all the winter , but now that our horses were foundered they were as thick as flies all round our outposts , and no man 's life was worth a sou when once he fell into their hands .
I could name a dozen officers of my own acquaintance who were cut off during that time , and the luckiest was he who received a ball from behind a rock through his head or his heart .
There were some whose deaths were so terrible that no report of them was ever allowed to reach their relatives .
So frequent were these tragedies , and so much did they impress the imagination of the men , that it became very difficult to induce them to leave the camp .
Duplessis was a Gascon , like myself , and he was a very fine fellow , as all Gascon gentlemen are .
We took it in turn , day about , to do duty , and it was Cortex who was in attendance upon the morning of which I speak .
I saw him at breakfast , but afterward neither he nor his horse was to be seen .
All day Massena was in his usual gloom , and he spent much of his time staring with his telescope at the English lines and at the shipping in the Tagus .
With a friendly gesture he took me by the sleeve and he led me to the open window which faced the east .
Beneath us was the infantry camp , and beyond that the lines of the cavalry with the long rows of picketed horses .
`` You shall know all , and so learn how high is the cause for which you risk your life , '' said he .
`` Fifty miles to the south of us , on the other side of the Tagus , is the army of General Clausel .
His camp is situated near a peak named the Sierra d'Ossa .
On the summit of this peak is a beacon , and by this beacon he has a picket .
It is agreed between us that when at midnight he shall see our signal-fire he shall light his own as an answer , and shall then at once fall back upon the main army .
If he does not start at once I must go without him .
For two days I have endeavoured to send him his message .
It must reach him to-day , or his army will be left behind and destroyed . ''
From eight till twelve would give me four hours of darkness in which to make the ascent .
It was only the first stage , then , which I had seriously to consider .
For two or three miles I kept under cover of the vineyards , and made such good progress that my heart was high within me , and I thought to myself that it only needed a man of some brains to take the matter in hand to bring it easily to success .
Of course , Cortex and Duplessis galloping down the high-road would be easily seen , but the intelligent Gerard lurking among the vines was quite another person .
I dare say I had got as far as five miles before I met any check .
At that point there is a small wine-house , round which I perceived some carts and a number of people , the first that I had seen .
Now that I was well outside the lines I knew that every person was my enemy , so I crouched lower while I stole along to a point from which I could get a better view of what was going on .
I then perceived that these people were peasants , who were loading two waggons with empty wine-casks .
I failed to see how they could either help or hinder me , so I continued upon my way .
I heard the crashing of the barrels as they hurled them off the waggon , and then a couple of bearded faces and the muzzles of two guns looked in at me .
They seized me by the sleeves of my coat , and they dragged me out into the daylight .
A strange figure I must have looked as I stood blinking and gaping in the blinding sunlight .
My body was bent like a cripple 's , for I could not straighten my stiff joints , and half my coat was as red as an English soldier 's from the lees in which I had lain .
They laughed and laughed , these dogs , and as I tried to express by my bearing and gestures the contempt in which I held them their laughter grew all the louder .
But even in these hard circumstances I bore myself like the man I am , and as I cast my eye slowly round I did not find that any of the laughers were very ready to face it .
On a couch of dried leaves there was stretched a man dressed in the same grey uniform which I wore myself .
`` Have you flint and steel ? ''
`` It is here ! ''
`` Sir , '' said I , `` in the name of France I thank you .
I am but a colonel of light cavalry , but I am Etienne Gerard , and the name stands for something in the French army .
May I ask -- -- ''
`` I am his first lieutenant , but I am also his deadly enemy , '' said he .
He slipped off his jacket and pulled up his shirt as he spoke .
`` Look at this ! ''
he cried , and he turned upon me a back which was all scored and lacerated with red and purple weals .
`` This is what 'The Smiler ' has done to me , a man with the noblest blood of Portugal in my veins .
What I will do to 'The Smiler ' you have still to see . ''
I was lying there with the one thought still consuming me , how to wait a few hours and to get at that pile of fagots above my head , when the door of my prison opened and a man entered .
Had my hands been free I should have flown at his throat , for it was none other than de Pombal .
A couple of brigands were at his heels , but he ordered them back and closed the door behind him .
A remarkable man was Manuelo , `` The Smiler . ''
He was fat and florid and comfortable , with a big , clean-shaven face and a bald head , the very model of a kindly father of a family .
As I looked at his honest smile I could scarcely believe that this was , indeed , the infamous ruffian whose name was a horror through the English Army as well as our own .
It is well known that Trent , who was a British officer , afterward had the fellow hanged for his brutalities .
He sat upon a boulder and he beamed upon me like one who meets an old acquaintance .
He flushed with anger and his eyes swept round toward the saw .
But he understood from my tone that I meant what I said , and that I was not a man to be bullied into submission .
He pulled a cross from under his zammara or jacket of black sheepskin .
`` I swear it , '' said he .
`` You swear in turn to answer them truly ? ''
`` Now , '' said the brigand chief , `` you see the camp and you see also the road which leads to Coimbra .
It is crowded with your fourgons and your ambulances .
Does this mean that Massena is about to retreat ? ''
The idea seemed to amuse him very much .
`` Why not ? ''
`` If Massena has sent you to spy upon us , he may guess what the fire upon the mountain means . ''
`` A promise is a promise . ''
`` Do you lie there ! ''
he cried , and he laid me in the place of the dead body .
`` I have four of my men waiting , and they will place this upon the beacon . ''
He opened the door and gave an order .
Several of the brigands entered and bore out Duplessis .
For myself I remained upon the floor , with my mind in a turmoil of hope and wonder .
A terrible cry had risen out of the woods beneath us .
I have told you , my friends , how I triumphed over the English at the fox-hunt when I pursued the animal so fiercely that even the herd of trained dogs was unable to keep up , and alone with my own hand I put him to the sword .
Perhaps I have said too much of the matter , but there is a thrill in the triumphs of sport which even warfare can not give , for in warfare you share your successes with your regiment and your army , but in sport it is you yourself unaided who have won the laurels .
It is an advantage which the English have over us that in all classes they take great interest in every form of sport .
It may be that they are richer than we , or it may be that they are more idle : but I was surprised when I was a prisoner in that country to observe how widespread was this feeling , and how much it filled the minds and the lives of the people .
A horse that will run , a cock that will fight , a dog that will kill rats , a man that will box -- they would turn away from the Emperor in all his glory in order to look upon any of these .
There is a game called cricket which they play in the summer , and this also I learned .
Rudd , the head gardener , was a famous player of cricket , and so was Lord Rufton himself .
Before the house was a lawn , and here it was that Rudd taught me the game .
It is a brave pastime , a game for soldiers , for each tries to strike the other with the ball , and it is but a small stick with which you may ward it off .
Three sticks behind show the spot beyond which you may not retreat .
I can tell you that it is no game for children , and I will confess that , in spite of my nine campaigns , I felt myself turn pale when first the ball flashed past me .
So swift was it that I had not time to raise my stick to ward it off , but by good fortune it missed me and knocked down the wooden pins which marked the boundary .
It was for Rudd then to defend himself and for me to attack .
When I was a boy in Gascony I learned to throw both far and straight , so that I made sure that I could hit this gallant Englishman .
How foolish of me , the old , broken man , to dwell upon these successes , and yet I will confess that my age has been very much soothed and comforted by the memory of the women who have loved me and the men whom I have overcome .
It is pleasant to think that five years afterward , when Lord Rufton came to Paris after the peace , he was able to assure me that my name was still a famous one in the north of Devonshire for the fine exploits that I had performed .
Especially , he said , they still talked over my boxing match with the Honourable Baldock .
It came about in this way .
Of an evening many sportsmen would assemble at the house of Lord Rufton , where they would drink much wine , make wild bets , and talk of their horses and their foxes .
How well I remember those strange creatures .
Sir Barrington , Jack Lupton , of Barnstable , Colonel Addison , Johnny Miller , Lord Sadler , and my enemy , the Honourable Baldock .
They were of the same stamp all of them , drinkers , madcaps , fighters , gamblers , full of strange caprices and extraordinary whims .
Yet they were kindly fellows in their rough fashion , save only this Baldock , a fat man , who prided himself on his skill at the box-fight .
It was he who , by his laughter against the French because they were ignorant of sport , caused me to challenge him in the very sport at which he excelled .
You will say that it was foolish , my friends , but the decanter had passed many times , and the blood of youth ran hot in my veins .
I would fight him , this boaster ; I would show him that if we had not skill at least we had courage .
Lord Rufton would not allow it .
The others cheered me on and slapped me on the back .
`` No , dash it , Baldock , he 's our guest , '' said Rufton .
`` It 's his own doing , '' the other answered .
`` Look here , Rufton , they ca n't hurt each other if they wear the mawleys , '' cried Lord Sadler .
And so it was agreed .
cried Lord Sadler , and once again we advanced to the assault .
I felt as I walked that it is no wonder Englishmen should suffer from the spleen .
My own heart was heavy within me , and I sat upon a rock by the wayside looking out on the dreary view with my thoughts full of trouble and foreboding .
Suddenly , however , as I glanced down the road , I saw a sight which drove everything else from my mind , and caused me to leap to my feet with a cry of astonishment and anger .
Down the curve of the road a phaeton was coming , the pony tearing along at full gallop .
Within was the very lady whom I had come to meet .
She lashed at the pony like one who endeavours to escape from some pressing danger , glancing ever backward over her shoulder .
The bend of the road concealed from me what it was that had alarmed her , and I ran forward not knowing what to expect .
You may think , my dear friends , that this was not a sight at which I could calmly gaze .
How my heart thrilled within me to think that a chance should have been given to me to serve the Lady Jane !
I ran -- oh , good Lord , how I ran !
At last , breathless , speechless , I reached the phaeton .
The man glanced up at me with his blue English eyes , but so deep was he in his talk that he paid no heed to me , nor did the lady say a word .
She still leaned back , her beautiful pale face gazing up at him .
He was a good-looking fellow -- tall , and strong , and brown ; a pang of jealousy seized me as I looked at him .
He was talking low and fast , as the English do when they are in earnest .
`` Oh , go to blazes ! ''
he cried , turning on me with his furious face .
The next instant he had spurred his horse and was galloping down the road once more .
The first words of her explanation went into me like a sabre-point .
It was only three days after the event which I have described when Lord Rufton burst hurriedly into my room .
I had seen her after breakfast and it was now mid-day .
His name , it seems , was a household word throughout all England for every sort of mischief .
Wine , women , dice , cards , racing -- in all forms of debauchery he had earned for himself a terrible name .
He was of an old and noble family , and it had been hoped that he had sowed his wild oats when he married the beautiful Lady Jane Rufton .
it 's the Frenchman , is it ? ''
said he , without returning my bow .
`` I 've got a crow to pluck with him already .
As to you , Ned , I knew you would be hot on our scent , and so I was looking out for you .
I saw you cross the park and go to ground in the shrubbery .
Come in , man , and let us have all the cards on the table . ''
In vain Lord Rufton tried to take the quarrel upon himself .
Two things were clear in my mind -- one that the Lady Jane had feared above all things that her husband and brother should fight , the other that if I could but kill this big milord , then the whole question would be settled forever in the best way .
Lord Rufton did not want him .
Lady Jane did not want him .
Therefore , I , Etienne Gerard , their friend , would pay the debt of gratitude which I owed them by freeing them of this encumbrance .
But , indeed , there was no choice in the matter , for Lord Dacre was as eager to put a bullet into me as I could be to do the same service to him .
In vain Lord Rufton argued and scolded .
The affair must continue .
`` And mine , sir , '' said I .
`` Then I 'll have nothing to do with it , '' cried Lord Rufton .
`` I tell you , George , if you shoot Colonel Gerard under these circumstances you'll find yourself in the dock instead of on the bench .
I wo n't act as second , and that 's flat . ''
`` Yes , '' we cried .
How well she knew me , this admirable woman !
I stood for an instant irresolute , with the pistol cocked in my hand .
My antagonist faced me bravely , with no blenching of his sunburnt face and no flinching of his bold , blue eyes .
I would have a stronger wine to-night , my friends , a wine of Burgundy rather than of Bordeaux .
It is that my heart , my old soldier heart , is heavy within me .
It is a strange thing , this age which creeps upon one .
One does not know , one does not understand ; the spirit is ever the same , and one does not remember how the poor body crumbles .
But there comes a moment when it is brought home , when quick as the sparkle of a whirling sabre it is clear to us , and we see the men we were and the men we are .
Yes , yes , it was so to-day , and I would have a wine of Burgundy to-night .
White Burgundy -- Montrachet -- Sir , I am your debtor !
It is years since I have been to a review , for I can not approve of many things which I have seen .
I do not approve of the red breeches of the infantry .
It was in white breeches that the infantry used to fight .
Red is for the cavalry .
A little more , and they would ask our busbies and our spurs !
Had I been seen at a review they might well have said that I , Etienne Gerard , had condoned it .
So I have stayed at home .
But this war of the Crimea is different .
The men go to battle .
They are not large , but they are very solid and they carry themselves well .
I took off my hat to them as they passed .
Then there came the guns .
They were good guns , well horsed and well manned .
I took off my hat to them .
Then came the Engineers , and to them also I took off my hat .
There are no braver men than the Engineers .
Then came the cavalry , Lancers , Cuirassiers , Chasseurs , and Spahis .
To all of them in turn I was able to take off my hat , save only to the Spahis .
But why was it that these helpless men were not destroyed by the Russians ?
Why was it that they were not speared by the Cossacks or herded into droves , and driven as prisoners into the heart of Russia ?
On every side as you watched the black snake winding over the snow you saw also dark , moving shadows which came and went like cloud drifts on either flank and behind .
They were the Cossacks , who hung round us like wolves round the flock .
But the reason why they did not ride in upon us was that all the ice of Russia could not cool the hot hearts of some of our soldiers .
To the end there were always those who were ready to throw themselves between these savages and their prey .
One man above all rose greater as the danger thickened , and won a higher name amid disaster than he had done when he led our van to victory .
To him I drink this glass -- to Ney , the red-maned Lion , glaring back over his shoulder at the enemy who feared to tread too closely on his heels .
I can see him now , his broad white face convulsed with fury , his light blue eyes sparkling like flints , his great voice roaring and crashing amid the roll of the musketry .
His glazed and featherless cocked hat was the ensign upon which France rallied during those dreadful days .
`` The horses , '' I suggested .
It was clear to me that in order to succeed in my enterprise I should take a small force and depend rather upon surprise than upon numbers .
A large body could not conceal itself , would have great difficulty in getting food , and would cause all the Russians around us to concentrate for its certain destruction .
On the other hand , if a small body of cavalry could get past the Cossacks unseen it was probable that they would find no troops to oppose them , for we knew that the main Russian army was several days ' march behind us .
This corn was meant , no doubt , for their consumption .
A squadron of Hussars and thirty Polish Lancers were all whom I chose for the venture .
That very night we rode out of the camp , and struck south in the direction of Minsk .
But it is a swift horse indeed and a skilful rider who can hope to escape from Violette with Etienne Gerard in the saddle .
He rode well , this young Russian , and his mount was a good one , but gradually we wore him down .
I could not but admire him , for it was the very smile which I should have myself smiled had I been in his position .
`` At least , '' said I , `` tell us the name of this village . ''
`` And that is Minsk over yonder , I suppose . ''
At my order the prisoner was brought up into the room .
shall I ever forget the sight which greeted us ?
Right in front of us was drawn up a triple line of Russian Grenadiers .
Their muskets rose as we entered , and a crashing volley burst into our very faces .
Oudin and Papilette dropped upon the floor , riddled with bullets .
`` These good people offer you the shelter of their roof for the night , '' said he to me , looking me up and down with vindictive eyes .
`` I find it hard to refuse them , but I tell you straight that for my part I had rather see you on the snow .
It would cool your hot blood , you rascal of a Frenchman ! ''
I looked at him with the contempt that I felt .
His supercilious manner was more than I could endure .
But the Dragoon was still in the sulks .
`` Let him give me his parole first that he will not attempt to escape , '' said he .
`` Do you hear , sir ?
Do you give me your parole ? ''
`` I give you nothing , '' said I .
`` To you , mademoiselle , I can refuse nothing .
I will give you my parole , with pleasure . ''
`` Keep awake and ready ! ''
The words rang in my ears .
I ate my food and I drank my wine , but it was neither food nor wine which had warmed the heart within me .
What could those words of Barakoff mean ?
Then at last my heart leaped within me , for I heard a light step in the passage .
An instant later the key turned , the door opened , and Sophie was in the room .
`` What trick ? ''
`` You betrayed me ! ''
`` You lured me into this trap .
It is to you that I owe the death and capture of my men .
Fool that I was to trust a woman ! ''
`` Do not be unjust , Colonel Gerard .
I am a Russian woman , and my first duty is to my country .
Would you not wish a French girl to have acted as I have done ?
Had I translated the message correctly you would not have gone to Minsk and your squadron would have escaped .
Tell me that you forgive me ! ''
`` You lie , you hound ! ''
How the Brigadier Bore Himself at Waterloo
He looked round , and his eyes fell upon me .
here is the prince of messengers , '' said he .
`` Are you well mounted , Colonel Gerard ? ''
On the right of the Old Guard were the Young Guard and the 6th Corps of Lobau , and then I passed Jacquinot 's Lancers and Marbot 's Hussars , who held the extreme flank of the line .
All these troops knew nothing of the corps which was coming toward them through the wood , and their attention was taken up in watching the battle which raged upon their left .
More than a hundred guns were thundering from each side , and the din was so great that of all the battles which I have fought I can not recall more than half-a-dozen which were as noisy .
I looked back over my shoulder , and there were two brigades of Cuirassiers , English and French , pouring down the hill together , with the sword-blades playing over them like summer lightning .
How I longed to turn Violette , and to lead my Hussars into the thick of it !
Etienne Gerard with his back to the battle , and a fine cavalry action raging behind him .
But duty is duty , so I rode past Marbot 's vedettes and on in the direction of the wood , passing the village of Frishermont upon my left .
`` You are in the heart of the Prussian army .
Turn and fly ! ''
`` How do you know ? ''
`` Because the Emperor has said it . ''
`` I saw Hussars . ''
Behind his house there was a low stable , and into this he thrust Violette .
Then he half led and half dragged me into the kitchen of the inn .
It was a bare , brick-floored room .
A stout , red-faced woman was cooking cutlets at the fire .
The innkeeper scratched his head and looked at me in despair , but it was very evident to me that it was neither for France nor for Belgium that this woman cared , but that it was the safety of her own house that was nearest her heart .
She was shaken by this , and I hastened to complete my victory by other methods .
Having observed them through the cracks in the floor , I next turned my attention to the holes in the roof , from which I had an excellent view of all that was passing outside .
The Prussian corps was still streaming past .
It was easy to see that they had made a terrible march and had little food , for the faces of the men were ghastly , and they were plastered from head to foot with mud from their falls upon the foul and slippery roads .
Yet , spent as they were , their spirit was excellent , and they pushed and hauled at the gun-carriages when the wheels sank up to the axles in the mire , and the weary horses were floundering knee-deep unable to draw them through .
`` You can put up your sword , sir , '' said the surgeon , and I saw a friendly twinkle in his eyes .
`` I am a Pole by birth , and I have no ill-feeling to you or your people .
I will do my best for my patients , but I will do no more .
Capturing Hussars is not one of the duties of a surgeon .
With your permission I will now descend with this truss of hay to make a couch for these poor fellows below . ''
By this time I was sure that the last of the army corps was past , and I went to my loophole confident that I should find the coast clear , save , perhaps , for a few stragglers , whom I could disregard .
The first corps was indeed past , and I could see the last files of the infantry disappearing into the wood ; but you can imagine my disappointment when out of the Forest of St. Lambert I saw a second corps emerging , as numerous as the first .
Even while I raged against my ill-fortune , that same fortune was reserving me for a far higher task than to carry a message to Grouchy -- a task which could not have been mine had I not been held tight in that little inn on the edge of the Forest of Paris .
Two Prussian generals were beneath me , their heads bent over a map which lay upon the table .
Several aides-de-camp and staff officers stood round in silence .
Of the two generals , one was a fierce old man , white-haired and wrinkled , with a ragged , grizzled moustache and a voice like the bark of a hound .
The other was younger , but long-faced and solemn .
He measured distances upon the map with the air of a student , while his companion stamped and fumed and cursed like a corporal of Hussars .
It was strange to see the old man so fiery and the young one so reserved .
I could not understand all that they said , but I was very sure about their general meaning .
`` We shall beat them , Gneisenau ; the Duke and I will grind them to powder between us .
Push on , I say !
The whole war will be ended in one blow .
Bring Pirsch up , and we can throw sixty thousand men into the scale while Thielmann holds Grouchy beyond Wavre . ''
`` An aide-de-camp from the Duke of Wellington , '' said he .
`` I am Marshal Blucher .
cried the impatient old man .
Indeed , he had acted exactly as I should have done in his place .
From each colonel he had demanded the two best horsemen in the regiment , and so he had assembled a band who might expect to catch whatever they should follow .
Heaven help the Emperor if , without an escort , he should find them on his track !
But how was I to do it ?
The whole Prussian army was now between me and the French lines .
They blocked every road , but they could not block the path of duty when Etienne Gerard sees it lie before him .
I could not wait longer .
I must be gone .
`` Pray do not move , '' said I ; `` I will hurt no one , but woe to the man who lays hands upon me to stop me .
You have nothing to fear if you leave me alone , and nothing to hope if you try to hinder me .
I am Colonel Etienne Gerard , of the Hussars of Conflans . ''
`` I would not rob you , '' said I ; and raising the cloak I took from the pockets a silver flask , a square wooden case and a field-glass .
All these I handed to him .
The wretch opened the case , took out a pistol , and pointed it straight at my head .
`` Of all your noble exploits , the greatest , even if it be the last , lies now before you ! ''
caption = `` There is Marshal Blucher .
Deliver your message ! ''
But a sight lay before me which held me fast as though I had been turned into some noble equestrian statue .
I could not move , I could scarce breathe , as I gazed upon it .
There was a mound over which my path lay , and as I came out on the top of it I looked down the long , shallow valley of Waterloo .
I had left it with two great armies on either side and a clear field between them .
Now there were but long , ragged fringes of broken and exhausted regiments upon the two ridges , but a real army of dead and wounded lay between .
For two miles in length and half a mile across the ground was strewed and heaped with them .
But slaughter was no new sight to me , and it was not that which held me spellbound .
It was that up the long slope of the British position was moving a walking forest-black , tossing , waving , unbroken .
Did I not know the bearskins of the Guard ?
And did I not also know , did not my soldier 's instinct tell me , that it was the last reserve of France ; that the Emperor , like a desperate gamester , was staking all upon his last card ?
Up they went and up -- grand , solid , unbreakable , scourged with musketry , riddled with grape , flowing onward in a black , heavy tide , which lapped over the British batteries .
With my glass I could see the English gunners throw themselves under their pieces or run to the rear .
On rolled the crest of the bearskins , and then , with a crash which was swept across to my ears , they met the British infantry .
A minute passed , and another , and another .
My heart was in my mouth .
`` The Old Guard is beaten !
The Guard retreats ! ''
An officer with a livid face passed me yelling out these words of woe .
You are betrayed ! ''
Men were rushing madly to the rear , blundering and jumping like frightened sheep .
Cries and screams rose from all around me .
And at that moment , as I looked at the British position , I saw what I can never forget .
A single horseman stood out black and clear upon the ridge against the last red angry glow of the setting sun .
So dark , so motionless , against that grim light , he might have been the very spirit of Battle brooding over that terrible valley .
As I gazed , he raised his hat high in the air , and at the signal , with a low , deep roar like a breaking wave , the whole British army flooded over their ridge and came rolling down into the valley .
Long steel-fringed lines of red and blue , sweeping waves of cavalry , horse batteries rattling and bounding -- down they came on to our crumbling ranks .
A yell of agony , the agony of brave men who see no hope , rose from one flank to the other , and in an instant the whole of that noble army was swept in a wild , terror-stricken crowd from the field .
Even now , dear friends , I can not , as you see , speak of that dreadful moment with a dry eye or with a steady voice .
There were things which I saw then , as I pressed through that dreadful crowd , which can never be banished from my mind .
In evil dreams there comes back to me the memory of that flowing stream of livid , staring , screaming faces upon which I looked down .
It was a nightmare .
In victory one does not understand the horror of war .
It is only in the cold chill of defeat that it is brought home to you .
I remember an old Grenadier of the Guard lying at the side of the road with his broken leg doubled at a right angle .
`` Comrades , comrades , keep off my leg ! ''
he cried , but they tripped and stumbled over him all the same .
In front of me rode a Lancer officer without his coat .
His arm had just been taken off in the ambulance .
The bandages had fallen .
Two gunners tried to drive through with their gun .
A Chasseur raised his musket and shot one of them through the head .
I saw a major of Cuirassiers draw his two holster pistols and shoot first his horse and then himself .
Beside the road a man in a blue coat was raging and raving like a madman .
His face was black with powder , his clothes were torn , one epaulette was gone , the other hung dangling over his breast .
Only when I came close to him did I recognise that it was Marshal Ney .
He howled at the flying troops and his voice was hardly human .
Then he raised the stump of his sword -- it was broken three inches from the hilt .
`` Come and see how a Marshal of France can die ! ''
Gladly would I have gone with him , but my duty lay elsewhere .
They walked slowly in square , their colours waving over the sombre line of the bearskins .
All round them raged the English cavalry and the black Lancers of Brunswick , wave after wave thundering up , breaking with a crash , and recoiling in ruin .
When last I saw them , the English guns , six at a time , were smashing grape-shot through their ranks and the English infantry were closing in upon three sides and pouring volleys into them ; but still , like a noble lion with fierce hounds clinging to its flanks , the glorious remnant of the Guard , marching slowly , halting , closing up , dressing , moved majestically from their last battle .
Behind them the Guard 's battery of twelve-pounders was drawn up upon the ridge .
Every gunner was in his place , but no gun fired .
`` Why do you not fire ? ''
I asked the colonel as I passed .
`` Our powder is finished . ''
`` Then why not retire ? ''
`` Our appearance may hold them back for a little .
We must give the Emperor time to escape . ''
Such were the soldiers of France .
They all started and stared .
It was the Emperor who broke the silence .
At that swift advance all doubt had vanished .
`` By heavens , Sire , it is indeed the Prussians ! ''
Lobau and Bertrand ran about the road like two frightened hens .
The sergeant of Chasseurs drew his sabre with a volley of curses .
The coachman and the valet cried and wrung their hands .
Napoleon stood with a frozen face , one foot on the step of the carriage .
And I -- ah , my friends , I was magnificent !
What words can I use to do justice to my own bearing at that supreme instant of my life ?
So coldly alert , so deadly cool , so clear in brain and ready in hand .
He had called me a numskull and a buffoon .
How quick and how noble was my revenge !
When his own wits failed him , it was Etienne Gerard who supplied the want .
To fight was absurd ; to fly was ridiculous .
The Emperor was stout , and weary to death .
At the best he was never a good rider .
How could he fly from these , the picked men of an army ?
The best horseman in Prussia was among them .
But I was the best horseman in France .
I , and only I , could hold my own with them .
If they were on my track instead of the Emperor 's , all might still be well .
These were the thoughts which flashed so swiftly through my mind that in an instant I had sprung from the first idea to the final conclusion .
Another instant carried me from the final conclusion to prompt and vigorous action .
I rushed to the side of the Emperor , who stood petrified , with the carriage between him and our enemies .
`` Your coat , Sire !
I dragged them of him .
They were as untiring and as remorseless as bloodhounds .
The Last Adventure of the Brigadier
It seemed that he might have been in the moon for all that we could do to help him .
But that was only because we were all soldiers and knew nothing of the sea .
I acknowledged the compliment .
`` What is it that you wish me to do ? ''
`` There are a hundred pounds in gold in this bag , '' said he .
`` You will be able to buy some comforts for your voyage .
I should recommend you to get them in Southampton , whence we will start in ten days .
The name of the vessel is the Black Swan .
I return to Southampton to-morrow , and I shall hope to see you in the course of the next week . ''
`` Come now , '' said I .
`` Tell me frankly what is the destination of our voyage ? ''
I was horrified by his words , but , after all , there are no ladies on the high seas , and what did it matter ?
He rang for the steward .
At last the wind which had followed us so long died away , and for several days we drifted about on a calm and oily sea , under a sun which brought the pitch bubbling out between the planks upon the deck .
We turned and turned our sails to catch every wandering puff , until at last we came out of this belt of calm and ran south again with a brisk breeze , the sea all round us being alive with flying fishes .
For some days Burns appeared to be uneasy , and I observed him continually shading his eyes with his hand and staring at the horizon as if he were looking for land .
Twice I caught him with his red head against the chart in the cabin , gazing at that pin , which was always approaching and yet never reaching the African coast .
At last one evening , as Captain Fourneau and I were playing ecarte in the cabin , the mate entered with an angry look upon his sunburned face .
`` But do you know what course the man at the wheel is steering ? ''
`` It is not worth while to put down the hatch , '' said Captain Fourneau .
`` Gustav , go to Mr. Turner and tell him that I would like to have a word with him . ''
`` What is it ? ''
Every light had been extinguished aboard our ship , and presently , at the direction of Captain Fourneau , we all pulled upon one of the ropes , which had the effect of swinging round one of the sticks above us , and so stopping the vessel .
Then he asked me to step down to the cabin .
Only when he spoke of it did I observe that the wind was blowing half a gale from the sea and that the waves were roaring in upon the beach .
Twice we tried to push out our little boat , and twice it was thrown back by the sea .
The third time a great wave filled it and stove the bottom .
Helplessly we waited beside it until the dawn broke , to show a raging sea and a flying scud above it .
There was no sign of the Black Swan .
Climbing the hill we looked down , but on all the great torn expanse of the ocean there was no gleam of a sail .
Whether she had sunk , or whether she was recaptured by her English crew , or what strange fate may have been in store for her , I do not know .
Never again in this life did I see Captain Fourneau to tell him the result of my mission .
For my own part I gave myself up to the English , my boatman and I pretending that we were the only survivors of a lost vessel -- though , indeed , there was no pretence in the matter .
At the hands of their officers I received that generous hospitality which I have always encountered , but it was many a long month before I could get a passage back to the dear land outside of which there can be no happiness for so true a Frenchman as myself .
Before passing to the new revelation , its certain proofs and its definite teaching , let us hark back for a moment upon the two points which have already been treated .
They are not absolutely vital points .
The fresh developments can go on and conquer the world without them .
There can be no sudden change in the ancient routine of our religious habits , nor is it possible to conceive that a congress of theologians could take so heroic a step as to tear the Bible in twain , laying one half upon the shelf and one upon the table .
Neither is it to be expected that any formal pronouncements could ever be made that the churches have all laid the wrong emphasis upon the story of Christ .
Moral courage will not rise to such a height .
But with the spiritual quickening and the greater earnestness which will have their roots in this bloody passion of mankind , many will perceive what is reasonable and true , so that even if the Old Testament should remain , like some obsolete appendix in the animal frame , to mark a lower stage through which development has passed , it will more and more be recognised as a document which has lost all validity and which should no longer be allowed to influence human conduct , save by way of pointing out much which we may avoid .
So also with the teaching of Christ , the mystical portions may fade gently away , as the grosser views of eternal punishment have faded within our own lifetime , so that while mankind is hardly aware of the change the heresy of today will become the commonplace of tomorrow .
These things will adjust themselves in God's own time .
What is , however , both new and vital are those fresh developments which will now be discussed .
In them may be found the signs of how the dry bones may be stirred , and how the mummy may be quickened with the breath of life .
With the actual certainty of a definite life after death , and a sure sense of responsibility for our own spiritual development , a responsibility which can not be put upon any other shoulders , however exalted , but must be borne by each individual for himself , there will come the greatest reinforcement of morality which the human race has ever known .
We are on the verge of it now , but our descendants will look upon the past century as the culmination of the dark ages when man lost his trust in God , and was so engrossed in his temporary earth life that he lost all sense of spiritual reality .
There is no space here for the history of the rise and development of the movement .
It provoked warm adhesion and fierce opposition from the start .
Professor Hare and Horace Greeley were among the educated minority who tested and endorsed its truth .
It was disfigured by many grievous incidents , which may explain but does not excuse the perverse opposition which it encountered in so many quarters .
This opposition was really largely based upon the absolute materialism of the age , which would not admit that there could exist at the present moment such conditions as might be accepted in the far past .
When actually brought in contact with that life beyond the grave which they professed to believe in , these people winced , recoiled , and declared it impossible .
The science of the day was also rooted in materialism , and discarded all its own very excellent axioms when it was faced by an entirely new and unexpected proposition .
Faraday declared that in approaching a new subject one should make up one 's mind a priori as to what is possible and what is not !
Huxley said that the messages , EVEN IF TRUE , `` interested him no more than the gossip of curates in a cathedral city . ''
Darwin said : `` God help us if we are to believe such things . ''
Herbert Spencer declared against it , but had no time to go into it .
At the same time all science did not come so badly out of the ordeal .
As already mentioned , Professor Hare , of Philadelphia , inventor , among other things , of the oxy-hydrogen blow-pipe , was the first man of note who had the moral courage , after considerable personal investigation , to declare that these new and strange developments were true .
He was followed by many medical men , both in America and in Britain , including Dr. Elliotson , one of the leaders of free thought in this country .
Professor Crookes , the most rising chemist in Europe , Dr. Russel Wallace the great naturalist , Varley the electrician , Flammarion the French astronomer , and many others , risked their scientific reputations in their brave assertions of the truth .
These men were not credulous fools .
They saw and deplored the existence of frauds .
Crookes' letters upon the subject are still extant .
In very many cases it was the Spiritualists themselves who exposed the frauds .
They laughed , as the public laughed , at the sham Shakespeares and vulgar Caesars who figured in certain seance rooms .
They deprecated also the low moral tone which would turn such powers to prophecies about the issue of a race or the success of a speculation .
But they had that broader vision and sense of proportion which assured them that behind all these follies and frauds there lay a mass of solid evidence which could not be shaken , though like all evidence , it had to be examined before it could be appreciated .
They were not such simpletons as to be driven away from a great truth because there are some dishonest camp followers who hang upon its skirts .
As to spirit photography , the most successful results are obtained by the Crewe circle in England , under the mediumship of Mr. Hope and Mrs .
[ 2 ] I have seen scores of these photographs , which in several cases reproduce exact images of the dead which do not correspond with any pictures of them taken during life .
I have seen father , mother , and dead soldier son , all taken together with the dead son looking far the happier and not the least substantial of the three .
It is in these varied forms of proof that the impregnable strength of the evidence lies , for how absurd do explanations of telepathy , unconscious cerebration or cosmic memory become when faced by such phenomena as spirit photography , materialisation , or the direct voice .
Only one hypothesis can cover every branch of these manifestations , and that is the system of extraneous life and action which has always , for seventy years , held the field for any reasonable mind which had impartially considered the facts .
Before opening up this subject there is one consideration which should have due weight , and yet seems continually to be overlooked .
The differences between various sects are a very small thing as compared to the great eternal duel between materialism and the spiritual view of the Universe .
That is the real fight .
It is a fight in which the Churches championed the anti-material view , but they have done it so unintelligently , and have been continually placed in such false positions , that they have always been losing .
Since the days of Hume and Voltaire and Gibbon the fight has slowly but steadily rolled in favour of the attack .
Then came Darwin , showing with apparent truth , that man has never fallen but always risen .
This cut deep into the philosophy of orthodoxy , and it is folly to deny it .
Then again came the so-called `` Higher Criticism , '' showing alleged flaws and cracks in the very foundations .
All this time the churches were yielding ground , and every retreat gave a fresh jumping-off place for a new assault .
It has gone so far that at the present moment a very large section of the people of this country , rich and poor , are out of all sympathy not only with the churches but with the whole Spiritual view .
Now , we intervene with our positive knowledge and actual proof -- an ally so powerful that we are capable of turning the whole tide of battle and rolling it back for ever against materialism .
We can say : `` We will meet you on your own ground and show you by material and scientific tests that the soul and personality survive . ''
That is the aim of Psychic Science , and it has been fully attained .
It means an end to materialism for ever .
And yet this movement , this Spiritual movement , is hooted at and reviled by Rome , by Canterbury and even by Little Bethel , each of them for once acting in concert , and including in their battle line such strange allies as the Scientific Agnostics and the militant Free-thinkers .
Father Vaughan and the Bishop of London , the Rev .
F. B. Meyer and Mr. Clodd , `` The Church Times '' and `` The Freethinker , '' are united in battle , though they fight with very different battle cries , the one declaring that the thing is of the devil , while the other is equally clear that it does not exist at all .
The opposition of the materialists is absolutely intelligent since it is clear that any man who has spent his life in saying `` No '' to all extramundane forces is , indeed , in a pitiable position when , after many years , he has to recognise that his whole philosophy is built upon sand and that `` Yes '' was the answer from the beginning .
But as to the religious bodies , what words can express their stupidity and want of all proportion in not running halfway and more to meet the greatest ally who has ever intervened to change their defeat into victory ?
What gifts this all-powerful ally brings with him , and what are the terms of his alliance , will now be considered .
Now , what can the fair-minded inquirer say to such a story as that -- one of many , but for the moment we are concentrating upon it ?
Was Mr. Crookes a blasphemous liar ?
But there were very many witnesses , as many sometimes as eight at a single sitting .
And there are the photographs which include Miss Cook and show that the two women were quite different .
Was he honestly mistaken ?
But that is inconceivable .
Read the original narrative and see if you can find any solution save that it is true .
If a man can read that sober , cautious statement and not be convinced , then assuredly his brain , is out of gear .
Finally , ask yourself whether any religious manifestation in the world has had anything like the absolute proof which lies in this one .
Can not the orthodox see that instead of combating such a story , or talking nonsense about devils , they should hail that which is indeed the final answer to that materialism which is their really dangerous enemy .
Even as I write , my eye falls upon a letter on my desk from an officer who had lost all faith in immortality and become an absolute materialist .
`` I came to dread my return home , for I can not stand hypocrisy , and I knew well my attitude would cause some members of my family deep grief .
Your book has now brought me untold comfort , and I can face the future cheerfully . ''
Are these fruits from the Devil 's tree , you timid orthodox critic ?
The truth of what is told us as to the life beyond can in its very nature never be absolutely established .
It is far nearer to complete proof , however , than any religious revelation which has ever preceded it .
We have the fact that these accounts are mixed up with others concerning our present life which are often absolutely true .
If a spirit can tell the truth about our sphere , it is difficult to suppose that he is entirely false about his own .
Then , again , there is a very great similarity about such accounts , though their origin may be from people very far apart .
Thus though `` non-veridical , '' to use the modern jargon , they do conform to all our canons of evidence .
A series of books which have attracted far less attention than they deserve have drawn the coming life in very close detail .
These books are not found on railway bookstalls or in popular libraries , but the successive editions through which they pass show that there is a deeper public which gets what it wants in spite of artificial obstacles .
These are a few of the properties of mediumship .
There are also the beautiful phenomena of the production of lights , and the rarer , but for evidential purposes even more valuable , manifestations of spirit photography .
The fact that the photograph does not correspond in many cases with any which existed in life , must surely silence the scoffer , though there is a class of bigoted sceptic who would still be sneering if an Archangel alighted in Trafalgar Square .
Mr. Hope and Mrs. Buxton , of Crewe , have brought this phase of mediumship to great perfection , though others have powers in that direction .
Indeed , in some cases it is difficult to say who the medium may have been , for in one collective family group which was taken in the ordinary way , and was sent me by a master in a well known public school , the young son who died has appeared in the plate seated between his two little brothers .
This matter is a detail , however , and it is always dangerous to discuss details in a subject which is so enormous , so dimly seen .
As the wisest woman I have known remarked to me : `` Things may well be surprising over there , for if we had been told the facts of this life before we entered it , we should never have believed it . ''
In its larger issues this happy life to come consists in the development of those gifts which we possess .
There is action for the man of action , intellectual work for the thinker , artistic , literary , dramatic and religious for those whose God-given powers lie that way .
What we have both in brain and character we carry over with us .
No man is too old to learn , for what he learns he keeps .
There is no physical side to love and no child-birth , though there is close union between those married people who really love each other , and , generally , there is deep sympathetic friendship and comradeship between the sexes .
Every man or woman finds a soul mate sooner or later .
The child grows up to the normal , so that the mother who lost a babe of two years old , and dies herself twenty years later finds a grown-up daughter of twenty-two awaiting her coming .
Age , which is produced chiefly by the mechanical presence of lime in our arteries , disappears , and the individual reverts to the full normal growth and appearance of completed man -- or womanhood .
Let no woman mourn her lost beauty , and no man his lost strength or weakening brain .
It all awaits them once more upon the other side .
Nor is any deformity or bodily weakness there , for all is normal and at its best .
But above all , brain , energy , character , driving power , if exerted for good , makes a man a leader there as here , while unselfishness , patience and spirituality there , as here , qualify the soul for the higher places , which have often been won by those very tribulations down here which seem so purposeless and so cruel , and are in truth our chances of spiritual quickening and promotion , without which life would have been barren and without profit .
Another speculation which is , perhaps , rather more fruitful is upon what principle did Christ select his twelve chief followers .
Out of all the multitudes he chose twelve men .
Why these particular ones ?
It was not for their intelligence or learning , for Peter and John , who were among the most prominent , are expressly described as `` unlearned and ignorant men . ''
It was not for their virtue , for one of them proved to be a great villain , and all of them deserted their Master in His need .
It was not for their belief , for there were great numbers of believers .
And yet it is clear that they were chosen on some principle of selection since they were called in ones and in twos .
In at least two cases they were pairs of brothers , as though some family gift or peculiarity , might underlie the choice .
There are many other small points which seem to bring the story of Christ and of the Apostles into very close touch with modern psychic research , and greatly support the close accuracy of some of the New Testament narrative .
One which appeals to me greatly is the action of Christ when He was asked a question which called for a sudden decision , namely the fate of the woman who had been taken in sin .
What did He do ?
The very last thing that one would have expected or invented .
He stooped down before answering and wrote with his finger in the sand .
This he did a second time upon a second catch-question being addressed to Him .
Can any theologian give a reason for such an action ?
I hazard the opinion that among the many forms of mediumship which were possessed in the highest form by Christ , was the power of automatic writing , by which He summoned those great forces which were under His control to supply Him with the answer .
Granting , as I freely do , that Christ was preternatural , in the sense that He was above and beyond ordinary humanity in His attributes , one may still inquire how far these powers were contained always within His human body , or how far He referred back to spiritual reserves beyond it .
When He spoke merely from His human body He was certainly open to error , like the rest of us , for it is recorded how He questioned the woman of Samaria about her husband , to which she replied that she had no husband .
In the case of the woman taken in sin , one can only explain His action by the supposition that He opened a channel instantly for the knowledge and wisdom which was preter-human , and which at once gave a decision in favor of large-minded charity .
It is interesting to observe the effect which these phenomena , or the report of them , produced upon the orthodox Jews of those days .
The greater part obviously discredited them , otherwise they could not have failed to become followers , or at the least to have regarded such a wonder-worker with respect and admiration .
One can well imagine how they shook their bearded heads , declared that such occurrences were outside their own experience , and possibly pointed to the local conjuror who earned a few not over-clean denarii by imitating the phenomena .
There were others , however , who could not possibly deny , because they either saw or met with witnesses who had seen .
These declared roundly that the whole thing was of the devil , drawing from Christ one of those pithy , common-sense arguments in which He excelled .
The same two classes of opponents , the scoffers and the diabolists , face us to-day .
Verily the old world goes round and so do the events upon its surface .
Enough has been said , perhaps , to show the reader that it is possible to put forward a view of Christ 's life which would be in strict accord with the most modern psychic knowledge , and which , far from supplanting Christianity , would show the surprising accuracy of some of the details handed down to us , and would support the novel conclusion that those very miracles , which have been the stumbling block to so many truthful , earnest minds , may finally offer some very cogent arguments for the truth of the whole narrative .
Is this then a line of thought which merits the wholesale condemnations and anathemas hurled at it by those who profess to speak in the name of religion ?
At the same time , though we bring support to the New Testament , it would , indeed , be a misconception if these , or any such remarks , were quoted as sustaining its literal accuracy -- an idea from which so much harm has come in the past .
It would , indeed , be a good , though an unattainable thing , that a really honest and open-minded attempt should be made to weed out from that record the obvious forgeries and interpolations which disfigure it , and lessen the value of those parts which are really above suspicion .
Is it necessary , for example , to be told , as an inspired fact from Christ 's own lips , that Zacharias , the son of Barachias , [ 7 ] was struck dead within the precincts of the Temple in the time of Christ , when , by a curious chance , Josephus has independently narrated the incident as having occurred during the siege of Jerusalem , thirty-seven years later ?
This makes it very clear that this particular Gospel , in its present form , was written after that event , and that the writer fitted into it at least one other incident which had struck his imagination .
Unfortunately , a revision by general agreement would be the greatest of all miracles , for two of the very first texts to go would be those which refer to the `` Church , '' an institution and an idea utterly unfamiliar in the days of Christ .
Since the object of the insertion of these texts is perfectly clear , there can be no doubt that they are forgeries , but as the whole system of the Papacy rests upon one of them , they are likely to survive for a long time to come .
The text alluded to is made further impossible because it is based upon the supposition that Christ and His fishermen conversed together in Latin or Greek , even to the extent of making puns in that language .
Surely the want of moral courage and intellectual honesty among Christians will seem as strange to our descendants as it appears marvellous to us that the great thinkers of old could have believed , or at least have pretended to believe , in the fighting sexual deities of Mount Olympus .
For an instant Joyce thought that it might be one of his own men , but a second glance assured him that this could not be so .
The stranger was dressed in the flowing robes of an Arab , and not in the close-fitting khaki of a soldier .
He was very tall , and a high turban made him seem gigantic .
He strode swiftly along , with head erect , and the bearing of a man who knows no fear .
`` Ask him who he is , and what he wants ? ''
`` Look here , Mahomet Ali , we 've got to get some sense out of this fellow .
You say there are no papers on him ? ''
`` No clue of any kind ? ''
`` No , no .
It 's all very well here , but it would sound just awful if ever it got as far as Fleet Street .
But , I say , '' he whispered , `` we might frighten him a bit .
There 's no harm in that . ''
`` Well , sir , I threatened to use physical force . ''
`` A tall man , sir .
Rather a desperate character , I should think . ''
Hilary Joyce 's heart was too heavy for words .
`` Good Lord ! ''
`` Well , well , Captain Joyce , we are quits ! ''
said the General , holding out his hand .
`` You gave me a bad ten minutes with that infernal red-hot horseshoe of yours .
I 've done as much for you .
I do n't think we can spare you for the Royal Mallows just yet awhile . ''
`` The fewer questions the better , perhaps .
But of course it must seem rather amazing .
I had a little private business with the Kabbabish .
It must be done in person .
I did it , and came to your post in my return .
I kept on winking at you as a sign that I wanted a word with you alone . ''
`` I could n't give it away before all those blacks , or where should I have been the next time I used my false beard and Arab dress ?
You put me in a very awkward position .
But at last I had a word alone with your Egyptian officer , who managed my escape all right . ''
As it chanced , I had in one of my rambles come upon an isolated dwelling in the very heart of these lonely moors , which I at once determined should be my own .
It was a two-roomed cottage , which had once belonged to some shepherd , but had long been deserted , and was crumbling rapidly to ruin .
In the winter floods , the Gaster Beck , which runs down Gaster Fell , where the little dwelling stood , had overswept its banks and torn away a part of the wall .
The roof was in ill case , and the scattered slates lay thick amongst the grass .
Yet the main shell of the house stood firm and true ; and it was no great task for me to have all that was amiss set right .
If this dwelling-room of mine were plain even to squalor , its poverty was more than atoned for by the luxury of the chamber which was destined to serve me as my study .
I had ever held that it was best for my mind to be surrounded by such objects as would be in harmony with the studies which occupied it , and that the loftiest and most ethereal conditions of thought are only possible amid surroundings which please the eye and gratify the senses .
The room which I had set apart for my mystic studies was set forth in a style as gloomy and majestic as the thoughts and aspirations with which it was to harmonise .
Both walls and ceilings were covered with a paper of the richest and glossiest black , on which was traced a lurid and arabesque pattern of dead gold .
A black velvet curtain covered the single diamond-paned window ; while a thick , yielding carpet of the same material prevented the sound of my own footfalls , as I paced backward and forward , from breaking the current of my thought .
Along the cornices ran gold rods , from which depended six pictures , all of the sombre and imaginative caste , which chimed best with my fancy .
On the morning after this incident I was up be-times , as is my wont ; but I was surprised , on glancing from my window , to see that our new inmate was earlier still .
She was walking down the narrow pathway , which zigzags over the fell -- a tall woman , slender , her head sunk upon her breast , her arms filled with a bristle of wild flowers , which she had gathered in her morning rambles .
The white and pink of her dress , and the touch of deep red ribbon in her broad drooping hat , formed a pleasant dash of colour against the dun-tinted landscape .
She was some distance off when I first set eyes upon her , yet I knew that this wandering woman could be none other than our arrival of last night , for there was a grace and refinement in her bearing which marked her from the dwellers of the fells .
Even as I watched she passed swiftly and lightly down the pathway , and turning through the wicket gate , at the further end of our cottage garden , she seated herself upon the green bank which faced my window , and strewing her flowers in front of her , set herself to arrange them .
`` Why , there she is , '' said I , standing up and glancing through the casement .
`` She has gone back for the flowers she left upon the bank . ''
`` Quiet , indeed ! ''
said she , glancing round at the vast circle of silent moors , with the one tiny line of grey cottages which sloped down beneath us .
`` Ah , but that is _triste_ , '' she cried .
`` And where is it , then , this house which you have built ? ''
`` Indeed , I have never been here before , '' she answered .
`` But I have heard my brother talk of these Yorkshire moors ; and , if I mistake not , I have heard him name this very one as the wildest and most savage of them all . ''
`` It is not for me .
I have other things to do .
That path of which I spoke is one which I must tread alone . ''
Clearly , it was time that I should go .
I set my teeth and vowed that another day should not have passed before I should have snapped this newly formed tie and sought the lonely retreat which awaited me upon the moors .
Breakfast was hardly over in the morning before a peasant dragged up to the door the rude hand-cart which was to convey my few personal belongings to my new dwelling .
My fellow-lodger had kept her room ; and , steeled as my mind was against her influence , I was yet conscious of a little throb of disappointment that she should allow me to depart without a word of farewell .
My hand-cart with its load of books had already started , and I , having shaken hands with Mrs. Adams , was about to follow it , when there was a quick scurry of feet on the stair , and there she was beside me all panting with her own haste .
It was a strange thing for me to find myself at last duly installed in my lonely dwelling .
For me , now , the horizon was bounded by the barren circle of wiry , unprofitable grass , patched over with furze bushes and scarred by the profusion of Nature 's gaunt and granite ribs .
A duller , wearier waste I have never seen ; but its dulness was its very charm .
Taking the narrow sheep path which ran by this stream , I strolled along it for some hundred yards , and had turned to retrace my steps , when the moon was finally buried beneath an ink-black cloud , and the darkness deepened so suddenly that I could see neither the path at my feet , the stream upon my right , nor the rocks upon my left .
I was standing groping about in the thick gloom , when there came a crash of thunder with a flash of lightning which lighted up the whole vast fell , so that every bush and rock stood out clear and hard in the vivid light .
It was but for an instant , and yet that momentary view struck a thrill of fear and astonishment through me , for in my very path , not twenty yards before me , there stood a woman , the livid light beating upon her face and showing up every detail of her dress and features .
All day I bent over the Egyptian papyrus upon which I was engaged ; but neither the subtle reasonings of the ancient philosopher of Memphis , nor the mystic meaning which lay in his pages , could raise my mind from the things of earth .
Evening was drawing in before I threw my work aside in despair .
My heart was bitter against this man for his intrusion .
Standing by the beck which purled past the door of my cabin , I cooled my heated brow , and thought the matter over .
Clearly it was the small mystery hanging over these neighbours of mine which had caused my mind to run so persistently on them .
That cleared up , they would no longer cause an obstacle to my studies .
What was to hinder me , then , from walking in the direction of their dwelling , and observing for myself , without permitting them to suspect my presence , what manner of men they might be ?
Doubtless , their mode of life would be found to admit of some simple and prosaic explanation .
In any case , the evening was fine , and a walk would be bracing for mind and body .
Lighting my pipe , I set off over the moors in the direction which they had taken .
When his footsteps had died away in the distance , I drew nearer to the cottage .
The prisoner within was still pouring forth a stream of words , and moaning from time to time like a man in pain .
These words resolved themselves , as I approached , into prayers -- shrill , voluble prayers , pattered forth with the intense earnestness of one who sees impending and imminent danger .
There was to me something inexpressibly awesome in this gush of solemn entreaty from the lonely sufferer , meant for no human ear , and jarring upon the silence of the night .
I was still pondering whether I should mix myself in the affair or not , when I heard in the distance the sound of the surgeon 's returning footfall .
At that I drew myself up quickly by the iron bars and glanced in through the diamond-paned window .
The interior of the cottage was lighted up by a lurid glow , coming from what I afterward discovered to be a chemical furnace .
By its rich light I could distinguish a great litter of retorts , test tubes and condensers , which sparkled over the table , and threw strange , grotesque shadows on the wall .
On the further side of the room was a wooden framework resembling a hencoop , and in this , still absorbed in prayer , knelt the man whose voice I heard .
The red glow beating upon his upturned face made it stand out from the shadow like a painting from Rembrandt , showing up every wrinkle upon the parchment-like skin .
I had but time for a fleeting glance ; then , dropping from the window , I made off through the rocks and the heather , nor slackened my pace until I found myself back in my cabin once more .
There I threw myself upon my couch , more disturbed and shaken than I had ever thought to feel again .
As he approached I noticed that his left arm was suspended in a sling .
On perceiving me he stood irresolute , as though uncertain whether to come over to me or not .
I had no desire for an interview with him , however , so I hurried past him , on which he continued on his way , still shouting and striking about with his club .
When he had disappeared over the fells , I made my way down to his cottage , determined to find some clue to what occurred .
I was surprised , on reaching it , to find the iron-plated door flung wide open .
The ground immediately outside it was marked with the signs of a struggle .
The chemical apparatus within and the furniture were all dashed about and shattered .
Most suggestive of all , the sinister wooden cage was stained with blood-marks , and its unfortunate occupant had disappeared .
My heart was heavy for the little man , for I was assured I should never see him in this world more .
`` You will say next that my house is free to all , '' I said , hotly .
`` You have had the impertinence to ransack it in my absence this afternoon . ''
`` _September 4th_ , 1885 .
`` It can not be done .
People really would not stand it .
I know because I have tried . ''
-- _Extract from an unpublished paper upon George Borrow and his writings._
The village of Swinehurst is a straggling line of half-timbered houses of the early English pattern .
One of these houses stood , as I observed , somewhat taller than the rest , and seeing by its appearance and by the sign which hung before it that it was the village inn , I approached it , for indeed I had not broken my fast since I had left London .
A stoutish man , five foot eight perhaps in height , with black coat and trousers of a greyish shade , stood outside , and to him I talked in the fashion of the master .
`` Surely , '' said he .
`` What else should we understand from a crown ? ''
`` And which king ? ''
`` For twenty-five years have I been in business , '' said the landlord , `` and never before have I been asked for tea and beer . ''
`` Then you are joking , '' said the landlord .
`` And why ? ''
`` Where , '' I asked , `` are the Romany chals and the Romany chis ? ''
The girl laughed , but said nothing .
It appeared to me from her appearance that she might be one of those who make a living at telling fortunes or `` dukkering , '' as the master calls it , at racecourses and other gatherings of the sort .
`` I meant no harm , Belle .
I was but comparing you to one of whom the saga says her eyes were like the shine of sun upon icebergs . ''
This seemed to please her , for she smiled .
`` My name ai n't Belle , '' she said at last .
`` Go on , '' said the girl .
This was a man with a broad , florid face and brown side-whiskers .
He was of a stout build and had rounded shoulders , with a small mole of a reddish colour over his left eyebrow .
His jacket was of velveteen , and he had large , iron-shod boots , which were perched upon the splashboard in front of him .
He pulled up the van as he came up to the stile near which I was standing with the maiden who had come from the dingle , and in a civil fashion he asked me if I could oblige him with a light for his pipe .
Then , as I drew a matchbox from my pocket , he threw his reins over the splashboard , and removing his large , iron-shod boots he descended on to the road .
He was a burly man , but inclined to fat and scant of breath .
It seemed to me that it was a chance for one of those wayside boxing adventures which were so common in the olden times .
It was my intention that I should fight the man , and that the maiden from the dingle standing by me should tell me when to use my right or my left , as the case might be , picking me up also in case I should be so unfortunate as to be knocked down by the man with the iron-shod boots and the small mole of a reddish colour over his left eyebrow .
`` Nor I against you , '' I answered .
`` So that we will fight for love , which was an expression much used in olden days .
It is narrated by Harold Sygvynson that among the Danes it was usual to do so even with battle-axes , as is told in his second set of runes .
Therefore you will take off your coat and fight . ''
As I spoke , I stripped off my own .
`` Fight , '' said I .
`` I had n't time , '' said she .
`` Why were you such a chump as to turn your back on him like that ? ''
_Myself._ What are you then ?
`` He is a gentleman too , '' said the constable , `` and I doubt not that he lives in a big house in London town . ''
As I went to bed the shingle and seaweed were pattering up against my attic window , and the wind was screaming as though every gust were a lost soul .
By that time the sounds of the tempest had become a lullaby to me .
I knew that the grey walls of the old house would buffet it out , and for what occurred in the world outside I had small concern .
Old Madge was usually as callous to such things as I was myself .
It was a surprise to me when , about three in the morning , I was awoke by the sound of a great knocking at my door and excited cries in the wheezy voice of my housekeeper .
I sprang out of my hammock , and roughly demanded of her what was the matter .
After breakfast was over , however , I got a clue to her nationality .
Passing along the beach once more , I saw that in a cleft of the ridge a piece of wood had been jammed .
I rowed out to it in my boat , and brought it ashore .
It was part of the sternpost of a boat , and on it , or rather on the piece of wood attached to it , was the word `` Archangel , '' painted in strange , quaint lettering .
`` So , '' I thought , as I paddled slowly back , `` this pale damsel is a Russian .
A fit subject for the White Czar and a proper dweller on the shores of the White Sea ! ''
It seemed to me strange that one of her apparent refinement should perform so long a journey in so frail a craft .
When I came back into the house , I pronounced the word `` Archangel '' several times in different intonations , but she did not appear to recognise it .
`` Yes , '' he answered , in good English .
`` It was no doing of mine .
The waves threw me up .
I wish to God I had been allowed to drown ! ''
There was a slight foreign lisp in his accent which was rather pleasing .
`` Two good fishermen , who live round yonder point , pulled me out and cared for me ; yet I could not honestly thank them for it . ''
`` Why do you wish to be drowned ? ''
I said , pulling him back from her .
`` This is a pretty to-do !
What do you mean ?
Do you think this is a wayside inn or place of public accommodation ? ''
It was not long , however , before I saw him again .
I had been out for a row one morning , for my head was aching , partly from prolonged stooping , and partly from the effects of a noxious drug which I had inhaled the night before .
I pulled along the coast some miles , and then , feeling thirsty , I landed at a place where I knew that a fresh water stream trickled down into the sea .
This rivulet passed through my land , but the mouth of it , where I found myself that day , was beyond my boundary line .
I felt somewhat taken aback when rising from the stream at which I had slaked my thirst I found myself face to face with the Russian .
I was as much a trespasser now as he was , and I could see at a glance that he knew it .
`` I am tired of your story , '' I said , turning away .
`` For my part , I think you are a great fool .
If you imagine that this love of yours will pass away you had best amuse yourself as best you can until it does .
If , on the other hand , it is a fixed thing , you can not do better than cut your throat , for that is the shortest way out of it .
I have no more time to waste on the matter . ''
With this I hurried away and walked down to the boat .
I never looked round , but I heard the dull sound of his feet upon the sands as he followed me .
And now I am coming near the end of this narrative of mine , which I have written a great deal more for my own amusement than for that of any one else .
The termination of the strange episode in which these two Russians had played a part was as wild and as sudden as the commencement .
The events of one single night freed me from all my troubles , and left me once more alone with my books and my studies , as I had been before their intrusion .
Let me endeavour to describe how this came about .
Underneath the hills where I walked that evening it was dull and chill , but their summits were rosy-red , and the sea was brightened by the sinking sun .
There were no clouds of importance in the sky , yet the dull groaning of the sea grew louder and stronger .
I saw , far to the eastward , a brig beating up for Wick , with a reef in her topsails .
It was evident that her captain had read the signs of nature as I had done .
Behind her a long , lurid haze lay low upon the water , concealing the horizon .
`` I had better push on , '' I thought to myself , `` or the wind may rise before I can get back . ''
I was too late .
By the time I reached the water 's edge he was a hundred yards away , making the boat spring with every stroke of his powerful arms .
I uttered a wild cry of impotent anger , and stamped up and down the sands like a maniac .
He turned and saw me .
Rising from his seat he made me a graceful bow , and waved his hand to me .
It was not a triumphant or a derisive gesture .
Even my furious and distempered mind recognised it as being a solemn and courteous leave-taking .
Then he settled down to his oars once more , and the little skiff shot away out over the bay .
The sun had gone down now , leaving a single dull , red streak upon the water , which stretched away until it blended with the purple haze on the horizon .
Gradually the skiff grew smaller and smaller as it sped across this lurid band , until the shades of night gathered round it and it became a mere blur upon the lonely sea .
Then this vague loom died away also and darkness settled over it -- a darkness which should never be raised .
That night a great wind rose up from the sea , and the wild waves shrieked upon the shore as though they would tear it back with them into the ocean .
The turmoil and the uproar were congenial to my vexed spirit .
All night I wandered up and down , wet with spray and rain , watching the gleam of the white breakers and listening to the outcry of the storm .
My heart was bitter against the Russian .
I joined my feeble pipe to the screaming of the gale .
`` If he would but come back again ! ''
I cried , with clenched hands ; `` if he would but come back ! ''
When the grey light of morning spread over the eastern sky , and lit up the great waste of yellow , tossing waters , with the brown clouds drifting swiftly over them , then I saw him once again .
A few hundred yards off along the sand there lay a long dark object , cast up by the fury of the waves .
It was my boat , much shattered and splintered .
A little farther on , a vague , shapeless something was washing to and fro in the shallow water , all mixed with shingle and with seaweed .
I saw at a glance that it was the Russian , face downwards and dead .
I rushed into the water and dragged him up on to the beach .
It was only when I turned him over that I discovered that she was beneath him , his dead arms encircling her , his mangled body still intervening between her and the fury of the storm .
It seemed that the fierce German Sea might beat the life from him , but with all its strength it was unable to tear this one-idea 'd man from the woman whom he loved .
There were signs which led me to believe that during that awful night the woman 's fickle mind had come at last to learn the worth of the true heart and strong arm which struggled for her and guarded her so tenderly .
Why else should her little head be nestling so lovingly on his broad breast , while her yellow hair entwined itself with his flowing beard ?
Why too should there be that bright smile of ineffable happiness and triumph , which death itself had not had power to banish from his dusky face ?
I fancy that death had been brighter to him than life had ever been .
`` That was why I took you into partnership , '' the other retorted , drumming nervously with his fingers upon the table .
`` I invent , you build .
It is a fair division of labour . ''
`` No , no , Brown ; you take too material a view , '' cried the inventor , raising his gleaming eyes from the machine to his companion .
`` Our fortunes are a mere detail .
Money is a thing which every heavy-witted plutocrat in the country shares with us .
My hopes rise to something higher than that .
Our true reward will come in the gratitude and goodwill of the human race . ''
`` I shall be at the station . ''
`` No , now , '' said the stolid mechanician .
`` I am half starved . ''
He pulled up to the table and made a hearty meal , while his Celtic companion strode impatiently up and down , with twitching fingers and restless eyes .
`` But there is no use our going out of our way to incur danger . ''
`` It is a good idea .
I see no objection . ''
`` We must make it travel in a small circle , '' said Pericord , glancing round at the bare high walls .
His comrade 's face darkened and set .
`` It _is_ registered , '' he said , with a forced laugh .
`` No , but -- -- ''
Pericord sat silently on the edge of the case , staring blankly down , and shivering like one with the ague , while the great Brown-Pericord Motor boomed and hurtled above him .
How long he sat there can never be known .
It might have been minutes or it might have been hours .
A thousand mad schemes flashed through his dazed brain .
It was true that he had been only the indirect cause .
But who would believe that ?
He glanced down at his blood-spattered clothing .
Everything was against him .
It would be better to fly than to give himself up , relying upon his innocence .
No one in London knew where they were .
If he could dispose of the body he might have a few days clear before any suspicion would be aroused .
`` I ca n't put it to the ground , '' said he .
`` Where do you live ? ''
I opened the door , and at the same moment he managed to strike a light .
There was a lamp upon the table , and we lit it between us .
`` Now , I 'm all right .
You can leave me now !
said he , and with the words he sat down in the arm-chair and fainted dead away .
What I saw outside amazed me .
The hall was empty .
The stairs were bare , and yellow with dust .
There were three doors opening into spacious rooms , and each was uncarpeted and undraped , save for the grey webs which drooped from the cornice , and rosettes of lichen which had formed upon the walls .
My feet reverberated in those empty and silent chambers .
Then I wandered on down the passage , with the idea that the kitchens , at least , might be tenanted .
Some caretaker might lurk in some secluded room .
No , they were all equally desolate .
Despairing of finding any help , I ran down another corridor , and came on something which surprised me more than ever .
`` Did you enter _all_ the rooms ? ''
he asked , with the same intent gaze .
`` Yes , I did . ''
`` Well , it did strike me as unusual . ''
`` I 'll tell you how it is , if it wo n't bore you , '' said he .
`` I think , after your kind attention to me , I can not do less than relieve any curiosity that you may feel .
You must know that my father was Stanislaus Stanniford , the banker . ''
`` We could not prove his death , but we know that it must be so , because the speculations came right again , and so there was no reason why he should not look any man in the face .
He would have returned if he were alive .
But he must have died in the last two years . ''
`` Because we heard from him two years ago . ''
`` Oh , yes , we had heard before , and that 's where our mystery of the sealed door , upon which you stumbled to-night , has its origin .
Pass me that desk , if you please .
Here I have my father 's letters , and you are the first man except Mr. Perceval who has seen them . ''
`` _June 4th , 1887._ ''
`` You could mortgage it . ''
`` Why should he not take your mother with him ? ''
`` Of course , '' I answered , `` I remember . ''
`` Have you opened it ? ''
`` Mr. Stanniford , '' said he , in a cracking voice , `` I hope you will prepare yourself in case any shock should be awaiting you when that seal is removed and the door is opened . ''
If I had not given heed to the clerk 's warning , and braced myself for a shock , I should certainly have dropped the lamp .
The room , windowless and bare , was fitted up as a photographic laboratory , with a tap and sink at the side of it .
A shelf of bottles and measures stood at one side , and a peculiar , heavy smell , partly chemical , partly animal , filled the air .
A single table and chair were in front of us , and at this , with his back turned towards us , a man was seated in the act of writing .
His outline and attitude were as natural as life ; but as the light fell upon him , it made my hair rise to see that the nape of his neck was black and wrinkled , and no thicker than my wrist .
Dust lay upon him -- thick , yellow dust -- upon his hair , his shoulders , his shrivelled , lemon-coloured hands .
His head had fallen forward upon his breast .
His pen still rested upon a discoloured sheet of paper .
`` Here he has sat for seven years .
Oh , why would he do it ?
I begged him , I implored him , I went on my knees to him , but he would have his way .
You see the key on the table .
He had locked the door upon the inside .
And he has written something .
We must take it . ''
`` Yes , I knew it , Mr. Stanniford .
I have acted for the best all along , but my position has been a terribly difficult one .
For seven years I have known that your father was dead in that room . ''
`` You know now the course that he took .
He wrote the letter which she received .
There was nothing in it which was not literally true .
When he spoke of seeing her again so soon , he was referring to her own approaching death , which he had been assured could not be delayed more than a very few months .
So convinced was he of this , that he only left two letters to be forwarded at intervals after his death .
She lived five years , and I had no letters to send .
`` On the contrary , my dear Ada , I believe in the differentiation of protoplasm . ''
`` He has not spoken to me , '' murmured the lady .
`` You differ from him ? ''
`` I must read _Nature 's Chronicle_ to counteract his pernicious influence , '' said Mrs. O'James , with a soft , cooing laugh .
She said nothing , but walked by his side with her eyes averted and her face aslant .
`` Is that very serious ? ''
They were standing under the shadow of the hawthorn .
He stooped gravely down , and kissed her glove-covered fingers .
There were tears in her eyes , and her lips twitched with some strong emotion .
`` How do you do , Professor ? ''
said the lady , with some little pomposity of manner .
`` You were very wise to stay out here on so lovely a day .
Is it not heavenly ? ''
`` I confess that I am not conscious of one , Mrs .
As Professor Ainslie Grey ascended the steps of his house , the hall-door opened and a dapper gentleman stepped briskly out .
He was somewhat sallow in the face , with dark , beady eyes , and a short , black beard with an aggressive bristle .
Thought and work had left their traces upon his face , but he moved with the brisk activity of a man who had not yet bade good-bye to his youth .
`` I 'm in luck 's way , '' he cried .
`` I wanted to see you . ''
`` I trust that you have been successful , O'Brien , '' said he .
`` I should be loath to exercise any undue pressure upon my sister Ada ; but I have given her to understand that there is no one whom I should prefer for a brother-in-law to my most brilliant scholar , the author of 'Some Remarks upon the Bile-Pigments , with special reference to Urobilin . '
`` My reason is true to agnosticism , and yet I am conscious of a void -- a vacuum .
I had feelings at the old church at home between the scent of the incense and the roll of the organ , such as I have never experienced in the laboratory or the lecture-room . ''
`` Sensuous -- purely sensuous , '' said the Professor , rubbing his chin .
`` Vague hereditary tendencies stirred into life by the stimulation of the nasal and auditory nerves . ''
`` Maybe so , maybe so , '' the younger man answered thoughtfully .
`` But this was not what I wished to speak to you about .
Before I enter your family , your sister and you have a claim to know all that I can tell you about my career .
Of my worldly prospects I have already spoken to you .
There is only one point which I have omitted to mention .
I am a widower . ''
`` Poor girl ! ''
`` God help me , I love her still .
But I must go . ''
`` My dear Professor , let me congratulate you with all my heart .
I had no idea .
Who is the lady ? ''
`` I must see Miss Grey before I leave England .
We have corresponded , and I think that all will be well .
She must come out with me .
I do n't think I could go without her . ''
`` No , I did not .
At the last moment my better nature prevailed .
But I was ashamed to come back after what I had written to you .
I could not face you .
I took passage alone to England under a new name , and here I have lived ever since .
It seemed to me that I was beginning life again .
I knew that you thought I was drowned .
Who could have dreamed that Fate would throw us together again !
When the Professor asked me -- -- ''
`` It is needless to prolong the situation , '' the Professor continued , in the same measured tones .
`` My brougham stands at the door .
I beg that you will use it as your own .
Perhaps it would be as well that you should leave the town without unnecessary delay .
Your things , Jeannette , shall be forwarded . ''
`` On the contrary .
I think that of the three of us you come best out of the affair .
You have nothing to be ashamed of . ''
`` I shall see that the matter is put to her in its true light .
Let me have a copy of your recent research .
Good-bye , Jeannette ! ''
Their hands met , and for one short moment their eyes also .
It was only a glance , but for the first and last time the woman 's intuition cast a light for itself into the dark places of a strong man 's soul .
She gave a little gasp , and her other hand rested for an instant , as white and as light as thistle-down , upon his shoulder .
`` I do n't think poor Grey was that sort of a man at all . ''
My first interview with Dr. James Winter was under dramatic circumstances .
It occurred at two in the morning in the bedroom of an old country house .
I kicked him twice on the white waistcoat and knocked off his gold spectacles , while he , with the aid of a female accomplice , stifled my angry cries in a flannel petticoat and thrust me into a warm bath .
I am told that one of my parents , who happened to be present , remarked in a whisper that there was nothing the matter with my lungs .
I can not recall how Dr. Winter looked at the time for I had other things to think of , but his description of my own appearance is far from flattering .
A fluffy head , a body like a trussed goose , very bandy legs , and feet with the soles turned inwards -- those are the main items which he can remember .
`` It 's always well to bring one in your waistcoat pocket , '' said he with a chuckle , `` but I suppose you youngsters are above all that . ''
`` Mrs. Hudson , '' said I to my housekeeper , `` would you kindly run along to old Dr. Winter and tell him that I should be obliged to him if he would step round . ''
`` I think -- I think they must be expecting me at home . ''
`` I do n't think I should look as white . ''
The woman lay back upon the waterproofed pillow and her murderous tumour lay revealed .
In itself it was a pretty thing , ivory white with a mesh of blue veins , and curving gently from jaw to chest .
But the lean , yellow face , and the stringy throat were in horrible contrast with the plumpness and sleekness of this monstrous growth .
The surgeon placed a hand on each side of it and pressed it slowly backwards and forwards .
The patient was moaning gently under the towel which had been placed over her face .
She tried to raise her arms and to draw up her knees but two dressers restrained her .
The heavy air was full of the penetrating smells of carbolic acid and of chloroform .
A muffled cry came from under the towel and then a snatch of a song , sung in a high , quavering , monotonous voice .
`` He has had a few friends to dinner , sir .
He does not like to be disturbed outside his usual hours , sir . ''
`` What , then ? ''
he asked , looking over his shoulder at the pale face with the startled eyes .
He was a pitiful , half-tragic , and half-grotesque figure as he stood with one trouser leg rolled to his knee , and that ever-present horror still lurking in his eyes .
A burst of merriment came from the card-players in the next room and the two looked at each other in silence .
`` Sit down ! ''
said the doctor abruptly .
`` Your assurance is quite sufficient . ''
He stooped and ran his finger down the line of the young man 's shin , raising it at one point .
he murmured , shaking his head ; `` any other symptoms ? ''
He had so forgotten the patient in his symptom that he had assumed an almost congratulatory air towards its possessor .
He reverted to human sympathy again as his patient asked for particulars .
`` It was from him , then ? ''
`` How could you ? ''
cried the doctor severely .
`` It was criminal . ''
`` Then you could buy some -- to-morrow morning , for example .
A thousand mining shares would do .
Then you might write to say that urgent business affairs have compelled you to start at an hour 's notice to inspect your property .
That would give you six months at any rate . ''
`` Why , dear me , you have n't even got your prescription yet .
This is the mixture , and I should recommend one of these powders every morning and the chemist will put all directions upon the ointment box .
You are placed in a cruel situation , but I trust that these may be but passing clouds .
When may I hope to hear from you again ? ''
Doctor Horace Selby heard again of his patient next morning and rather earlier than he had expected .
A paragraph in the _Daily News_ caused him to push away his breakfast untasted , and turned him sick and faint while he read it .
`` A Deplorable Accident '' it was headed , and it ran in this way : --
Little qualms of anxiety came over Johnson as his wife 's time approached .
However , after all , it was a natural process .
Other men's wives went through it unharmed , and why should not his ?
He was himself one of a family of fourteen , and yet his mother was alive and hearty .
It was quite the exception for anything to go wrong .
And yet in spite of his reasonings the remembrance of his wife 's condition was always like a sombre background to all his other thoughts .
Doctor Miles of Bridport Place , the best man in the neighbourhood , was retained five months in advance , and , as time stole on , many little packets of absurdly small white garments with frill work and ribbons began to arrive among the big consignments of male necessities .
And then one evening , as Johnson was ticketing the scarves in the shop , he heard a bustle upstairs , and Mrs. Peyton came running down to say that Lucy was bad and that she thought the doctor ought to be there without delay .
He hardly knew what he expected the doctor to do .
Something very energetic , certainly -- to seize some drugs , perhaps , and rush excitedly with him through the gaslit streets .
Instead of that Doctor Miles threw his umbrella into the rack , jerked off his hat with a somewhat peevish gesture , and pushed Johnson back into the room .
`` Mrs. Peyton said it was time you were there , sir . ''
`` Oh , she 's very much better , '' said Johnson , with enthusiasm .
`` There is no immediate cause for alarm , '' said Doctor Miles .
`` The case is not all that we could wish it .
Still we will hope for the best . ''
`` Ah , I should get a lease if I were you .
There 's Marshall , the watchmaker , down the street , I attended his wife twice and saw him through the typhoid when they took up the drains in Prince Street .
I assure you his landlord sprung his rent nearly forty a year and he had to pay or clear out . ''
`` Oh yes , she did very well .
`` Smith or Hawley would come for two guineas , '' said he .
`` But I think Pritchard of the City Road is the best man . ''
`` My consultation fee is three guineas , payable at the time . ''
`` Delighted , I 'm sure .
Wo n't you step round and have a cup of coffee ? ''
`` No , thanks .
I 'm expecting another case . ''
Mrs. Peyton was standing by a soapy bath with a bundle in her hands .
From under the curve of a brown shawl there looked out at him the strangest little red face with crumpled features , moist , loose lips , and eyelids which quivered like a rabbit 's nostrils .
The weak neck had let the head topple over , and it rested upon the shoulder .
Her eyes were fixed upon the brown bundle .
`` Aye , and it has driven men into asylums who never found their way on to the medical staff .
I was a very shy fellow myself as a student , and I know what it means . ''
`` Faith and hope , '' murmurs the general practitioner .
`` Good heavens ! ''
`` My own lips tremble .
I often slur my words .
I believe I 've got it myself . ''
`` We were talking about nerve just now , '' observes the surgeon .
`` Just , after my qualifying I served in the Navy for a time , as I think you know .
I was on the flag-ship on the West African Station , and I remember a singular example of nerve which came to my notice at that time .
One of our small gunboats had gone up the Calabar river , and when there the surgeon died of coast fever .
On the same day a man 's leg was broken by a spar falling upon it , and it became quite obvious that it must be taken off above the knee if his life was to be saved .
The young lieutenant who was in charge of the craft searched among the dead doctor 's effects and laid his hands upon some chloroform , a hip-joint knife , and a volume of Grey 's _Anatomy_ .
He had the man laid by the steward upon the cabin table , and with a picture of the cross section of the thigh in front of him he began to take off the limb .
Every now and then , referring to the diagram , he would say : 'Stand by with the lashings , steward .
There's blood on the chart about here . '
Then he would jab with his knife until he cut the artery , and he and his assistant would tie it up before they went any further .
In this way they gradually whittled the leg off , and upon my word they made a very excellent job of it .
The man is hopping about the Portsmouth Yard at this day .
`` Well , of what the folk die of , and what diseases are made most use of in novels .
Some are worn to pieces , and others , which are equally common in real life , are never mentioned .
Typhoid is fairly frequent , but scarlet fever is unknown .
Heart disease is common , but then heart disease , as we know it , is usually the sequel of some foregoing disease , of which we never hear anything in the romance .
Then there is the mysterious malady called brain fever , which always attacks the heroine after a crisis , but which is unknown under that name to the text books .
People when they are over-excited in novels fall down in a fit .
In a fairly large experience I have never known any one to do so in real life .
The small complaints simply do n't exist .
Nobody ever gets shingles or quinsy , or mumps in a novel .
All the diseases , too , belongs to the upper part of the body .
The novelist never strikes below the belt . ''
`` I 'll tell you what , Foster , '' says the alienist , `` there is a side of life which is too medical for the general public and too romantic for the professional journals , but which contains some of the richest human materials that a man could study .
It 's not a pleasant side , I am afraid , but if it is good enough for Providence to create , it is good enough for us to try and understand .
It would deal with strange outbursts of savagery and vice in the lives of the best men , curious momentary weaknesses in the record of the sweetest women , known but to one or two , and inconceivable to the world around .
It would deal , too , with the singular phenomena of waxing and of waning manhood , and would throw a light upon those actions which have cut short many an honoured career and sent a man to a prison when he should have been hurried to a consulting-room .
Of all evils that may come upon the sons of men , God shield us principally from that one ! ''
`` Walker was one of the best men in Europe on nervous disease .
You must have read his little book on sclerosis of the posterior columns .
It 's as interesting as a novel , and epoch-making in its way .
He worked like a horse , did Walker -- huge consulting practice -- hours a day in the clinical wards -- constant original investigations .
And then he enjoyed himself also .
'_De mortuis_ , ' of course , but still it 's an open secret among all who knew him .
If he died at forty-five , he crammed eighty years into it .
The marvel was that he could have held on so long at the pace at which he was going .
But he took it beautifully when it came .
`` When it was over he came into my room and lit a cigarette .
`` Well , we did it at night .
Walker , of course , felt that it was something of an experiment , and did not wish too much talk about it unless it proved successful .
There were half a dozen of us there , M'Namara and I among the rest .
The room was a small one , and in the centre was the narrow table , with a mackintosh over the pillow , and a blanket which extended almost to the floor on either side .
Two candles , on a side-table near the pillow , supplied all the light .
In came the patient , with one side of his face as smooth as a baby 's , and the other all in a quiver with fright .
He lay down , and the chloroform towel was placed over his face , while Walker threaded his needles in the candle light .
The chloroformist stood at the head of the table , and M'Namara was stationed at the side to control the patient .
The rest of us stood by to assist .
`` I am not married , '' said she simply .
It was a neat little counter , and Doctor Ripley , like a pinked fencer , bowed his acknowledgment .
He bowed again , and took a step towards the door .
`` I thought it was a very able monograph . ''
`` But the views which you attribute to Professor Pitres , of Bordeaux , have been repudiated by him . ''
And so he would but for that whimsical element of chance , which will for ever muddle up the affairs of this world and dumbfound the prophets .
Whether it came from the want of his lights , or from his mind being full of the thoughts of his rival , he allowed too little by half a foot in taking the sharp turn upon the Basingstoke road .
The empty trap and the frightened horse clattered away into the darkness , while the Squire's groom crawled out of the ditch into which he had been shot .
He struck a match , looked down at his groaning companion , and then , after the fashion of rough , strong men when they see what they have not seen before , he was very sick .
The doctor raised himself a little on his elbow in the glint of the match .
He caught a glimpse of something white and sharp bristling through his trouser-leg half-way down the shin .
`` A three months ' job , '' and fainted .
When he came to himself the groom was gone , for he had scudded off to the Squire 's house for help , but a small page was holding a gig-lamp in front of his injured leg , and a woman , with an open case of polished instruments gleaming in the yellow light , was deftly slitting up his trouser with a crooked pair of scissors .
`` When it comes we can move you into the gig .
A little more light , John !
Ah , dear , dear , we shall have laceration unless we reduce this before we move you .
Allow me to give you a whiff of chloroform , and I have no doubt that I can secure it sufficiently to -- -- ''
You are pestered with one of those ! ''
`` I do n't know what I should have done without her . ''
`` You think there is nothing to be said on the other side ? ''
`` I would rather that you did not undo it , '' said the patient .
`` I have her assurance that it is all right . ''
The lady , who had heard of his coming , was much surprised on learning of his departure .
`` We had a difference upon a point of professional etiquette , '' said Doctor James , and it was all the explanation he would vouchsafe .
`` Oh , you do n't think they are necessarily unsexed , then ? ''
she cried , with a mischievous smile .
`` At any rate , it is the truth , '' said he , and was happy all night at the remembrance of the flush of pleasure which made her pale face look quite comely for the instant .
`` I am so sorry , '' she said again .
`` If I had known what was passing in your mind I should have told you earlier that I intend to devote my life entirely to science .
There are many women with a capacity for marriage , but few with a taste for biology .
I will remain true to my own line , then .
I came down here while waiting for an opening in the Paris Physiological Laboratory .
I have just heard that there is a vacancy for me there , and so you will be troubled no more by my intrusion upon your practice .
I have done you an injustice just as you did me one .
I thought you narrow and pedantic , with no good quality .
I have learned during your illness to appreciate you better , and the recollection of our friendship will always be a very pleasant one to me . ''
Crabbe was not at all the type of man whom we usually associate with the word `` genius . ''
He was not pale nor thin , neither was his hair of abnormal growth .
On the contrary he was a powerfully built , square-shouldered fellow , full of vitality , with a voice like a bull and a laugh that could be heard across the meadows .
A muscular Christian too , and one of the best Rugby forwards in Edinburgh .
`` Yes , '' he said ; `` Thomas Crabbe , a 'Varsity man . ''
Crabbe went down with his young degree , and a still younger wife , to settle in this town , which we will call Brisport .
I was acting as assistant to a medical man in Manchester , and heard little from my former friend , save that he had set up in considerable style , and was making a bid for a high-class practice at once .
I read one most deep and erudite paper in a medical journal , entitled `` Curious Development of a Discopherous Bone in the Stomach of a Duck , '' which emanated from his pen , but beyond this and some remarks on the embryology of fishes he seemed strangely quiet .
After dinner the three of us held a solemn council of war , in which he laid before me all his difficulties .
`` What in the world am I to do , Barton ? ''
`` If I could make myself known it would be all right , but no one seems to look at my door-plate , and the place is overstocked with doctors .
I believe they think I am a D.D .
I would n't mind if these other fellows were good men , but they are not .
They are all antiquated old fogies at least half a century behind the day .
Now there is old Markham , who lives in that brick house over there and does most of the practice in the town .
I 'll swear he does n't know the difference between locomotor ataxia and a hypodermic syringe , but he is known , so they flock into his surgery in a manner which is simply repulsive .
And Davidson down the road , he is only an L.S.A .
Talked about epispastic paralysis at the Society the other night -- confused it with liquor epispasticus , you know .
Yet that fellow makes a pound to my shilling . ''
`` Look here , Thomas , '' said I , `` you want your name in the papers -- is that it ? ''
`` Well , by Jove , you shall have it . ''
`` Well , I 'm off , '' said I .
`` I 'll go into the fit against your garden gate . ''
`` All right , old man . ''
Brisport seemed unusually lively this morning .
The streets were crowded with people .
I wormed my way down Waterloo Street through the old Square and past Crabbe 's house .
The cathedral bells were chiming ten o'clock as I reached the above-mentioned little dock with the iron swinging bridge .
A man was standing on the bridge leaning over the balustrades .
There was no mistaking the heart-broken hat rim and the spectacles of Thomas Waterhouse Crabbe , M.B .
`` Take me round the docks , '' I said .
`` I want to have a look at the shipping . ''
I hardly realised what it was I was going to do until I had done it .
It was not a pleasant feeling to have the thick , clammy water closing over one 's head .
I struck the bottom with my feet , and shot up again to the surface .
The air seemed alive with shouts .
`` Heave a rope ! ''
`` Where 's a boat-hook ! ''
`` Catch him ! ''
`` There he is ! ''
The boatman managed to hit me me a smart blow on the head with something , an oar , I fancy , and I went down again , but not before I had got my lungs well filled with air .
I came up again and my top-booted friend seized me by the hair of my head as if he would tear my scalp off .
`` Do n't struggle ! ''
he yelled , `` and I'll save you yet . ''
But I shook him off , and took another plunge .
There was no resisting him next time , however , for he got a boat-hook into my collar , and though I kept my head under water as long as possible I was ignominiously hauled to land .
`` Stop , '' said a solemn voice -- '' stop !
Can I be of any assistance ?
I am a medical man .
What has occurred ? ''
`` Hang it , man , stop ! ''
I growled , but he only paused to make a dart for the window and yell out `` No sign of life , '' and then fell upon me with greater energy than ever .
`` We will now try Sylvestre 's method , '' he said , when the perspiration was fairly boiling out of him ; and with that he seized me again , and performed a series of evolutions even more excruciating than the first .
`` It is hopeless ! ''
he said at last , stopping and covering my head reverently with the bed-clothes .
`` Send for the coroner !
He has gone to a better land .
Here is my card , '' he continued to an inspector of police who had arrived .
`` Doctor Crabbe of George Street .
You will see that the matter is accurately reported .
Poor young man ! ''
And Tom drew his handkerchief across his eyes and walked towards the door , while a groan of sympathy rose from the crowd outside .
He had his hand upon the handle when a thought seemed to strike him , and he turned back .
`` There is yet a possible hope , '' he said , `` we have not tried the magical effects of electricity -- that subtle power , next of kin to nervous force .
Is there a chemist 's near ? ''
A human life trembles in the balance -- get his strongest battery , quick ! ''
And away went half the crowd racing down the street and tumbling over each other in the effort to be first at Mr. McLagan 's .
They came back very red and hot , and one of them bore a shining brown mahogany box in his arms which contained the instrument in question .
THE CROXLEY MASTER _And Other Tales of the Ring and Camp_
`` For a time , and only for a time , '' Magro answered , gravely .
`` Yet you will smile , perchance , when I tell you how it is that I know it .
There was a wise woman who lived in that part of the Tin Islands which juts forth into the sea , and from her lips I have heard many things , but not one which has not come aright .
Of the fall of our own country , and even of this battle , from which we now return , she told me clearly .
There is much strange lore amongst these savage peoples in the west of the land of Tin . ''
The smile which flickered upon the old patrician 's keen features died away suddenly , and his fingers closed upon his companion 's wrist .
The other had set rigid , his head advanced , his hawk eyes upon the northern skyline .
Its straight , blue horizon was broken by two low black dots .
`` It is not to be wondered at if he won their votes , Caesar , '' said the soldier , `` for from what I hear it would have been no disgrace had you , even you , been conquered in this conquest . ''
The cloud cleared from Nero 's brow .
`` Of course , Arsenius !
No man would have dared to brave me so .
What a story for Rome !
Let the messenger leave this very night , Arsenius , to tell them how their Emperor has upheld their honour in Olympia this day . ''
`` Well , mam , by all accounts they left because they had to .
The folk round could thole them no longer , so they just up and burned the fort aboot their lugs .
You can see the fire marks on the stanes . ''
`` Aye , I think they were red , '' said her husband .
`` It 's a queer thing , Maggie , and it may be your words that have done it ; but I seem to see that business aboot as clear as ever I saw anything in my life .
The light shone on the water . ''
`` No doubt it was just the name of the Legion which put the altar up . ''
Neither of them could shake off the strange impression which had been left upon them by their visit to the excavations .
It was as if some miasma had risen from those damp trenches and passed into their blood .
All the evening they were silent and thoughtful , but such remarks as they did make showed that the same subject was in the minds of each .
Brown had a restless night , in which he dreamed a strange connected dream , so vivid that he woke sweating and shivering like a frightened horse .
He tried to convey it all to his wife as they sat together at breakfast in the morning .
`` Tell me of it -- tell me slow , '' said she .
`` Then came the thing that I mind best of all .
You 're ill , Maggie .
You nave the very look on your face that you had last night in my dream .
He came runnin ' in the firelight .
His head was bare ; his hair was black and curled ; he had a naked sword in his hand , short and broad , little more than a dagger .
He stabbed at me , but he tripped and fell .
I held you with one hand , and with the other -- ''
His wife had sprung to her feet with writhing features .
They never talk about that strange isolated incident in their married life .
For an instant the curtain of the past had swung aside , and some strange glimpse of a forgotten life had come to them .
But it closed down , never to open again .
They live their narrow round -- he in his shop , she in her household -- and yet new and wider horizons have vaguely formed themselves around them since that summer evening by the crumbling Roman fort .
`` Nay , better come in with me now and take a bitter draught ere you go upon your way .
My Greek physician Stephanos has a rare prescription for a morning head .
Your clients await you ?
Well , I will see you later at the Senate house . ''
The senator gave a cry of apprehension and rushed to the corner of the atrium , where a little shrine , curtained off by silken drapery , held the precious statue , the greatest art treasure of his collection -- perhaps of the whole world .
He tore the hangings aside and stood in speechless anger before the outraged goddess .
The red perfumed lamp which always burned before her had been spilled and broken ; her altar fire had been quenched , her chaplet had been dashed aside .
But worst of all -- insufferable sacrilege !
-- her own beautiful nude body of glistening Pantelic marble , as white and fair as when the inspired Greek had hewed it out five hundred years before , had been most brutally mishandled .
Three fingers of the gracious outstretched hand had been struck off , and lay upon the pedestal beside her .
Above her delicate breast a dark mark showed , where a blow had disfigured the marble .
Emilius Flaccus , the most delicate and judicious connoisseur in Rome , stood gasping and croaking , his hand to his throat , as he gazed at his disfigured masterpiece .
Then he turned upon his slaves , his fury in his convulsed face ; but , to his amazement , they were not looking at him , but had all turned in attitudes of deep respect towards the opening of the peristyle .
As he faced round and saw who had just entered his house , his own rage fell away from him in an instant , and his manner became as humble as that of his servants .
`` It was an afterthought , '' said Domitian .
`` When you and the others had left me , I was in no mood for sleep , and so it came into my mind that I would have a breath of morning air by coming down to you , and seeing this Grecian Venus of yours , about which you discoursed so eloquently between the cups .
But , indeed , by your appearance and that of your servants , I should judge that my visit was an ill-timed one . ''
`` Nay , dear master ; say not so .
But , indeed , it is truth that I was in trouble at the moment of your welcome entrance , and this trouble was , as the Fates have willed it , brought forth by that very statue in which you have been graciously pleased to show your interest .
There it stands , and you can see for yourself how rudely it has been mishandled . ''
`` By Pluto and all the nether gods , if it were mine some of you should feed the lampreys , '' said the Emperor , looking round with his fierce eyes at the shrinking slaves .
`` You were always overmerciful , Emilius .
It is the common talk that your catenoe are rusted for want of use .
But surely this is beyond all bounds .
Let me see how you handle the matter .
Whom do you hold responsible ? ''
`` In the ergastulum , your honour , with the furca on his neck . ''
`` Did you do this injury to my statue ? ''
`` There are the games this afternoon .
I am showing the new hunting-leopard which King Juba has sent from Numidia .
This slave may give us some sport when he finds the hungry beast sniffing at his heels . ''
But the Patrician still hesitated .
He would make a last effort .
`` Well , friend , what think you now ? ''
`` Are you wiser than your Emperor ?
Can you indeed tame your Christian with kindness ? ''
Emilius Flaccus wiped the sweat from his brow .
`` He is yours , great Caesar .
Do with him as you will . ''
`` When I see mother next it will be to put a golden torque round her neck , '' said the young giant .
`` And you , daddy ; I will fill your leather pouch with gold pieces before I have done . ''
`` My place is down among yonder men , '' said the young man .
`` I was not born to drive goats and carry logs , but to sell this manhood of mine in the best market .
There is my market in the Emperor 's own Guard .
Say nothing , daddy , for my mind is set , and if you weep now it will be to laugh hereafter .
I will to great Rome with the soldiers . ''
The daily march of the heavily laden Roman legionary was fixed at twenty miles ; but on this afternoon , though only half the distance had been accomplished , the silver trumpets blared out their welcome news that a camp was to be formed .
As the men broke their ranks , the reason of their light march was announced by the decurions .
It was the birthday of Geta , the younger son of the Emperor , and in his honour there would be games and a double ration of wine .
But the iron discipline of the Roman army required that under all circumstances certain duties should be performed , and foremost among them that the camp should be made secure .
Laying down their arms in the order of their ranks , the soldiers seized their spades and axes , and worked rapidly and joyously until sloping vallum and gaping fossa girdled them round , and gave them safe refuge against a night attack .
Then in noisy , laughing , gesticulating crowds they gathered in their thousands round the grassy arena where the sports were to be held .
A long green hillside sloped down to a level plain , and on this gentle incline the army lay watching the strife of the chosen athletes who contended before them .
They stretched themselves in the glare of the sunshine , their heavy tunics thrown off , and their naked limbs sprawling , wine-cups an baskets of fruit and cakes circling amongst them , enjoying rest and peace as only those can to whom it comes so rarely .
As the two men , stripped save for their loin-cloths , approached the wrestling-ring , cheers and counter-cheers burst from their adherents , some favouring the Lictor for his Roman blood , some the Greek from their own private grudge .
And then , of a sudden , the cheering died , heads were turned towards the slope away from the arena , men stood up and peered and pointed , until finally , in a strange hush , the whole great assembly had forgotten the athletes , and were watching a single man walking swiftly towards them down the green curve of the hill .
This huge solitary figure , with the oaken club in his hand , the shaggy fleece flapping from his great shoulders , and the setting sun gleaming upon a halo of golden hair , might have been the tutelary god of the fierce and barren mountains from which he had issued .
Even the Emperor rose from his chair and gazed with open-eyed amazement at the extraordinary being who approached him .
The Barbarian rose , and his fair cheeks flushed with resentment .
`` By the shade of Milo this is a bold fellow ! ''
`` How say you , Crassus ?
Shall he make good his words ? ''
There was some laughter when the peasant tossed his sheep-skin mantle to the ground and , without troubling to remove his leathern tunic , advanced towards the two wrestlers ; but it became uproarious when with a quick spring he seized the Greek under one arm and the Roman under the other , holding them as in a vice .
Then with a terrific effort he tore them both from the ground , carried them writhing and kicking round the arena , and finally walking up to the Emperor 's throne , threw his two athletes down in front of him .
Then , bowing to Caesar , the huge Barbarian withdrew , and laid his great bulk down among the ranks of the applauding soldiers , whence he watched with stolid unconcern the conclusion of the sports .
`` By the god of war , I do not know where in all the world I could find such a servant ! ''
`` You shall be my own body-guard , the one nearest to me of all . ''
`` If he is indeed to be always at your call , Caesar , it would be well to give the poor Barbarian some name which your lips can frame .
Theckla is as uncouth and craggy a word as one of his native rocks . ''
So it came about that as the Roman army resumed its march next day , and left behind it the fair valley of the Harpessus , a huge recruit , clad in brown leather , with a rude sheep-skin floating from his shoulders , marched beside the Imperial troop .
But far away in the wooden farmhouse of a distant Macedonian valley two old country folk wept salt tears , and prayed to the gods for the safety of their boy who had turned his face to Rome .
`` He had no great force , '' replied Balbus .
`` Ten or twelve cohorts of the Praetorians and a handful of horse . ''
`` Aye , '' croaked a grumbling old greybeard .
`` Our limbs , our blood , our lives -- what do they care so long as the Barbarians are held off , and they are left in peace to their feastings and their circus ?
Free bread , free wine , free games -- everything for the loafer at Rome .
For us the frontier guard and a soldier 's fare . ''
There was a hush for the answer .
The sigh of the wind among the pines and the low lapping of the river swelled out louder in the silence .
Balbus looked hard at his commander .
`` I like it not , '' said he .
`` It is my counsel , Caesar , that with the first light of morning we make our way south once more . ''
`` Who is he ? ''
stammered the Emperor , clutching at his guardsman 's sleeve .
`` They call him Caesar . ''
That night he sat with his son Verus in his tent , and he spoke softly and gently as the youth had never heard him speak before .
He had spoken thus in old days with Paullina , the boy 's mother ; but she had been dead these many years , and all that was soft and gentle in the big man had passed away with her .
Now her spirit seemed very near him , and his own was tempered by its presence .
`` I would have you go back to the Thracian mountains , '' he said .
`` I have tried both , boy , and I can tell you that there is no pleasure which power can bring which can equal the breath of the wind and the smell of the kine upon a summer morning .
Against you they have no quarrel .
Why should they mishandle you ?
Keep far from Rome and the Romans .
Old Eudoxus has money , and to spare .
He awaits you with two horses outside the camp .
Make for the valley of the Harpessus , lad .
It was thence that your father came , and there you will find his kin .
Buy and stock a homestead , and keep yourself far from the paths of greatness and of danger .
God keep you , Verus , and send you safe to Thrace . ''
`` The tyrant is dead ! ''
`` The tyrant is dead , '' and from all the camp beneath them and from the walls of the beleaguered city the joyous cry came echoing back , `` He is dead , Maximin is dead ! ''
I sit in my study , and upon the table before me lies a denarius of Maximin , as fresh as when the triumvir of the Temple of Juno Moneta sent it from the mint .
Around it are recorded his resounding titles -- Imperator Maximinus , Pontifex Maximus , Tribunitia potestate , and the rest .
In the centre is the impress of a great craggy head , a massive jaw , a rude fighting face , a contracted forehead .
For all the pompous roll of titles it is a peasant 's face , and I see him not as the Emperor of Rome , but as the great Thracian boor who strode down the hillside on that far-distant summer day when first the eagles beckoned him to Rome .
Alexandria , Antioch , and Constantinople were centres of theological warfare .
The whole north of Africa , too , was rent by the strife of the Donatists , who upheld their particular schism by iron flails and the war-cry of `` Praise to the Lord ! ''
But minor local controversies sank to nothing when compared with the huge argument of the Catholic and the Arian , which rent every village in twain , and divided every household from the cottage to the palace .
The rival doctrines of the Homoousian and of the Homoiousian , containing metaphysical differences so attenuated that they could hardly be stated , turned bishop against bishop and congregation against congregation .
The ink of the theologians and the blood of the fanatics were spilled in floods on either side , and gentle followers of Christ were horrified to find that their faith was responsible for such a state of riot and bloodshed as had never yet disgraced the religious history of the world .
Many of the more earnest among them , shocked and scandalized , slipped away to the Libyan Desert , or to the solitude of Pontus , there to await in self-denial and prayer that second coming which was supposed to be at hand .
Even in the deserts they could not escape the echo of the distant strife , and the hermits themselves scowled fiercely from their dens at passing travellers who might be contaminated by the doctrines of Athanasius or of Arius .
Such a hermit was Simon Melas , of whom I write .
A Trinitarian and a Catholic , he was shocked by the excesses of the persecution of the Arians , which could be only matched by the similar outrages with which these same Arians in the day of their power avenged their treatment on their brother Christians .
Weary of the whole strife , and convinced that the end of the world was indeed at hand , he left his home in Constantinople and travelled as far as the Gothic settlements in Dacia , beyond the Danube , in search of some spot where he might be free from the never-ending disputes .
Still journeying to the north and east , he crossed the river which we now call the Dneister , and there , finding a rocky hill rising from an immense plain , he formed a cell near its summit , and settled himself down to end his life in self-denial and meditation .
There were fish in the stream , the country teemed with game , and there was an abundance of wild fruits , so that his spiritual exercises were not unduly interrupted by the search of sustenance for his mortal frame .
The old hermit gave a hoarse cry of fury , and his brown , withered face was convulsed with anger .
Seizing the huge cudgel which he kept to beat off the wolves , he shook it murderously at his companion .
`` We show that our spirit is superior to our flesh , '' Simon answered .
`` If we fare badly in this world , we believe that we shall reap an advantage in the world to come . ''
`` If you will read our philosophers , and above all the divine Plato , you will find that there are other guides who may take you to the same end .
Have you by chance read the book which was written by our Emperor Marcus Aurelius ?
Do you not discover there every virtue which man could have , although he knew nothing of your creed ?
Have you considered , also , the words and actions of our late Emperor Julian , with whom I served my first campaign when he went out against the Persians ?
Where could you find a more perfect man than he ? ''
On the opposite peak a man was standing , his outline black in the fading light .
He was a strange almost a deformed figure , short-statured , round-backed , with a large head , no neck , and a long rod jutting out from between his shoulders .
He stood with his face advanced , and his body bent , peering very intently over the plain to the westward .
In a moment he was gone , and the lonely black peak showed up hard and naked against the faint eastern glimmer .
Then the night closed down , and all was black once more .
All day , held spell-bound by this wonderful sight , the hermit crouched in the shadow of the rocks , and all day the sea of horsemen rolled onward over the plain beneath .
Simon had seen the swarming quays of Alexandria , he had watched the mob which blocked the hippodrome of Constantinople , yet never had he imagined such a multitude as now defiled beneath his eyes , coming from that eastern skyline which had been the end of his world .
Sometimes the dense streams of horsemen were broken by droves of brood-mares and foals , driven along by mounted guards ; sometimes there were herds of cattle ; sometimes there were lines of waggons with skin canopies above them ; but then once more , after every break , came the horsemen , the horsemen , the hundreds and the thousands and the tens of thousands , slowly , ceaselessly , silently drifting from the east to the west .
The long day passed , the light waned , and the shadows fell ; but still the great broad stream was flowing by .
Simon 's veins were throbbing and quivering with the unwonted joy of action .
All the energy stored up in those years of repose came in a flood at this moment of need .
Standing in the darkness of the cell , he saw , as in a map of fire , the outlines of the great Barbaric host , the line of the river , the position of the settlements , the means by which they might be warned .
Silently he waited in the shadow until the moon had sunk .
Then he flung himself upon the dead man 's horse , guided it down the gorge , and set forth at a gallop across the plain .
A yellow-haired British major-domo came forward for orders .
`` Is the General there ? ''
`` I fear , your excellency , that you have had bad news from Rome . ''
`` Here they are , with the Emperor 's own seal . ''
The soldier shrugged his shoulder 's .
`` I will send out the messengers within an hour .
This very morning there has come news that the Barbarians are through the old gap in the wall , and their outriders as far south as Vinovia . ''
The Governor shrugged his shoulders .
`` These things concern us no longer , '' said he .
Then a bitter smile broke upon his aquiline clean-shaven face .
`` Whom think you that I see in audience this morning ? ''
`` We would take all the learning and all the arts that Rome or Greece could give , but we would still be Britain , and ruled by Britons . ''
The last traces of joy had passed from the faces of the Britons .
Suddenly the future had started up clearly before them , and they quailed at the prospect .
`` But , your excellency , if the legions should go at once , we should have the wild Scots at York , and the Northmen in the Thames within the month .
We can build ourselves up under your shield , and in a few years it would be easier for us ; but not now , your excellency , not now . ''
Whilst I was talking to my friend Eric , a sudden altercation broke out upon the deck , and a great number of the men paused in their work , and flocked towards the spot with faces which showed that they were deeply interested in the matter .
Eric and I pushed our way among the others , for I was very anxious to see as much as I could of the ways and manners of these Barbarians .
A quarrel had broken out about a child , a little blue-eyed fellow with curly yellow hair , who appeared to be greatly amused by the hubbub of which he was the cause .
On one side of him stood a white-bearded old man , of very majestic aspect , who signified by his gestures that he claimed the lad for himself , while on the other was a thin , earnest , anxious person , who strongly objected to the boy being taken from him .
Eric whispered in my ear that the old man was the tribal high priest , who was the official sacrificer to their great god Woden , whilst the other was a man who took somewhat different views , not upon Woden , but upon the means by which he should be worshipped .
The majority of the crew were on the side of the old priest ; but a certain number , who liked greater liberty of worship , and to invent their own prayers instead of always repeating the official ones , followed the lead of the younger man .
The difference was too deep and too old to be healed among the grown men , but each had a great desire to impress their view upon the children .
This was the reason why these two were now so furious with each other , and the argument between them ran so high that several of their followers on either side had drawn the short saxes , or knives from which their name of Saxon is derived , when a burly , red-headed man pushed his way through the throng , and in a voice of thunder brought the controversy to an end .
His eyes sparkled as he gazed .
`` Perhaps , '' he cried ; and then suddenly collecting himself and thinking that he had said too much , he added --
`` Yes , Leon , your mother the Empress Theodora and her husband the great Justinian dwell in yonder palace . ''
`` Are you sure , Father Luke , that my mother will indeed be glad to see me ? ''
`` At a distance , Leon , it would be easy to refuse you .
An Imperial messenger would have stopped us .
But when she sees you , Leon -- your eyes , so like her own , your face , which carries memories of one whom she loved -- then , if there be a woman 's heart within her bosom , she will take you into it .
They say that the Emperor can refuse her nothing .
They have no child of their own .
There is a great future before you , Leon .
When it comes , do not forget the poor brethren of Saint Nicephorus , who took you in when you had no friend in the world . ''
The old abbot spoke cheerily , but it was easy to see from his anxious countenance that the nearer he came to the capital the more doubtful did his errand appear .
What had seemed easy and natural from the quiet cloisters of Antioch became dubious and dark now that the golden domes of Constantinople glittered so close at hand .
Ten years before , a wretched woman , whose very name was an offence throughout the eastern world where she was as infamous for her dishonour as famous for her beauty , had come to the monastery gate , and had persuaded the monks to take charge of her infant son , the child of her shame .
There he had been ever since .
But she , Theodora , the harlot , returning to the capital , had by the strangest turn of Fortune 's wheel caught the fancy and finally the enduring love of Justinian the heir to the throne .
Then on the death of his uncle Justin , the young man had become the greatest monarch upon the earth , and had raised Theodora to be not only his wife and Empress , but to be absolute ruler with powers equal to and independent of his own .
And she , the polluted one , had risen to the dignity , had cut herself sternly away from all that related to her past life , and had shown signs already of being a great Queen , stronger and wiser than her husband , but fierce , vindictive , and unbending , a firm support to her friends , but a terror to her foes .
This was the woman to whom the Abbot Luke of Antioch was bringing Leon , her forgotten son .
If ever her mind strayed back to the days when , abandoned by her lover Ecebolus , the Governor of the African Pentapolis , she had made her way on foot through Asia Minor , and left her infant with the monks , it was only to persuade herself that the brethren cloistered far from the world would never identify Theodora the Empress with Theodora the dissolute wanderer , and that the fruits of her sin would be for ever concealed from her Imperial husband .
`` I have no doubt , your excellency , '' said he , `` that the importance of my mission has given me the right to enter the palace .
The only thing which troubles me is whether it may not be so important as to forbid me from broaching it to you , or indeed , to anybody save the Empress Theodora , since it is she only whom it concerns . ''
`` You are sure of this ? ''
A few minutes had elapsed when a curtain at the end of the room was pushed aside , and the eunuch , reappearing , held it back , doubling his unwieldy body into a profound obeisance as he did so .
Through the gap came a small alert woman , clad in golden tissue , with a loose outer mantle and shoes of the Imperial purple .
That colour alone showed that she could be none other than the Empress ; but the dignity of her carriage , the fierce authority of her magnificent dark eyes , and the perfect beauty of her haughty face , all proclaimed that it could only be that Theodora who , in spite of her lowly origin , was the most majestic as well as the most maturely lovely of all the women in her kingdom .
Gone now were the buffoon tricks which the daughter of Acacius the bearward had learned in the amphitheatre ; gone too was the light charm of the wanton , and what was left was the worthy mate of a great king , the measured dignity of one who was every inch an empress .
`` You have turned me against my own .
You have goaded me to slay my own son .
You have intended to use my secret against me .
I read it in your eyes from the first .
Cruel , murderous villain , taste the fate which you have yourself given to so many others .
This is your doom .
I have spoken . ''
`` We had travelled in this way for ten days , camping every evening at the vile wells which offered a small quantity of abominable water .
It was our habit to rise very early and to travel very late , but to halt during the intolerable heat of the afternoon , when , for want of trees , we would crouch in the shadow of a sandhill , or , if that were wanting , behind our own camels and merchandise , in order to escape from the insufferable glare of the sun .
On the seventh day we were near the point where one leaves the coast in order to strike inland to Macoraba .
We had concluded our midday halt , and were just starting once more , the sun still being so hot that we could hardly bear it , when , looking up , I saw a remarkable sight .
Standing on a hillock to our right there was a man about forty feet high , holding in his hand a spear which was the size of the mast of a large ship .
You look surprised , my friends , and you can therefore imagine my feelings when I saw such a sight .
But my reason soon told me that the object in front of me was really a wandering Arab , whose form had been enormously magnified by the strange distorting effects which the hot air of the desert is able to cause .
`` 'But he is an unbeliever , ' cried the youth , fingering a great knife which hung in his belt .
'Were I to be the judge , he would lose not only his merchandise , but his life also , if he did not accept the faith . '
`` I answered that I was not .
`` And yet much of his talk was unintelligible to me , though , as you are aware , I speak Arabian like an Arab .
It rose and fell in the strangest way .
Sometimes it was the babble of a child , sometimes the incoherent raving of a fanatic , sometimes the lofty dreams of a prophet and philosopher .
There were times when his stories of demons , of miracles , of dreams , and of omens , were such as an old woman might tell to please the children of an evening .
There were others when , as he talked with shining face of his converse with angels , of the intentions of the Creator , and the end of the universe , I felt as if I were in the company of some one more than mortal , some one who was indeed the direct messenger of the Most High .
-- What perfect nonsense it is for doctors to prescribe rest when rest is out of the question !
They might as well shout to a man who has a pack of wolves at his heels that what he wants is absolute quiet .
My figures must be out by a certain date ; unless they are so , I shall lose the chance of my lifetime , so how on earth am I to rest ?
I'll take a week or so after the trial .
A sceptic would say , no doubt , that I had dropped asleep over my figures , and that my experience was a dream .
As a matter of fact , I was never more vividly awake in my life .
I was able to argue about it even as I looked at it , and to tell myself that it was a subjective impression -- a chimera of the nerves -- begotten by worry and insomnia .
But why this particular shape ?
And who is the woman , and what is the dreadful emotion which I read in those wonderful brown eyes ?
They come between me and my work .
For the first time I have done less than the daily tally which I had marked out .
Perhaps that is why I have had no abnormal sensations tonight .
Tomorrow I must wake up , come what may .
I suppose it was about one in the morning , and I was closing my books preparatory to staggering off to bed , when I saw her there in front of me .
The stage of mistiness and development must have passed unobserved , and there she was in all her beauty and passion and distress , as clear-cut as if she were really in the flesh before me .
The figure was small , but very distinct -- so much so that every feature , and every detail of dress , are stamped in my memory .
She is seated on the extreme left of the mirror .
A sort of shadowy figure crouches down beside her -- I can dimly discern that it is a man -- and then behind them is cloud , in which I see figures -- figures which move .
It is not a mere picture upon which I look .
It is a scene in life , an actual episode .
She crouches and quivers .
The man beside her cowers down .
The vague figures make abrupt movements and gestures .
All my fears were swallowed up in my interest .
It was maddening to see so much and not to see more .
One other detail : On the left side of the skirt of the black dress was , as I thought at first , a shapeless bunch of white ribbon .
Then , as I looked more intently or as the vision defined itself more clearly , I perceived what it was .
It was the hand of a man , clenched and knotted in agony , which held on with a convulsive grasp to the fold of the dress .
The rest of the crouching figure was a mere vague outline , but that strenuous hand shone clear on the dark background , with a sinister suggestion of tragedy in its frantic clutch .
The man is frightened-horribly frightened .
That I can clearly discern .
What has terrified him so ?
Why does he grip the woman 's dress ?
The answer lies amongst those moving figures in the background .
They have brought danger both to him and to her .
The interest of the thing fascinated me .
I thought no more of its relation to my own nerves .
I stared and stared as if in a theatre .
But I could get no farther .
There were tumultuous movements in which all the figures were vaguely concerned .
Then the mirror was clear once more .
-- Headaches , nervous twitches , mistiness , fullness of the temples -- all the premonitions of trouble , and the trouble came sure enough .
And yet my real sorrow is not so much that the vision should come as that it should cease before all is revealed .
But I saw more tonight .
The crouching man was as visible as the lady whose gown he clutched .
He is a little swarthy fellow , with a black-pointed beard .
He has a loose gown of damask trimmed with fur .
The prevailing tints of his dress are red .
What a fright the fellow is in , to be sure !
He cowers and shivers and glares back over his shoulder .
There is a small knife in his other hand , but he is far too tremulous and cowed to use it .
Dimly now I begin to see the figures in the background .
Fierce faces , bearded and dark , shape themselves out of the mist .
There is one terrible creature , a skeleton of a man , with hollow cheeks and eyes sunk in his head .
He also has a knife in his hand .
On the right of the woman stands a tall man , very young , with flaxen hair , his face sullen and dour .
The beautiful woman looks up at him in appeal .
So does the man on the ground .
This youth seems to be the arbiter of their fate .
The crouching man draws closer and hides himself in the woman 's skirts .
The tall youth bends and tries to drag her away from him .
So much I saw last night before the mirror cleared .
Shall I never know what it leads to and whence it comes ?
It is not a mere imagination , of that I am very sure .
Somewhere , some time , this scene has been acted , and this old mirror has reflected it .
But when -- where ?
-- He has just left me .
Let me set down his words as closely as I can recall them .
He began by laying several musty volumes upon my bed .
`` These you can consult at your leisure , '' said he .
`` I have some notes here which you can confirm .
There is not a doubt that what you have seen is the murder of Rizzio by the Scottish nobles in the presence of Mary , which occurred in March , 1566 .
Your description of the woman is accurate .
The high forehead and heavy eyelids combined with great beauty could hardly apply to two women .
The tall young man was her husband , Darnley .
Rizzio , says the chronicle , 'was dressed in a loose dressing-gown of furred damask , with hose of russet velvet . '
With one hand he clutched Mary 's gown , with the other he held a dagger .
Your fierce , hollow-eyed man was Ruthven , who was new-risen from a bed of sickness .
Every detail is exact . ''
Some hugged the shore , ready to make for the nearest port , while others struck far out beyond the known lines of commerce , but none were so stout-hearted that they did not breathe more freely when their passengers and cargoes were safe under the guns of some mothering fort .
It was early in May , in the year 1720 , that _The Happy Delivery_ lay with her fore-yard aback some five leagues west of the Windward Passage , waiting to see what rich , helpless craft the trade-wind might bring down to her .
A very different figure was Captain John Sharkey .
His thin , drawn , clean-shaven face was corpse-like in its pallor , and all the suns of the Indies could but turn it to a more deathly parchment tint .
He was part bald , with a few lank locks of tow-like hair , and a steep , narrow forehead .
His thin nose jutted sharply forth , and near-set on either side of it were those filmy blue eyes , red-rimmed like those of a white bull-terrier , from which strong men winced away in fear and loathing .
His bony hands , with long , thin fingers which quivered ceaselessly like the antennae of an insect , were toying constantly with the cards and the heap of gold moidores which lay before him .
His dress was of some sombre drab material , but , indeed , the men who looked upon that fearsome face had little thought for the costume of its owner .
`` Sink you for villains ! ''
`` I see well that if I do not shoot one of you from time to time you will forget the man I am .
What mean you by entering my cabin as though it were a Wapping alehouse ? ''
`` It is no time for drinking , Captain Sharkey , '' said Martin .
`` The men are holding council round the mainmast , and may be aft at any minute .
They mean mischief , Captain Sharkey , and we have come to warn you . ''
`` There are forty of them under the lead of Sweetlocks , the master , '' said Martin , `` and on the open deck they would surely cut you to pieces .
Here within the cabin it may be that we can hold them off at the points of our pistols . ''
`` So I have heard , Sweetlocks , '' said the captain , softly .
`` I may live to rip you the length of your vest for this night 's work . ''
It was clear that she had come from afar and knew nothing of the ways of the Caribbean Sea , for she made no effort to avoid the low , dark craft which lay so close upon her bow , but blundered on as if her mere size would avail her .
Having secured their prisoners , all huddled together in a dazed , distracted group , the pirates spread over the vessel in search of plunder , handing all that was found to the giant quartermaster , who in turn passed it over the side of _The Happy Delivery_ and laid it under guard at the foot of her mainmast .
`` If it be to soften me , you may save your breath .
You have kept us waiting here for three days , and curse me if one of you shall live ! ''
The body of Captain Hardy had not yet settled upon the sand forty fathoms deep before the pirates had rushed along the cabin gangway .
There , sure enough , at the further end , was a barred door , overlooked in their previous search .
There was no key , but they beat it in with their gunstocks , whilst shriek after shriek came from within .
In the light of their outstretched lanterns they saw a young woman , in the very prime and fullness of her youth , crouching in a corner , her unkempt hair hanging to the ground , her dark eyes glaring with fear , her lovely form straining away in horror from this inrush of savage blood-stained men .
Rough hands seized her , she was jerked to her feet , and dragged with scream on scream to where John Sharkey awaited her .
He held the light long and fondly to her face , then , laughing loudly , he bent forward and left his red hand-print upon her cheek .
`` Dolts that we were ! ''
the surgeon shouted , beating his head with his hand .
`` Tainted or no , we shall never know a moment 's peace till the year is up and the time of danger past .
'Fore God , that merchant skipper has left his mark on us , and pretty fools we were to think that such a maid would be quarantined for the cause he gave .
It is easy to see now that her corruption broke forth in the journey , and that save throwing her over they had no choice but to board her up until they should come to some port with a lazarette . ''
It was the Sunday evening , and I had ridden over from the camp .
There were several of our fellows who were visiting the village , and we all left our horses at the inn .
Thence I had to walk to the Ravons , which was only separated by a single very large field extending to the very door .
I was about to start when the landlord ran after me .
`` Excuse me , lieutenant , '' said he , `` it is farther by the road , and yet I should advise you to take it . ''
`` It is a mile or more out of my way . ''
`` I will go by the shortest way , '' said I .
`` One way or the other , '' they said , in their blunt country fashion .
`` Let us hear that you are betrothed to Marie , or let us never see your face again . ''
I walked across the field lost in thought , with my mind entirely filled with the arguments of the old people and the skilful replies which I had made to them .
What should I do ?
I had promised to see Marie without delay .
What should I say to her when I did see her ?
Would I surrender to her beauty and turn my back upon my profession ?
If Etienne Gerard's sword were turned to a scythe , then indeed it was a bad day for the Emperor and France .
Or should I harden my heart and turn away from Marie ?
Or was it not possible that all might be reconciled ; that I might be a happy husband in Normandy but a brave soldier elsewhere ?
All these thoughts were buzzing in my head , when a sudden noise made me look up .
The moon had come from behind a cloud , and there was the bull before me .
It was for the house of the Ravons that I raced .
But even as I reached it , it flashed into my mind that there was no refuge for me there .
The door was locked .
The lower windows were barred .
The wall was high upon either side .
And the bull was nearer me with every stride .
But oh , my friends , it is at that supreme moment of danger that Etienne Gerard has ever risen to his height .
There was one path to safety , and in an instant I had chosen it .
Ah , the joy which I had brought to that humble household !
It warms my heart still when I think of it .
It did not seem too strange to them that I should fly in through the window , for who should be a hot-headed suitor if it is not a gallant Hussar ?
And if the door be locked , then what way is there but the window ?
Once more we assembled all four in the parlour , while the cobwebbed bottle was brought up and the ancient glories of the House of Ravon were unrolled before me .
Once more I see the heavy-raftered room , the two old smiling faces , the golden circle of the lamp-light , and she , my Marie , the bride of my youth , won so strangely , and kept for so short a time .
`` I 've an eye for a winner . ''
`` She ai n't making a match , surely ? ''
A drawer looked in from the bar .
`` If you please , Mr. Cribb , the lady's carriage is back again . ''
`` What is the chest measurement ? ''
`` Saving your presence , ma'am , I think not , and outside Gentleman Jackson my judgment would stand against any in the ring .
My lad here has beat Painter once , and will again , if your ladyship could see your way to find the battle-money . ''
`` I 'll do that , ma'am , with pleasure .
But , by your leave , does he have anything if he loses ? ''
The two men looked at each other in silence .
said she , stamping her foot furiously .
`` And this is training ! ''
The young man looked up with an angry face .
`` By George , it 's an amateur ! ''
cried Cribb , in amazement .
`` But you don't surely ask Tom Spring to train for three weeks to meet a Corinthian ? ''
The young man smiled rather grimly , as he turned up his cuff and looked at a puckered hole in his wrist .
`` I can do no more , ma'am .
He 's fit to fight for a kingdom .
Another week would see him stale . ''
The lady looked Spring over with the eye of a connoisseur .
`` No , '' said the lady .
`` It ca n't be helped .
You are too well known .
Your arrival would spread all over the town , and my plans might suffer .
It is quite out of the question that you should come . ''
`` I suppose , '' said Spring , `` you would have me bring my fightin ' shorts and my spiked shoes ? ''
`` No ; you will kindly bring nothing whatever which may point to your trade .
I would have you wear just those clothes in which I saw you first , such clothes as any mechanic or artisan might be expected to wear . ''
`` I beg pardon , sir , '' said he , `` but surely I have the honour of talking to Mr. Thomas Spring ? ''
They were standing under the shadow of the trees , so that he was very visible to them , while they were out of his sight .
Tom Spring looked hard at the man , who was still some hundreds of yards away .
He was a tall , powerful fellow , clad in a blue coat with gilt buttons , which gleamed in the sun .
He had white corded breeches and riding-boots .
He walked with a vigorous step , and with every few strides he struck his leg with a dog-whip which hung from his wrist .
There was a great suggestion of purpose and of energy in the man 's appearance and bearing .
said he , halting a few yards from him , and staring him up and down .
`` Who the devil are you , and where the devil did you come from , and what the devil are you doing on my property ? ''
They were standing facing one another in a grassy ring intersected by the path at the outlet of the wood .
The insolent and overbearing look had passed away from the amateur 's face , but a grim half-smile was on his lips and his eyes shone fiercely from under his tufted brows .
From the way in which he stood it was very clear that he was a past-master at the game .
Tom Spring , as he paced lightly to right and left , looking for an opening , became suddenly aware that neither with Stringer nor with the redoubtable Painter himself had he ever faced a more business-like opponent .
The amateur 's left was well forward , his guard low , his body leaning back from the haunches , and his head well out of danger .
Spring tried a light lead at the mark , and another at the face , but in an instant his adversary was on to him with a shower of sledge-hammer blows which it took him all his time to avoid .
He sprang back , but there was no getting away from that whirlwind of muscle and bone .
A heavy blow beat down his guard , a second landed on his shoulder , and over went the prize-fighter with the other on the top of him .
Both sprang to their feet , glared at each other , and fell into position once more .
`` Come on ! ''
But the other 's manhood would not have it so .
With a snarl of fury he cast his science to the winds , and rushed madly to slogging with both hands .
For a moment Spring was overborne .
Then he side-stepped swiftly ; there was the crash of his blow , and the amateur tossed up his arms and fell all asprawl , his great limbs outstretched , his disfigured face to the sky .
Spring shook her off with a cry of disgust , but she was back in an instant .
`` The fight 's over , ma'am .
I ca n't touch him . ''
`` A hundred pounds -- a clear hundred !
I have it here in my bodice .
Would you refuse a hundred ? ''
He turned on his heel .
She darted past him and tried to kick at the face of the prostrate man .
Spring dragged her roughly away , before she could do him a mischief .
`` Stand clear ! ''
he cried , giving her a shake .
`` You should take shame to hit a fallen man . ''
`` Well , '' he said , shrugging his broad shoulders , `` it was a fair fight .
I 've no complaint to make .
I was Jackson 's favourite pupil , but I give you best . ''
Suddenly his eyes lit upon the furious face of the woman .
`` Hulloa , Betty ! ''
`` So I have you to thank .
I might have guessed it when I had your letter . ''
`` You would n't , John ! ''
`` But where am I to go ? ''
asked the prize-fighter , gazing around him at the winding lanes .
Everywhere over the countryside he heard shoutings and whistlings .
It was clear that so long as she escaped the indignity of sharing his fate his employer was perfectly indifferent as to whether he got into trouble or not .
Tom Spring began to feel indifferent himself .
He was weary to death , his head was aching from the blows and falls which he had received , and his feelings were raw from the treatment which he had undergone .
He walked slowly some few yards down the lane , but had no idea which way to turn to reach Tunbridge Wells .
In the distance he heard the baying of dogs , and he guessed that they were being set upon his track .
In that case he could not hope to escape them , and might just as well await them where he was .
He picked out a heavy stake from the hedge , and he sat down moodily waiting , in a very dangerous temper , for what might befall him .
`` His lordship ! ''
The pugilist passed his hand over his battered face .
`` Well , Mr. Cordery , '' said he , `` low life is good enough for me . ''
The green slopes were dotted every here and there with dark clumps of gorse bushes , all alight with the flaming yellow blossoms .
To the left lay the broad Portsmouth Road curving over the hill , with a line of gaunt telegraph posts marking its course .
Beyond a huge white chasm opened in the grass , where the great Butser chalk quarry had been sunk .
From its depths rose the distant murmur of voices , and the clinking of hammers .
Just above it , between two curves of green hill , might be seen a little triangle of leaden-coloured sea , flecked with a single white sail .
Down the Portsmouth Road two women were walking , one elderly , florid and stout , with a yellow-brown Paisley shawl and a coarse serge dress , the other young and fair , with large grey eyes , and a face which was freckled like a plover 's egg .
Her neat white blouse with its trim black belt , and plain , close-cut skirt , gave her an air of refinement which was wanting in her companion , but there was sufficient resemblance between them to show that they were mother and daughter .
The one was gnarled and hardened and wrinkled by rough country work , the other fresh and pliant from the benign influence of the Board School ; but their step , their slope of the shoulders , and the movement of their hips as they walked , all marked them as of one blood .
`` There 's Bill . ''
`` That 's right , Dolly .
There 's some on your flounces .
But , Lor ' bless you , Dolly , it do n't matter to him .
It 's not your dress he looks at , but your face .
Now I should n't be very surprised if he had n't come over to ask you from father . ''
`` I 'm not so sure of that , mother . ''
The older woman threw up her hands .
I do n't know what the gals are coming to .
I do n't indeed .
It's the Board Schools as does it .
When I was a gal , if a decent young man came a-courtin ' , we gave him a 'Yes ' or a 'No . '
We did n't keep him hanging on like a half-clipped sheep .
Now , here are you with two of them at your beck , and you ca n't give an answer to either of them . ''
`` Why , mother , that 's it , '' cried the daughter , with something between a laugh and a sob .
`` May be if they came one at a time I 'd know what to say . ''
`` He 's not got one . ''
The old couple walked in front , and the other dropped behind , the young man lingering , and taking short steps to increase the distance .
`` I tell you so .
What more can I do ? ''
I wish he 'd come and ask me .
I 'd let him see what I wanted .
`` Very well , Miss Foster , '' said he , in a choking voice , `` that 's all right .
We know where we are now .
I did n't come here to be made a fool of , so good day to you . ''
He plucked at his hat , and walked furiously off in the direction from which they had come .
She looked after him , half frightened , in the hope of seeing some sign that he had relented , but he strode onwards with a rigid neck , and vanished at a turn of the lane .
When she turned again her other visitor was close upon her -- a thin , wiry , sharp-featured man with a sallow face , and a quick , nervous manner .
`` I am sure that father will be very glad to see you , Mr. Mason .
You must come in and have a glass of milk . ''
`` Then perhaps you know something of these ? ''
She took out the humble little sprig , and held it out to him with an arch questioning glance .
He took it and pressed it to his lips .
When Elias Mason left the farmhouse that evening , he drew Dolly aside at the door .
`` We shall be glad to see you , Mr .
`` Oh , I can not give any promise , you know . ''
Dolly looked , and saw for the first time that the nameless farm-labourer was crouching under the beech , his browns and yellows blending with the bark behind him .
`` I have not taken Elias yet , '' said she .
`` Nor him either . ''
`` It 's a common dog-rose . ''
`` No , but on my window-ledge . ''
`` And how will you be sure ? ''
`` Well then , mother , you need n't fret any more about me , for as sure as I stand here , I 'll tell you to-morrow which of them it is to be . ''
`` Who was it then ? ''
`` But d'you tell me you know Adam 's hand ? ''
`` The great hayrick is giving .
They 're all out trying to prop it up .
My , but it do blow ! ''
Thank God it was n't father ! ''
They were at the edge of the field now in which the accident had taken place .
The rick lay , a shapeless mound upon the earth , with a long thick pole protruding from it , which had formerly supported the tarpaulin drawn across it in case of rain .
Four men were walking slowly away , one shoulder humped , one hanging , and betwixt them they bore a formless clay-coloured bundle .
He might have been a clod of the earth that he tilled , so passive , so silent , still brown , for death itself could not have taken the burn from his skin , but with patient , bovine eyes looking out heavily from under half-closed lids .
He breathed jerkily , but he neither cried out nor groaned .
There was something almost brutal and inhuman in his absolute stolidity .
He asked no sympathy , for his life had been without it .
It was a broken tool rather than an injured man .
`` I 'm sure he 's welcome to my room , father . ''
`` No , no , lass .
Better leave it alone . ''
`` I fear that he is going home , '' said the doctor gravely .
`` But it 's out of the question to move him now .
He must lie where he is for better or for worse . ''
An old woman , the wife of a labourer , had been set to nurse him , for the doctor had said that he was not to be left .
She moved about the room , arranging and ordering , grumbling to herself from time to time at this lonely task which had been assigned to her .
There were some flowers in broken jars upon a cross-beam , and these , with a touch of tenderness , she carried over and arranged upon a deal packing-case beside the patient 's head .
He lay motionless , and as he breathed there came a gritty rubbing sound from somewhere in his side , but he followed his companion about with his eyes and even smiled once as she grouped the flowers round him .
`` And to think , '' said she , `` that it was only _him_ , after all . ''
I rang and ordered a carafe and glasses .
`` You are flushed , '' said I .
`` You do n't look the thing . ''
`` A touch of the sea will soon set you right . ''
`` Yes , I will .
I sleep aboard tonight .
You know , '' he continued , as the film settled down again over his eyes , `` I 've not slept well the last few nights .
I 've been troubled with theolololog -- that is to say , theolological -- hang it , '' with a desperate effort , `` with the doubts of theolologicians .
Wondering why the Almighty made us , you know , and why He made our heads swimmy , and fixed little pains into the small of our backs .
Maybe I 'll do better tonight . ''
He rose and steadied himself with an effort against the corner of the chair back .
His skin felt like a thin sheet of velvet beneath which lies a close-packed layer of small shot .
It was smooth to the touch at any one place , but to a finger passed along it , rough as a nutmeg grater .
`` No , it 's London .
It 's breathing bad air .
But tomorrow it 'll be all right .
There 's a surgeon aboard , so I shall be in safe hands .
I must be off now . ''
`` Seven days out from London , '' said he , `` and five in the gale .
Well , the Channel 's swept clear by this wind .
There 's three things for it .
She may have popped into port on the French side .
That 's like enough . ''
`` It was he !
He is dead ! ''
I muttered some lame words of doubt .
Well , those are the main facts about the death of John Vansittart , and his appearance to his wife somewhere about lat .
35 N. and long .
15 W. A clearer case of a wraith has seldom been made out , and since then it has been told as such , and put into print as such , and endorsed by a learned society as such , and so floated off with many others to support the recent theory of telepathy .
For myself , I hold telepathy to be proved , but I would snatch this one case from amid the evidence , and say that I do not think that it was the wraith of John Vansittart , but John Vansittart himself whom we saw that night leaping into the moonlight out of the depths of the Atlantic .
It has ever been my belief that some strange chance -- one of those chances which seem so improbable and yet so constantly occur -- had becalmed us over the very spot where the man had been buried a week before .
For the rest , the surgeon tells me that the leaden weight was not too firmly fixed , and that seven days bring about changes which fetch a body to the surface .
Coming from the depth to which the weight would have sunk it , he explains that it might well attain such a velocity as to carry it clear of the water .
Such is my own explanation of the matter , and if you ask me what then became of the body , I must recall to you that snapping , crackling sound , with the swirl in the water .
The shark is a surface feeder and is plentiful in those parts .
`` That was why I took you into partnership , '' the other retorted , drumming nervously with his fingers upon the table .
`` I invent , you build .
It is a fair division of labour . ''
Brown pursed up his lips , as though by no means satisfied upon the point .
Seeing , however , that further argument was useless , he turned his attention to the machine , which was shivering and rocking with each swing of its arms , as though a very little more would send it skimming from the table .
`` All right ? ''
Pericord had thrown open the shutters and the mellow evening light streamed in through the discoloured windows .
Brown drew a knife from his pocket and cut the pack-thread with which the canvas was secured .
As the brown covering fell away it disclosed two great yellow metal fans .
These he leaned carefully against the wall .
The girdle , the connecting-bands , and the motor were then in turn unpacked .
It was dark before all was set out in order .
A lamp was lit , and by its light the two men continued to tighten screws , clinch rivets , and make the last preparations for their experiment .
`` We must have something to eat , '' Brown remarked , laying out some provisions which he had brought with him .
`` I shall , '' cried his companion eagerly .
`` What we do to-night is likely to be historic . ''
`` That is true , '' said Pericord , thoughtfully .
When all was ready , the door of the barn was closed , and the lamp balanced upon an empty packing-case .
The bag of bricks was laid upon two trestles , and the broad steel girdle was buckled round it .
Then the great flanges , the wires , and the metal box containing the motor were in turn attached to the girdle .
Last of all a flat steel rudder , shaped like a fish 's tail , was secured to the bottom of the sack .
`` Under my own , '' said Brown , sullenly .
`` I consider that I have the best right to it . ''
`` Keep your hands off ! ''
he said , drawing a knife from his pocket .
`` I will defend myself if you attack me . ''
`` I will not .
I did the work . ''
`` Will you give it up ? ''
Pericord sat silently on the edge of the case , staring blankly down , and shivering like one with the ague , while the great Brown-Pericord Motor boomed and hurtled above him .
How long he sat there can never be known .
It might have been minutes or it might have been hours .
A thousand mad schemes flashed through his dazed brain .
It was true that he had been only the indirect cause .
But who would believe that ?
He glanced down at his blood-spattered clothing .
Everything was against him .
It would be better to fly than to give himself up , relying upon his innocence .
No one in London knew where they were .
If he could dispose of the body he might have a few days clear before any suspicion would be aroused .
It is a most lonely spot , and the walks are picturesque in the extreme .
The farm consists of grazing land lying at the bottom of an irregular valley .
On each side are the fantastic limestone hills , formed of rock so soft that you can break it away with your hands .
All this country is hollow .
Could you strike it with some gigantic hammer it would boom like a drum , or possibly cave in altogether and expose some huge subterranean sea .
A great sea there must surely be , for on all sides the streams run into the mountain itself , never to reappear .
There are gaps everywhere amid the rocks , and when you pass through them you find yourself in great caverns , which wind down into the bowels of the earth .
I have a small bicycle lamp , and it is a perpetual joy to me to carry it into these weird solitudes , and to see the wonderful silver and black effect when I throw its light upon the stalactites which drape the lofty roofs .
Shut off the lamp , and you are in the blackest darkness .
Turn it on , and it is a scene from the Arabian Nights .
Strange how superstitious these countrymen are !
I should have thought better of young Armitage , for he is a man of some education and character , and a very fine fellow for his station in life .
I was standing at the Blue John Gap when he came across the field to me .
And now comes the queer point about the whole business .
I was still standing near the mouth of the cave turning over in my mind the various statements of Armitage , and reflecting how readily they could be explained away , when suddenly , from the depth of the tunnel beside me , there issued a most extraordinary sound .
How shall I describe it ?
First of all it seemed to be a great distance away , far down in the bowels of the earth .
Secondly , in spite of this suggestion of distance , it was very loud .
Lastly , it was not a boom , nor a crash , such as one would associate with falling water or tumbling rock , but it was a high whine , tremulous and vibrating , almost like the whinnying of a horse .
It was certainly a most remarkable experience , and one which for a moment , I must admit , gave a new significance to Armitage 's words .
I waited by the Blue John Gap for half an hour or more , but there was no return of the sound , so at last I wandered back to the farmhouse , rather mystified by what had occurred .
Decidedly I shall explore that cavern when my strength is restored .
Of course , Armitage 's explanation is too absurd for discussion , and yet that sound was certainly very strange .
It still rings in my ears as I write .
I observed this morning that among the numerous tufts of sheep 's wool which lay among the bushes near the cavern there was one which was smeared with blood .
Of course , my reason tells me that if sheep wander into such rocky places they are likely to injure themselves , and yet somehow that splash of crimson gave me a sudden shock , and for a moment I found myself shrinking back in horror from the old Roman arch .
A fetid breath seemed to ooze from the black depths into which I peered .
Could it indeed be possible that some nameless thing , some dreadful presence , was lurking down yonder ?
I should have been incapable of such feelings in the days of my strength , but one grows more nervous and fanciful when one 's health is shaken .
How long this lasted I can not say .
It may have been for an hour , it may have been for several .
Suddenly I sat up on my rock couch , with every nerve thrilling and every sense acutely on the alert .
Beyond all doubt I had heard a sound -- some sound very distinct from the gurgling of the waters .
It had passed , but the reverberation of it still lingered in my ear .
Was it a search party ?
They would most certainly have shouted , and vague as this sound was which had wakened me , it was very distinct from the human voice .
I sat palpitating and hardly daring to breathe .
There it was again !
Now it had become continuous .
It was a tread -- yes , surely it was the tread of some living creature .
But what a tread it was !
It gave one the impression of enormous weight carried upon sponge-like feet , which gave forth a muffled but ear-filling sound .
The darkness was as complete as ever , but the tread was regular and decisive .
And it was coming beyond all question in my direction .
-- I was laid up in bed for two days after my incredible adventure in the cavern .
I use the adjective with a very definite meaning , for I have had an experience since which has shocked me almost as much as the other .
I have said that I was looking round for someone who could advise me .
There is a Dr. Mark Johnson who practices some few miles away , to whom I had a note of recommendation from Professor Saunderson .
To him I drove , when I was strong enough to get about , and I recounted to him my whole strange experience .
He listened intently , and then carefully examined me , paying special attention to my reflexes and to the pupils of my eyes .
When he had finished , he refused to discuss my adventure , saying that it was entirely beyond him , but he gave me the card of a Mr. Picton at Castleton , with the advice that I should instantly go to him and tell him the story exactly as I had done to himself .
He was , according to my adviser , the very man who was pre-eminently suited to help me .
I went on to the station , therefore , and made my way to the little town , which is some ten miles away .
Mr. Picton appeared to be a man of importance , as his brass plate was displayed upon the door of a considerable building on the outskirts of the town .
I was about to ring his bell , when some misgiving came into my mind , and , crossing to a neighbouring shop , I asked the man behind the counter if he could tell me anything of Mr. Picton .
`` Why , '' said he , `` he is the best mad doctor in Derbyshire , and yonder is his asylum . ''
You can imagine that it was not long before I had shaken the dust of Castleton from my feet and returned to the farm , cursing all unimaginative pedants who can not conceive that there may be things in creation which have never yet chanced to come across their mole 's vision .
After all , now that I am cooler , I can afford to admit that I have been no more sympathetic to Armitage than Dr. Johnson has been to me .
My splendid lamp cast a brilliant flood of vivid light in front of me , very different from the yellow glimmer which had aided me down the same passage only twelve days before .
As I ran , I saw the great beast lurching along before me , its huge bulk filling up the whole space from wall to wall .
Its hair looked like coarse faded oakum , and hung down in long , dense masses which swayed as it moved .
It was like an enormous unclipped sheep in its fleece , but in size it was far larger than the largest elephant , and its breadth seemed to be nearly as great as its height .
It fills me with amazement now to think that I should have dared to follow such a horror into the bowels of the earth , but when one's blood is up , and when one 's quarry seems to be flying , the old primeval hunting-spirit awakes and prudence is cast to the wind .
Rifle in hand , I ran at the top of my speed upon the trail of the monster .
I had seen that the creature was swift .
Now I was to find out to my cost that it was also very cunning .
I had imagined that it was in panic flight , and that I had only to pursue it .
The idea that it might turn upon me never entered my excited brain .
I have already explained that the passage down which I was racing opened into a great central cave .
Into this I rushed , fearful lest I should lose all trace of the beast .
But he had turned upon his own traces , and in a moment we were face to face .
When I came to myself I was back in the farm-house of the Allertons .
Two days had passed since my terrible adventure in the Blue John Gap .
It seems that I had lain all night in the cave insensible from concussion of the brain , with my left arm and two ribs badly fractured .
In the morning my note had been found , a search party of a dozen farmers assembled , and I had been tracked down and carried back to my bedroom , where I had lain in high delirium ever since .
There was , it seems , no sign of the creature , and no bloodstain which would show that my bullet had found him as he passed .
Save for my own plight and the marks upon the mud , there was nothing to prove that what I said was true .
Six weeks have now elapsed , and I am able to sit out once more in the sunshine .
Just opposite me is the steep hillside , grey with shaly rock , and yonder on its flank is the dark cleft which marks the opening of the Blue John Gap .
But it is no longer a source of terror .
Never again through that ill-omened tunnel shall any strange shape flit out into the world of men .
The educated and the scientific , the Dr. Johnsons and the like , may smile at my narrative , but the poorer folk of the countryside had never a doubt as to its truth .
On the day after my recovering consciousness they assembled in their hundreds round the Blue John Gap .
As the _Castleton Courier_ said :
One more experience of this wonderful day -- the most crowded with impressions of my whole life .
At night we take a car and drive north , and ever north , until at a late hour we halt and climb a hill in the darkness .
Below is a wonderful sight .
Down on the flats , in a huge semi-circle , lights are rising and falling .
They are very brilliant , going up for a few seconds and then dying down .
Sometimes a dozen are in the air at one time .
There are the dull thuds of explosions and an occasional rat-tat-tat .
I have seen nothing like it , but the nearest comparison would be an enormous ten-mile railway station in full swing at night , with signals winking , lamps waving , engines hissing and carriages bumping .
It is a terrible place down yonder , a place which will live as long as military history is written , for it is the Ypres Salient .
What a salient it is , too !
A huge curve , as outlined by the lights , needing only a little more to be an encirclement .
Something caught the rope as it closed , and that something was the British soldier .
But it is a perilous place still by day and by night .
Never shall I forget the impression of ceaseless , malignant activity which was borne in upon me by the white , winking lights , the red sudden glares , and the horrible thudding noises in that place of death beneath me .
The civilian cuts a ridiculous figure when he enlarges upon small adventures which may come his way -- adventures which the soldier endures in silence as part of his everyday life .
On this occasion , however , the episode was all our own , and had a sporting flavour in it which made it dramatic .
I know now the feeling of tense expectation with which the driven grouse whirrs onwards towards the butt .
I have been behind the butt before now , and it is only poetic justice that I should see the matter from the other point of view .
As we approached Ronchi we could see shrapnel breaking over the road in front of us , but we had not yet realised that it was precisely for vehicles that the Austrians were waiting , and that they had the range marked out to a yard .
We went down the road all out at a steady fifty miles an hour .
The village was near , and it seemed that we had got past the place of danger .
We had in fact just reached it .
At this moment there was a noise as if the whole four tyres had gone simultaneously , a most terrific bang in our very ears , merging into a second sound like a reverberating blow upon an enormous gong .
As I glanced up I saw three clouds immediately above my head , two of them white and the other of a rusty red .
The air was full of flying metal , and the road , as we were told afterwards by an observer , was all churned up by it .
The metal base of one of the shells was found plumb in the middle of the road just where our motor had been .
There is no use telling me Austrian gunners ca n't shoot .
Our difficulties were by no means over .
We found an ambulance lorry and a little group of infantry huddled under the same shelter with the expression of people who had been caught in the rain .
The road beyond was under heavy fire as well as that by which we had come .
Had the Ostro-Boches dropped a high-explosive upon us they would have had a good mixed bag .
But apparently they were only out for fancy shooting and disdained a sitter .
Presently there came a lull and the lorry moved on , but we soon heard a burst of firing which showed that they were after it .
My companions had decided that it was out of the question for us to finish our excursion .
We waited for some time therefore and were able finally to make our retreat on foot , being joined later by the car .
So ended my visit to Monfalcone , the place I did not reach .
I hear that two 10,000-ton steamers were left on the stocks there by the Austrians , but were disabled before they retired .
Their cabin basins and other fittings are now adorning the Italian dug-outs .
Nothing could be more cool or methodical than the Italian arrangements on the Trentino front .
There are no troops who would not have been forced back by the Austrian fire .
It corresponded with the French experience at Verdun , or ours at the second battle of Ypres .
It may well occur again if the Austrians get their guns forward .
But at such a rate it would take them a long time to make any real impression .
One can not look at the officers and men without seeing that their spirit and confidence are high .
In answer to my inquiry they assure me that there is little difference between the troops of the northern provinces and those of the south .
Even among the snows of the Alps they tell me that the Sicilians gave an excellent account of themselves .
Germany set out to bleed France white .
Well , she has done so .
France is full of widows and orphans from end to end .
Perhaps in proportion to her population she has suffered the most of all .
But in carrying out her hellish mission Germany has bled herself white also .
Her heavy sword has done its work , but the keen French rapier has not lost its skill .
France will stand at last , weak and tottering , with her huge enemy dead at her feet .
But it is a fearsome business to see -- such a business as the world never looked upon before .
It is fearful for the French .
It is fearful for the Germans .
May God 's curse rest upon the arrogant men and the unholy ambitions which let loose this horror upon humanity !
Seeing what they have done , and knowing that they have done it , one would think that mortal brain would grow crazy under the weight .
Perhaps the central brain of all was crazy from the first .
But what sort of government is it under which one crazy brain can wreck mankind !
But this is digression .
I had set out to say something of a day's experience of the French front , though I shall write with a fuller pen when I return from the Argonne .
It was for Soissons that we made , passing on the way a part of the scene of our own early operations , including the battlefield of Villers Cotteret -- just such a wood as I had imagined .
My companion 's nephew was one of those Guards ' officers whose bodies rest now in the village cemetery , with a little British Jack still flying above them .
They lie together , and their grave is tended with pious care .
Among the trees beside the road were other graves of soldiers , buried where they had fallen .
'So look around -- and choose your ground -- and take your rest . '
I am led to a cunning loop-hole , and have a glimpse through it of a little framed picture of French countryside .
There are fields , a road , a sloping hill beyond with trees .
Quite close , about thirty or forty yards away , was a low , red-tiled house .
'They are there , ' said our guide .
'That is their outpost .
We can hear them cough . '
Only the guns were coughing that morning , so we heard nothing , but it was certainly wonderful to be so near to the enemy and yet in such peace .
I suppose wondering visitors from Berlin are brought up also to hear the French cough .
Modern warfare has certainly some extraordinary sides .
There was one little gun which fascinated me , and I stood for some time watching it .
Its three gunners , enormous helmeted men , evidently loved it , and touched it with a swift but tender touch in every movement .
When it was fired it ran up an inclined plane to take off the recoil , rushing up and then turning and rattling down again upon the gunners who were used to its ways .
The first time it did it , I was standing behind it , and I do n't know which moved quickest -- the gun or I .
French officers above a certain rank develop and show their own individuality .
In the lower grades the conditions of service enforce a certain uniformity .
The British officer is a British gentleman first , and an officer afterwards .
The Frenchman is an officer first , though none the less the gentleman stands behind it .
One very strange type we met , however , in these Argonne Woods .
He was a French-Canadian who had been a French soldier , had founded a homestead in far Alberta , and had now come back of his own will , though a naturalised Briton , to the old flag .
He spoke English of a kind , the quality and quantity being equally extraordinary .
It poured from him and was , so far as it was intelligible , of the woolly Western variety .
His views on the Germans were the most emphatic we had met .
'These Godam sons of ' -- well , let us say 'Canines ! '
he would shriek , shaking his fist at the woods to the north of him .
A good man was our compatriot , for he had a very recent Legion of Honour pinned upon his breast .
He had been put with a few men on Hill 285 , a sort of volcano stuffed with mines , and was told to telephone when he needed relief .
He refused to telephone and remained there for three weeks .
'We sit like a rabbit in his hall , ' he explained .
He had only one grievance .
There were many wild boars in the forest , but the infantry were too busy to get them .
'The Godam Artillaree he get the wild pig ! '
Out of his pocket he pulled a picture of a frame-house with snow round it , and a lady with two children on the stoop .
It was his homestead at Trochu , seventy miles north of Calgary .
`` Ladies and gentlemen , '' said he , plunging boldly into the rapid but broken stream of his English , `` to-morrow you will remember not to forget to rise when the gong strikes you for to compress the journey before twelve o'clock .
Having arrived at the place where the donkeys expect us , we shall ride five miles over the desert , passing a very fine temple of Ammon-ra which dates itself from the eighteenth dynasty upon the way , and so reach the celebrated pulpit rock of Abou-sir .
The pulpit rock is supposed to have been called so because it is a rock like a pulpit .
When you have reached it you will know that you are on the very edge of civilisation , and that very little more will take you into the country of the Dervishes , which will be obvious to you at the top .
Having passed the summit , you will perceive the full extremity of the second cataract , embracing wild natural beauties of the most dreadful variety .
Here all very famous people carve their names , -- and so you will carve your names also . ''
Mansoor waited expectantly for a titter , and bowed to it when it arrived .
`` You will then return to Wady Haifa , and there remain two hours to suspect ( sp . )
the Camel Corps , including the grooming of the beasts , and the bazaar before returning , so I wish you a very happy good-night . ''
There was a gleam of his white teeth in the lamplight , and then his long , dark petticoats , his short English cover-coat , and his red tarboosh vanished successively down the ladder .
The low buzz of conversation which had been suspended by his coming broke out anew .
`` I never hope to keep up with it , '' said her aunt .
`` When I am safe back in Commonwealth Avenue , and there 's no dragoman to hustle me around , I 'll have time to read about it all , and then I expect I shall begin to enthuse and want to come right back again .
But it 's just too good of you , Mr. Stephens , to try and keep us informed . ''
`` Yes , in business , '' said Sadie , demurely , and there was a silence .
But the American lady had risen , and her face showed that her nerves had been ruffled .
`` You do n't say ! ''
`` But I have heard of raids , Monsieur Fardet , and I 've read of battles , too , when the Arabs tried to invade Egypt .
It was only two days ago that we passed Toski , where the dragoman said there had been a fight .
Is that all bluff also ? ''
`` No , monsieur ; it is the same for all . ''
`` Well , I suppose they know their own business best , but they seem to me to take a great deal of trouble , and to get mighty little in exchange .
If they do n't mind keeping order and guarding the frontier , with a constant war against the Dervishes on their hands , I do n't know why any one should object .
I suppose no one denies that the prosperity of the country has increased enormously since they came .
The revenue returns show that .
They tell me , also , that the poorer folks have justice , which they never had before . ''
The young American hesitated for a little , debating in his mind whether he should not go down and post up the daily record of his impressions which he kept for his home-staying sister .
But the cigars of Colonel Cochrane and of Cecil Brown were still twinkling in the far corner of the deck , and the student was acquisitive in the search of information .
He did not quite know how to lead up to the matter , but the Colonel very soon did it for him .
`` What is to prevent them from coming down on that side ? ''
`` Nothing , except their fears .
The coming , of course , would be absolutely simple .
The difficulty would lie in the return .
They might find it hard to get back if their camels were spent and the Haifa garrison with their beasts fresh got on their track .
They know it as well as we do , and it has kept them from trying . ''
`` Come now , Colonel , '' cried Headingly , laughing , `` surely you do n't mean that they would shift the pyramids ? ''
`` The world is small , and it grows smaller every day .
It 's a single organic body , and one spot of gangrene is enough to vitiate the whole .
There 's no room upon it for dishonest , defaulting , tyrannical , irresponsible Governments .
As long as they exist they will always be centres of trouble and of danger .
But there are many races which appear to be so incapable of improvement that we can never hope to get a good Government out of them .
What is to be done , then ?
The former device of Providence in such a case was extermination by some more virile stock .
An Attila or a Tamerlane pruned off the weaker branch .
Now , we have a more merciful substitution of rulers , or even of mere advice from a more advanced race .
That is the case with the Central Asian Khanates and with the protected States of India .
If the work has to be done , and if we are the best fitted for the work , then I think that it would be a cowardice and a crime to shirk it . ''
`` There is a house near ours , down on the Back Bay at Boston , which just ruins the whole prospect , '' said he .
`` It has old chairs littered about the stoop , and the shingles are loose , and the garden runs wild ; but I do n't know that the neighbours are exactly justified in rushing in , and stamping around , and running the thing on their own lines . ''
`` Not if it were on fire ? ''
Headingly laughed , and rose from his camp-stool .
His voice was strong and thick like his figure .
`` Well , who could help feeling good with this dry , clear air , and the blue sky and the crisp , yellow sand , and a superb donkey to carry you .
I 've just got everything in the world to make me happy . ''
`` I suppose you never know what it is to be sad ? ''
`` Those are his putties , Miss Adams , '' said Colonel Cochrane , looking back at her .
`` We have found in India that they are the best support to the leg in marching .
They are very much better than any stocking . ''
`` Well , you do n't say !
They remind me mostly of a sick horse .
But it's elegant to have the soldiers with us , though Monsieur Fardet tells me there 's nothing for us to be scared about . ''
`` I am not so sure of that , Miss Adams , '' said the Colonel .
`` I have seen these fellows in the field , and I assure you that I have the utmost confidence in their steadiness . ''
`` Well , I 'll take your word without trying , '' said Miss Adams , with a decision which made every one smile .
[ Illustration : He pointed up with his donkey-whip p66 ]
`` Is n't it a sacrilege ? ''
said the Oxford man , at last .
said Cecil Brown , looking over the desert with his dark , intolerant eyes .
`` If one could come wandering here alone -- stumble upon it by chance , as it were -- and find one 's self in absolute solitude in the dim light of the temple , with these grotesque figures all around , it would be perfectly overwhelming .
A man would be prostrated with wonder and awe .
But when Belmont is puffing his bulldog pipe , and Stuart is wheezing , and Miss Sadie Adams is laughing -- -- ''
The Oxford man laughed in his gentle , tired fashion .
Belmont gave a short gruff laugh .
`` Auntie , I 'm surprised at you ! ''
`` I suppose there 's no help for us ? ''
The soldier next them had sat down abruptly , and leaned forward over his knees .
His movement and attitude were so natural that it was hard to realise that he had been shot through the head .
He neither stirred nor groaned .
His comrades bent over him for a moment , and then , shrugging their shoulders , they turned their dark faces to the Arabs once more .
Belmont picked up the dead man 's Martini and his ammunition-pouch .
`` You 're a famous shot , Belmont , '' cried the Colonel .
`` I 've heard of you as one of the cracks .
Do n't , you think you could pick off their leader ? ''
`` Which is he ? ''
Belmont thrust in his cartridge and altered the sights .
`` It 's a shocking bad light for judging distance , '' said he .
`` This is where the low point-blank trajectory of the Lee-Metford comes in useful .
Well , we'll try him at five hundred . ''
He fired , but there was no change in the white camel or the peering rider .
`` Did you see any sand fly ? ''
`` No ; I saw nothing . ''
`` I fancy I took my sight a trifle too full . ''
`` Try him again . ''
Man and rifle and rock were equally steady , but again the camel and chief remained unharmed .
The third shot must have been nearer , for he moved a _few_ paces to the right , as if he were becoming restless .
`` It 's this confounded light , '' he cried , and his cheeks flushed with annoyance .
`` Think of my wasting three cartridges in that fashion !
If I had him at Bisley I 'd shoot the turban off him , but this vibrating glare means refraction .
What 's the matter with the Frenchman ? ''
Then a spear-head flashed from behind a rock with a quick , vicious upward thrust , the clergyman fell upon his hands and knees , and the horde poured over him to seize their unresisting victims .
Knives glimmered before their eyes , rude hands clutched at their wrists and at their throats , and then , with brutal and unreasoning violence , they were hauled and pushed down the steep , winding path to where the camels were waiting below .
The Frenchman waved his unwounded hand as he walked .
`` Vive le Khalifa !
Vive le Madhi ! ''
he shouted , until a blow from behind with the butt-end of a Remington beat him into silence .
The excited gestures of Monsieur Fardet drew the sinister eyes of the Baggara chief upon him .
Again he asked a curt question , and Mansoor , kneeling in front of him , answered it .
`` The chief asks what religion you call your own , '' said Mansoor .
`` The Khalifa , he says , has no necessity for any friendship from those who are infidels and unbelievers . ''
`` And if not ? ''
`` You will fare in the same way as the others . ''
`` He says , Monsieur Fardet , '' said the dragoman , `` that if you speak again he will make a trough out of you for the dogs to feed from .
Say nothing to anger him , sir , for he is now talking what is to be done with us . ''
The Colonel shook his head .
`` What am I to do ?
For God 's sake , tell me what I am to do , Mr. Belmont !
I am an old woman .
I have had my day .
I could stand it if it was only myself .
But Sadie -- I am clean crazed when I think of her .
There 's her mother waiting at home , and I -- -- '' She clasped her thin hands together in the agony of her thoughts .
`` Auntie will faint if she does not get water , '' said Sadie .
`` Oh , Mr. Stephens , is there nothing we could do ? ''
`` My Arabic wo n't bear much strain .
I do n't know what he is saying , '' said he .
`` He 's trying to speak English .
Tippy Tilly is as near as he can get to Egyptian Artillery .
He has served in the Egyptian Artillery under Bimbashi Mortimer .
He was taken prisoner when Hicks Pasha was destroyed , and had to turn Dervish to save his skin .
How 's that ? ''
`` The reis was a sleepy old crock , '' Belmont continued ; `` but I have absolute confidence in the promptness and decision of my wife .
She would insist upon an immediate alarm being given .
Suppose they started back at two-thirty , they should be at Haifa by three , since the journey is down stream .
How long did they say that it took to turn out the Camel Corps ? ''
Slowly the sun sank towards the west , and their shadows began to trail along the path where their hearts would go .
It was cooler , and a desert breeze had sprung up , whispering over the rolling , stone-strewed plain .
The Emir at their head had called his lieutenant to his side , and the pair had peered about , their eyes shaded by their hands , looking for some landmark .
Then , with a satisfied grunt , the chiefs camel had seemed to break short off at its knees , and then at its hocks , going down in three curious , broken-jointed jerks until its stomach was stretched upon the ground .
As each succeeding camel reached the spot it lay down also , until they were all stretched in one long line .
The riders sprang off , and laid out the chopped tibbin upon cloths in front of them , for no well-bred camel will eat from the ground .
In their gentle eyes , their quiet , leisurely way of eating , and their condescending , mincing manner , there was something both feminine and genteel , as though a party of prim old maids had foregathered in the heart of the Libyan desert .
`` Ladies and gentlemen , '' Mansoor began , with something of his old consequential manner ; but a glare from the Colonel 's eyes struck the words from his lips , and he broke away into a long , whimpering excuse for his conduct .
Fardet , the Frenchman , was sitting alone with his chin resting upon his hands , and his elbows upon his knees , staring miserably out over the desert , when Belmont saw him start suddenly and prick up his head like a dog who hears a strange step .
Then , with clenched fingers , he bent his face forward and stared fixedly towards the black eastern hills through which they had passed .
Belmont followed his gaze , and , yes -- yes -- there was something moving there !
He saw the twinkle of metal , and the sudden gleam and flutter of some white garment .
`` Norah , darling , '' he shouted , `` keep your heart up !
I 'm here , and it is all well ! ''
`` I 'm uneasy about Mrs. Shlesinger and the child , '' said Colonel Cochrane .
`` I can see your wife , Belmont , but I can see no one else . ''
[ Illustration : They have n't hurt you , Norah , have they p139 ]
`` Has any news gone to the town ? ''
[ Illustration : Hour of Arab prayer p142 ]
`` No use , sir , '' said Mansoor .
`` They say that he is too fat , and that they will not take him any farther .
He will die , they say , and why should they trouble about him ? ''
[ Illustration : The old soldier fell forward gasping p145 ]
The long line of camels moved as noiselessly as ghosts across the desert .
Before and behind were the silent swaying white figures of the Arabs .
Not a sound anywhere , not the very faintest sound , until far away behind them they heard a human voice singing in a strong , droning , unmusical fashion .
It had the strangest effect , this far-away voice , in that huge inarticulate wilderness .
And then there came a well-known rhythm into that distant chant , and they could almost hear the words : We nightly pitch our moving tent A day 's march nearer home .
The Colonel had straightened himself , though he still gasped a little in his breathing .
It still comes back in their dreams to those who are left , that long night 's march in the desert .
It was like a dream itself , the silence of it as they were borne forward upon those soft , shuffling sponge feet , and the flitting , flickering figures which oscillated upon every side of them .
The whole universe seemed to be hung as a monstrous time-dial in front of them .
A star would glimmer like a lantern on the very level of their path .
They looked again , and it was a hand's-breadth up , and another was shining beneath it .
Hour after hour the broad stream flowed sedately across the deep blue background , worlds and systems drifting majestically overhead , and pouring over the dark horizon .
In their vastness and their beauty there was a vague consolation to the prisoners for their own fate , and their own individuality seemed trivial and unimportant amid the play of such tremendous forces .
Slowly the grand procession swept across the heaven , first climbing , then hanging long with little apparent motion , and then sinking grandly downwards , until away in the east the first cold grey glimmer appeared , and their own haggard faces shocked each other 's sight .
`` Yes , if it would end right here one might say so .
But if it goes on and on for a few weeks or months of misery , and then ends in death , I don't know where we reap the benefit of those improvements of character which it brings .
Suppose you escape , what will you do ' ? ''
`` And you without your coat ? ''
`` Can I speak to you , Colonel Cochrane ? ''
`` He said that there were eight Egyptian soldiers among the Arabs -- six black and two fellaheen .
He said that he wished to have your promise that they should all have very good reward if they helped you to escape . ''
Mansoor shook his head .
`` Too much danger to try , '' said he .
`` Suppose you try and fail , then that will be the end to all of us .
I will go tell what you have said . ''
He strolled off to where the old negro gunner was grooming his camel and waiting for his reply .
`` What do you say , Norah ? ''
`` Well then , you , Miss Sadie ?
You , Miss Adams ?
It is only just to say it once , and you will be saved . ''
`` Wad Ibrahim would , but the Emir Abderrahman is a terrible man .
I advise you to give in to him . ''
`` I was yesterday morning .
Perhaps I will be to-morrow morning .
I serve the Lord as long as what He ask seem reasonable ; but this is very otherwise . ''
`` Not so much as that , '' said the Colonel .
`` We could not have been moving more than fourteen or fifteen hours , and a camel seldom goes more than two and a half miles an hour unless he is trotting .
That would give about forty miles , but still it is , I fear , rather far for a rescue .
I do n't know that we are much the better for this postponement .
What have we to hope for ?
We may just as well take our gruel . ''
`` Never say die ! ''
cried the cheery Irishman .
`` There 's plenty of time between this and mid-day .
Hamilton and Hedley of the Camel Corps are good boys , and they 'll be after us like a streak .
They 'll have no baggage-camels to hold them back , you can lay your life on that !
Little did I think , when I dined with them at mess that last night , and they were telling me all their precautions against a raid , that I should depend upon them for our lives . ''
`` It 's devilish pretty , '' said the Colonel , looking about him .
`` I always had an idea that I should like to die in a real , good , yellow London fog .
You could n't change for the worse . ''
`` What is it ? ''
asked Belmont , who found the dragoman riding at his elbow .
`` Why are we going out of our course ? ''
`` Well , Cochrane , it 's all in our favour .
The longer the chase the better chance for the fresh camels ! ''
and for the hundredth time he looked back at the long , hard skyline behind them .
There was the great , empty , dun-coloured desert , but where the glint of steel or the twinkle of white helmet for which he yearned ?
The sun was now high , and it shone with dazzling brightness upon the bleached bones which lay upon the road .
Again the torture of thirst fell upon the little group of survivors , and again , as they rode with withered tongues and crusted lips , a vision of the saloon of the _Korosko_ danced like a mirage before their eyes , and they saw the white napery , the wine-cards by the places , the long necks of the bottles , the siphons upon the sideboard .
Sadie , who had borne up so well , became suddenly hysterical , and her shrieks of senseless laughter jarred horribly upon their nerves .
Her aunt on one side of her and Mr. Stephens on the other did all they could to soothe her , and at last the weary , over-strung girl relapsed into something between a sleep and a faint , hanging limp over her pommel , and only kept from falling by the friends who clustered round her .
The baggage-camels were as weary as their riders , and again and again they had to jerk at their nose-ropes to prevent them from lying down .
From horizon to horizon stretched that one hugh arch of speckless blue , and up its monstrous concavity crept the inexorable sun , like some splendid but barbarous deity , who claimed a tribute of human suffering as his immemorial right .
[ Illustration : Sword in his hand p184 ]
[ Illustration : Grimy bodies lay senseless under the palm-trees p188 ]
`` Thank you , '' said he ; `` speak slowly , so that I may understand you . ''
The black soldier shrugged his shoulders .
He understood enough to set a little spring of hope bubbling in his heart .
The last terrible day had left its mark in his livid face and his hair , which was turning rapidly to grey .
He might have been the father of the spruce , well-preserved soldier who had paced with straight back and military stride up and down the saloon deck of the _Korosko_ .
The negro turned and crept away for some little distance , where he was met by one of his fellaheen comrades , Mehemet Ali , who had charge of the camels .
The two argued for some little time , -- for those three hundred golden pieces were not to be lightly resigned .
Then the negro crept back to Colonel Cochrane .
`` Mehemet Ali has agreed , '' said he .
`` He has gone to put the nose-rope upon three more of the camels .
But it is foolishness , and we are all going to our death .
Now come with me , and we shall awaken the women and tell them . ''
`` It looks like it .
Something has scared them . ''
`` I think they have seen something to frighten them .
I believe that the soldiers are behind us .
They have given the order to fill the waterskins , and be ready for a start when the darkness comes .
But I am ordered to gather you together , for the Moolah is coming to convert you all .
I have already told him that you are all very much inclined to think the same with him . ''
`` Come on , Fardet !
We depend upon you , '' said Belmont .
`` I 'll do nothing of the sort , '' snapped the Colonel .
`` Besides , that is merely a personal quarrel , '' Belmont continued , hastily .
`` It is for the good of the whole party that we wish you to speak with the Moolah , because we all feel that you are the best man for the job . ''
The Moolah looked from one to the other , and the kindly expression began to fade away from his large , baggy face .
His mouth drew down at the corners , and became hard and severe .
`` I am sure , Monsieur Fardet , '' said Mrs. Belmont , `` that you , who are a Frenchman , and therefore a man of gallantry and honour , would not permit your own wounded feelings to interfere with the fulfilment of your promise and your duty towards three helpless ladies . ''
Fardet was on his feet in an instant , with his hand over his heart .
`` Things are looking up , '' cried the Colonel .
`` By George , I think we are going to come through all right .
The Gippy Camel Corps are hot on our trail . ''
`` Sure , we 're in God 's hands , anyway , '' said his wife , in her soothing , Irish voice .
`` Kneel down with me , John , dear , if it 's the last time , and pray that , earth or heaven , we may not be divided . ''
`` Let him do what he likes ! ''
said the obstinate Irishman ; `` we will rise when our prayers are finished , and not before . ''
`` Do n't be a fool , Belmont ! ''
cried the Colonel ; `` everything depends upon our humouring them .
Do get up , Mrs. Belmont !
You are only putting their backs up ! ''
The four men writhed as they saw the women dragged away from them .
All their agonies had been nothing to this .
Sadie and her aunt appeared to be half senseless from fear .
Only Mrs. Belmont kept a brave face .
When they were seated the camels rose , and were led under the tree behind where the four men were standing .
`` I 've a pistol in me pocket , '' said Belmont , looking up at his wife .
`` I would give me soul to be able to pass it to you . ''
`` But it is evident , '' cried Monsieur Fardet .
`` He says , '' Mansoor translated , `` that the baggage-camels are spent , and that there is only one beast left which can keep up .
It is ready now for one of you , and you have to decide among yourselves which is to have it .
If one is richer than the others , he will have the preference . ''
`` Tell him that we are all equally rich . ''
`` Well , '' said the Colonel , `` if only one of us is to escape , I think you fellows will agree with me that it ought to be Belmont , since he is the married man . ''
The Dervishes had formed a semicircle in front of them , with a fringe of the oscillating heads of the camels .
Before them was a cooking fire , which threw its red light over the group .
The Emir was standing with his back to it , and his fierce face towards the prisoners .
Behind the four men was a line of guards , and behind them again the three women , who looked down from their camels upon this tragedy .
With a malicious smile , the fat , one-eyed Moolah advanced with his fist closed , and the four little brown spicules protruding from between his fingers .
`` How unselfish you are ! ''
`` I never saw any one like you .
There you stand in the very presence of death , and you think only of us . ''
The Colonel and the three women gave one backward glance when they came to the edge of the oasis .
Between the straight stems of the palms they saw the gleam of the fire , and above the group of Arabs they caught a last glimpse of the three white hats .
An instant later , the camels began to trot , and when they looked back once more the palm grove was only a black clump with the vague twinkle of a light somewhere in the heart of it .
As with yearning eyes they gazed at that throbbing red point in the darkness , they passed over the edge of the depression , and in an instant the huge , silent , moonlit desert was round them without a sign of the oasis which they had left .
On every side the velvet , blue-black sky , with its blazing stars , sloped downwards to the vast , dun-coloured plain .
The two were blurred into one at their point of junction .
`` Gippy Camel Corps ! ''
`` I think -- -- I think , '' cried Mrs. Belmont , `` that something is moving in front of us . ''
Miss Adams , who had been frozen into silence during the long cold night , began to thaw now in the cheery warmth of the rising sun .
She looked about her , and rubbed her thin hands together .
`` Why , Sadie , '' she remarked , `` I thought I heard you in the night , dear , and now I see that you have been crying . ''
`` Then I wish I was also . ''
`` Well , I think he might feel less lonesome , '' said Sadie , and drooped her saucy little chin upon her breast .
The four had been riding in silence for some little time , when the Colonel clapped his hand to his brow with a gesture of dismay .
`` Good God ! ''
he cried , `` I am going off my head . ''
But the Colonel looked up again , and again he cried out in his agitation and surprise .
Several of the Dervishes had seen the singular apparition upon the hill , and had un-slung their Remingtons , but a long arm suddenly shot up behind the figure of the Birmingham clergyman , a brown hand seized upon his skirts , and he disappeared with a snap .
Higher up the pass , just below the spot where Mr. Stuart had been standing , appeared the tall figure of the Emir Abderrahman .
He had sprung upon a boulder , and was shouting and waving his arms , but the shouts were drowned in a long , rippling roar of musketry from each side of the khor .
The bastion-like cliff was fringed with gun-barrels , with red tarbooshes drooping over the triggers .
From the other lip also came the long spurts of flame and the angry clatter of the rifles .
The raiders were caught in an ambuscade .
The Emir fell , but was up again and waving .
There was a splotch of blood upon his long white beard .
He kept pointing and gesticulating , but his scattered followers could not understand what he wanted .
Some of them came tearing down the pass , and some from behind were pushing to the front .
A few dismounted and tried to climb up sword in hand to that deadly line of muzzles , but one by one they were hit , and came rolling from rock to rock to the bottom of the ravine .
The shooting was not very good .
One negro made his way unharmed up the whole side , only to have his brains dashed out with the butt-end of a Martini at the top .
The Emir had fallen off his rock and lay in a crumpled heap , like a brown and white patch-work quilt at the bottom of it .
And then when half of them were down it became evident , even to those exalted fanatical souls , that there was no chance for them , and that they must get out of these fatal rocks and into the desert again .
They galloped down the pass , and it is a frightful thing to see a camel galloping over broken ground .
The beast 's own terror , his ungainly bounds , the sprawl of his four legs all in the air together , his hideous cries , and the yells of his rider who is bucked high from his saddle with every spring , make a picture which is not to be forgotten .
The women screamed as this mad torrent of frenzied creatures came pouring past them , but the Colonel edged his camel and theirs farther and farther in among the rocks and away from the retreating Arabs .
The air was full of whistling bullets , and they could hear them smacking loudly against the stones all round them .
`` Hurrah , Sadie !
Hurrah , my own darling Sadie ! ''
`` We are saved , my girl , we are saved after all . ''
`` We left some of our people at the wells .
We are very uneasy about them , '' said the Colonel .
`` I suppose you have not heard anything of them ? ''
`` Hulloa , Archer ! ''
Archer drew a thick satisfying partaga from his case and handed it down , with half-a-dozen wax vestas .
Then he cantered after his men , and the old soldier leaned back against the rock and drew in the fragrant smoke .
It was then that his jangled nerves knew the full virtue of tobacco , the gentle anodyne which stays the failing strength and soothes the worrying brain .
He watched the dim , blue reek swirling up from him , and he felt the pleasant , aromatic bite upon his palate , while a restful languor crept over his weary and harassed body .
The three ladies sat together upon a flat rock .
`` I guess we all want some setting to right , '' said Sadie , in a voice which was much more subdued than that of the Sadie of old .
`` Mrs. Belmont , you look just too perfectly sweet anyhow , but if you 'll allow me , I 'll fix your dress for you . ''
But Mrs. Belmont 's eyes were far away , and she shook her head sadly as she gently put the girl 's hands aside .
`` I wonder that you were not shot without any drumhead court-martial , '' said the Colonel .
`` But how in the world did you get here ? ''
The Dervishes -- or what was left of them -- were riding slowly some little distance out in a confused crowd , their patchwork jibbehs and red turbans swaying with the motion of their camels .
They did not present the appearance of men who were defeated , for their movements were very deliberate , but they looked about them and changed their formation as if they were uncertain what their tactics ought to be .
It was no wonder that they were puzzled , for upon their spent camels their situation was as hopeless as could be conceived .
The Sarras men had all emerged from the khor , and had dismounted , the beasts being held in groups of four , while the riflemen knelt in a long line with a woolly , curling fringe of smoke , sending volley after volley at the Arabs , who shot back in a desultory fashion from the backs of their camels .
But it was not upon the sullen group of Dervishes , nor yet upon the long line of kneeling riflemen , that the eyes of the spectators were fixed .
Far out upon the desert , three squadrons of the Haifa Camel Corps were coming up in a dense close column , which wheeled beautifully into a widespread semicircle as it approached .
The Arabs were caught between two fires .
`` By Jove ! ''
`` See that ! ''
The camels of the Dervishes had all knelt down simultaneously , and the men had sprung from their backs .
In front of them was a tall , stately figure , who could only be the Emir Wad Ibrahim .
They saw him kneel for an instant in prayer .
Then he rose , and taking something from his saddle he placed it very deliberately upon the sand and stood upon it .
`` But how did I save you ? ''
Fardet held up his wrist with a cotton bandage still round it .
`` It is my firm belief , '' said Mrs. Belmont , gravely , `` that there was not one of us who did not rise to a greater height during those days in the desert than ever before or since .
When our sins come to be weighed , much may be forgiven us for the sake of those unselfish days . ''
